=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20200218230657+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 20 for Word
/ModDate: D:20200219094438+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.6.20034
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
10 – 12 March 2020  
Geneva, Switzerland  
Provisional agenda item 17  GCF/B. 25/02/Add.0 2 
18 February 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum I I 
Funding proposal package f or FP 125 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled “ Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture to 
climate change -induced water insecurity in the Central Highlands and South -
Central Coast regions of Vietnam ”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.25/02 /Add.02 
Page b 
3 
107  
108  
111  
124  
138  Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal  point(s)  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment  
Gender documentation  143


---
*Page 3*
---

Project Title:  Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture to climate change -induced
water insecurity in the Central Highlands and South -Central  Coast regions of Vietnam  
Country : Vietnam 
Accredited 
Entity:  United N ations D evelopment P rogramme
Date of
Submission:  17 February  2020


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT  SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION  
 Section D  
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 Section G  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
• Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 102 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project Information  
A.1.1. Project  title Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture 
to climate change -induced water insecurity in the 
Central Highlands and South -Central Coast regions of 
Vietnam  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project  
A.1.3. Country   Vietnam  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority  Ministry of Planning and Investment  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  Government of Vietnam acting through the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development  (MARD)  
Beneficiar ies: 222,412 direct beneficiaries  and 335,252 
indirect beneficiaries   
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐   Micro (≤10)  
X   Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐ Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission 21 Oct 18 ; 19 Jun 19 ; 17 Sep 19 ; 28 Oct 19 ; 25 Nov 19 ; 3 
Dec 19; 9 Dec 19; 12 Dec 19; 16 Dec 19;  23 Dec 19; 13 Jan 
20; 30 Jan 20 ; 17 Feb 20  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Yusuke Taishi , Regional Technical Advisor  
Organization  UNDP  
Email address  yusuke.taishi@undp.org  
Telephone number  +66 819493997  
Mailing address  United Nations Service Building,  
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue, Bangkok 10200 Thailand   
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on- grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –  diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 102 
 
 
 A 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐ 
 
  
A.2.  Project Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. Viet Nam is particularly vulnerable to climate change and already impacted by more irregular and intense climate 
variability and change. Two of the regions most vulnerable to climate risks affecting smallholder farmers are the 
Central Highlands and South- Central Coast. Changes in precipitation are leading to increasing deficits in surface and 
ground water availability for agricultural production with longer periods of severe water scarcity during the dry season and increased frequency and intensity of droughts. Overall agricultural productivity is falling, with corresponding 
declines in yields and incomes particularly harmful to small -scale farmers vulnerable to reduced water availability on 
rain fed lands and within this group, poor and near -poor, ethnic mi nority and women farmers.  
2. The objective of this project is to empower vulnerable smallholders in five provinces of the Central Highlands and 
South- Central Coast regions of Vietnam – particularly women and ethnic minority farmers - to manage increasing 
climate risks to agricultural production. To achieve its objective, the project will enable smallholder  farmers  to adapt 
to climate -driven rainfall variability and drought through implementation of two linked Outputs integrating GCF and 
co-financing resources  from the Asian Development Bank and the Government of Vietnam:  1) improved access to 
water for vulnerable smallholder farmers for climate- resilient agricultural production in the face of climate- induced 
rainfall variability and droughts , and 2) s trengthened capacities of smallholder farmers to apply climate and market 
information, technologies, and practices for climate- resilient water and agricultural management . While th is project 
will use GCF financing to specifically target ethnic minority, women and other poor/near poor farmers, it will use GCF 
and co- financing resources to build the capacities of all farmers in climate vulnerable areas; as such the project will 
reach 222,412  direct  individual  beneficiaries in the five provinces of Dak Lak, Da k, Nong, Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan 
and Khanh Hoa.   
3. The project was developed as part of an  integrated programme
12 funded through multiple sources , as envisaged by 
the Government of Vietnam (GoV), that was aimed at enhanc ing water security and build ing the climate change 
resilience of the agriculture sector focusing on Vietnam’s Central Highland and South- Central Coastal Regions . In 
alignment with this programme, the project will enable the GoV to adopt a paradigm shift in the way smallholder 
agricultural development is envisioned and supported through an integrated approach to agricultural resilience 
starting with planning for climate risk s based on identification and analysis of agroecosystem vulnerabilities; 
enhancing water  security  and guaranteeing access; scaling up adoption and application of climate- resilient 
agricultural practices and cropping systems; and creating partnerships among value chain stakeholders to ensure 
access to market and credit. This approach directly addresses climate risks while also establishing or strengthening 
institutional capacities for long- term multi -stakeholder support to vulnerable smallholders.    
4. This project has been designed to achieve smallholder adaptation to climate change in the most v ulnerable Districts 
and Communes of the five target provinces of Vietnam by complementing and enhancing the activities and results of the Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected Provinces – WEIDAP  – 
project for primary irrigation 
infrastructure fi nanced through a USD 99.59 million loan from the Asian Development Bank, as well as USD 22.06 
million from the Government of Vietnam. GCF funding will be used a) to achieve last mile connections to this infrastructure by poor/near -poor smallholders, with a particular focus on ethnic minority and women farmers; and b) 
to attain adoption by all farmers in WEIDAP -served areas of climate- resilient agricultural practices, co- development 
and use of agro- climate information for climate risk management, and multi -stakeholder coordination for climate-
resilient value chain development through climate innovation platforms.  
5. This project will advance the implementation of priority activities in Viet Nam’s Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC)3. These include: support livelihoods and production processes that are appropriate under climate change 
conditions and are linked to poverty reduction and social justice; implement community -based adaptation, including 
using indigenous knowledge, prioritiz ing the most vulnerable communities; implement integrated water resources 
 
1 Government of Viet Nam. 2013. Prime Minister Decision No. 899/QD -TTg: Approval of Agricultural Restructuring Towards Greater 
Added Value and Sustainable Development. Hanoi.  
2 Government of Viet Nam, MARD. 2015. Decision No. 1788/QD -BNN- TCTL of 19 May 2015 on “Promulgating the Action Plan for the 
Development of Advanced and Water Saving Irrigation for Upland Crops to Assist Water Resources Sector Restructuring.” Hanoi.  
3 http://www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/PublishedDocuments/Vi et%20Nam%20First/VIETNAM%27S%20INDC.pdf


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 102 
 
 
 A 
management and ensure water security; ensure food security through protecting, sustainably maintaining and 
managing agricultural land; and adopt technology for sustainable agricultur e production and the sustainable use of 
water resources.  
6. The National Designated Authority (NDA) has issued a no- objection letter  and the project is included in the GCF 
Country Work Program.  
 
  
A.3. Project Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  18 October 2018  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  TBD (date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GEF)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/01/2020 
End:  31/12/ 2025  
Project  lifespan  6 years 0 months


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 102 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project  
7. The Government of Vietnam requests maximum concessionality to support smallholder farmers – particularly ethnic 
minority and women farmers –  in the most vulnerable provinces of Vietnam to adapt to increasing rainfall variability 
and drought caused by climate change. The proposed project is designed to complement and further enhance the 
climate  resilienc e of investments being made under the Wat er Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected Provinces 
(WEIDAP)  project.  The WEIDAP project was approved by the ADB board and with an implementation period between  
2019- 2026.45 The total amount of the WEIDAP project is USD 124,260,000, of which USD 121,650,000 is earmarked 
for investments in primary irrigation infrastructure. The USD 121,650,000 includes  a USD 99,590,000 loan from the 
Asian Development Bank (ADB), as well as co- financing of USD 22,060,000 from the Government of Vietnam.  (See 
table below for breakdown activity -wise of WIEDAP project funding).  
Break -up WEIDAP Project funding  (USD Million)6 
 Activity Description  GoV co -financing ADB loan (ADF)  ADB Grant  Project Total  
1 Strengthen irrigation management services  1.11 0.00 1.05 2.16 
2 Develop moderniz ed irrigation infrastructures   22.06* 99.59 - 121.65 
3 Efficient on -farm water management practices adopted  0.05 0.41 - 0.45 
  Total  23.22 100.00 1.05 124.26 
 
* Includes USD 1.655 million as Project management  expenses  for Output 2 of the WEIDAP project  
GCF grant use:  
8. The GCF  grant will be used to overcome barriers to water security undermined by climate change for poor/near poor 
farmers by enabling them to make the last -mile connection from their farm plots to the WEIDAP primary irrigation  
infrastructure in their district . While all smallholders in WEIDAP -served areas will have access to the irrigation 
infrastructure, poor and near -poor farmers, particularly ethnic minority and women farmers, face insurmountable 
financial barriers to investing in last -mile connectivity. GCF fi nancing will cover the costs of connectivity for these 
farmers, while better off farmers will invest in connecting to the WEIDAP infrastructure on their own.  
9. The GCF grant will furthermore be applied to enhance water storage on rain fed lands for seasonal cropping and 
improve the productivity of irrigation water with use of high efficiency technologies (Output 1). GCF financing will be 
used to enhance climate resilience of all farmers in the project target areas by maximizing the utility of water security 
benefits resulting from Output 1. This will be done by overcoming barriers to the adoption and application of climate-
resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems through farmer training in Farmer Field Schools in the target 
communes and through pe er-to-peer extension of the identified innovations to current practice. GCF financing will 
also supplement GoV co- financing (detailed below) to support capacity development of farmers to enable market 
linkages for climate- resilient crops through their part icipation in district and provincial Climate Innovation Platforms 
involving all value chain stakeholders. GCF funding will be used to overcome barriers to the production, dissemination and use of agro- climate information by establishing a participatory process (Participatory Scenario Planning) involving 
farmers, agro-
climatological experts, and others in compiling and interpreting institutional data and analyzing 
traditional knowledge and information and synthesizing them to produce actionable,  localized,  agro-climate advisories 
for improved farmer management of climate risk.  
Co-financing:  
10. Co-financing from the WEIDAP project:  Co-financing from the WEIDAP project totaling USD 121. 65 million for primary 
irrigation infrastructure complement s the proposed project’ s support to smallholder farmers . The WEIDAP project 
comprises eight sub -projects serving the corresponding command areas in the five provinces i.e. those areas that 
 
4 The WEIDAP project was approved by the ADB board as on 26th Nov 2018 and signed on 28th Dec 2018. Subsequently the project 
became effective on 26th Jan 2019 with a planned closing date of 30th Jun 2026. For further details refer  
https://www.adb.org/projects/49404- 002/main#project -overview     
5 The total amount for the WEIDAP project is US$ 124.26 million over the six -year project cyc le. The break -up of the funding for the 
total WEIDAP project is (i) an ADB loan amount of US$ 100.00 million from its Asian Development Fund (ADF) to the Socialist R epublic 
of Viet Nam for the Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected Provinces  project, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, on 
concessional terms, with an interest charge at the rate of 2.0% per annum during the grace period and thereafter for a term of 25 
years, including a grace period of five years; (ii) an ADB grant of $1.05 million, and (iii) Government co- financing of US$ 23.22 million 
from the central and provincial budgets.  
6 For further details refer to the WEIDAP Project Administration Manual (PAM). Section IV –  Costs and Financing. 
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/vie- 49404- 002-pam


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 102 
 
 B 
will be accessible to irrigation from WEIDAP infrastructure (canals, pipes, weirs, etc.). Note that these command 
areas are also covered by the proposed GCF project. Following internal review in Government, the Prime Minister 
has formally approved the allocation of co- finance.  This was the final stage required by the Government system prior 
to ADB board approval.  
11. GCF financing will cover the incremental costs of adaptation for poor/near -poor farmers in the WEIDAP command 
areas to connect their plots to the WEIDAP infrastructure to improve water security in light of increasing climate risks .7 
At the same time, GCF funding will be used to build the capacities of all farmers in the WEIDAP  command areas  
(including poor/near -poor smallholders , as well as better off farmers ) to manage climate risk through application of 
climate -resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems, i nformed by actionable, localized agro -climate 
advisories. All farmers in the WEIDAP command areas will benefit from the increased coordination and collaboration 
among climate- resilient value chain stakeholders on the Climate Innovation Platforms , thereby enhancing the climate-
resilience of the WEIDAP /ADB  investment through the GCF resources .  
12. Additional Co- financing from GoV:  GCF resources are leveraging new and a dditional  co-financing of USD 4,437,475 
from the central and provincial budgets to support the multi -pronged approach and holistic investment to enhance the 
water security and agricultural productivity and markets of the targeted farmers in light of evolving climate risks. This 
co-financing will be applied  under the proposed project  for investments in:  (i) construction of the l ast-mile connection 
and distribution system (Activity 1.2); ii) improved water storage on rain fed lands (Activity 1. 3); and iii) improved 
access to credit and market s (sub- activity 2.2)  
13. In-kind co- financing: The MARD and DARD s (provincial Department s of Agriculture and Rural Development)  will 
contribute an estimated USD 1.0 million as in- kind co-financing over the six -year project duration, which will primarily 
be in the form of i) USD 534,700 for contribution of public land for building new shared/ community ponds , the locations 
and size of  which , were  identified and estimated during the preliminary assessments  conducted and agreed to in 
consultation with local authorities . The ownership of the ponds , post construction and during their lifespan,  will be 
governed by l and user agreements developed during the project,  in consultation with the user groups and 
administered by the local authorities ; and ii) USD 465,300 for staff time towards project implementation support, and 
resources towards project management costs.  
14. Financing for Operations and Maintenance (O&M) : During the six -year project duration,  a total of USD 819,624 
towards O&M costs are  expected to be incurred for maintenance of installed last -mile connections ( Activity 1.2) and 
supplementary irrigation for rain fed smallholder farmers through shared ponds  (Activity 1.3).  Of this  USD 2 54,444 
will be supported through cash co- financing by the  provincial and district authorities during the 6-year project 
implementation period with the remainder covered by the smallholder beneficiaries themselves . The beneficiary 
contribution was vetted through field consultations (Refer to Stakeholder Consultations Report, AnnexXIIId1) and builds on current practices for pond management in Vietnam. Post project  O&M will be supported by the provincial 
and district authorities (Post -project O&M commitment indicated in the co- finance letters, Annex IV) as well as 
smallholder beneficiaries  who will also assume partial financial responsibility for O&M including for the last-mile 
connections  to the WEIDAP system s (Activity 1.2),  supplementary irrigation through ponds (Activity 1.3), and on- farm 
practices and technologies (Activity 1.4) . Ten-year, post-project completion O&M is estimated at USD 5,372,659  of 
which the provincial and district authorities will commit USD 1,294,906  while s mallholder contributions are calculated 
at approximately USD 4,077,75 2. Of the total post project O&M, USD 1,286,12 3 would be towards  their respective 
irrigation connections to the WEIDAP infrastructure, USD 2,224,400 towards  on-farm water storage facilities  including 
monitoring, minor repairs and maint enance costs of the water collection system,  and USD 1,862,13 6 towards 
maintenance of on- farm technologies. The O&M costs include maintenance as well as  replacement costs of high 
efficiency irrigation equipment , which have been further detailed in the O&M plan  for the project.  Finally, provision of 
adequate irrigation water is also designed to catalyze community engagement and investment, which includes an 
estimated total of US D 4,642,93 2 in cash and in- kind contributions for O&M over the entire project duration (16 years) 
managed by Water Users Groups.  (see Annex XIIIb )   
15. Finance expected to be leveraged during  project implementation  (not counted as direct co -finance in GCF context) : 
The project expects to mobilize significant community and private sector (value- chain and market actors) engagement 
and related financing during project implementation. Experience from MARD programmes have shown that farmers 
are more likely to sustain new  agricultural practices if they have invested their own resources; a key project strategy 
is to enable poor and near -poor smallholders to graduate from initially utilizing project funds (through vouchers) to 
 
7 The selection of poor/near -poor farmer participants is based on an official annual socio- economic categorization following a 
multidimensional poverty approach, and confirmed through consultations with local beneficiaries and authorities at village, and 
commune levels. For further information, please see section 6.1 of the Feasibility Study.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 102 
 
 B 
using their own resources to enhance and sustain  the resilience of their production assets.  8,621 p oor/near -poor 
farmers ’ in-cash contributions to cover input costs are matched with equal amounts of GCF funding for a total of 
approximately USD 1,551,7 80 in cash contributions  from smallholder farmers over the full project period.  Additionally, 
smallholder farmers contributions estimated at USD 387,945 will be leveraged in the form of labor  for co-designing  
and installation costs pertaining to last-mile connectivity systems and water efficient t echnology packages that will be 
catered to by households.  Initial input support will be provided to farmers , contingent on their satisfactory completion 
of FFS activities over two years ; farmers are subsequently expected to progressively cover their own expenses as 
they perceive a lower risk of adoption of new innovations from having seen new practices work in the field, having 
developed the skills to apply them and having explored acces s to related markets. As part of FFS activities, the project 
will build smallholder capacities to plan and manage their farms as small/micro enterprises and to facilitate 
collaboration between farmers and private sector actors to ensure sustainability beyond the project’s lifetime. The 
proposed project will enable smallholder producers’ groups to access credit by linking them directly to lenders on 
multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation Platforms (CIPs). Establishment of CIPs at the provincial and district le vel, along 
with technical assistance to enhance access to markets and finance, is intended to leverage and sustain community 
and private sector financing during and after project implementation.  
16. A breakdown of cost estimates by Outputs  and Activities in local and foreign currency (USD) is provided below in 
Table 1.  
  Table 1: Financial Elements per project outputs  
Component  Output  Activity  GCF Funding 
Amount  Co-financing  Project Total  GoVa WEIDAPb 
USD Local 
Currency: 
VND Million*  
Strengtheni
ng the 
resilience of 
smallholder 
agriculture to climate change-induced 
water 
insecurity 
in the 
Central 
Highlands and South-
Central 
Coast regions of Vietnam  Output 1  
Enhanced water security for 
agricultural 
productio n 
for vulnerable smallholder 
farmers in 
the face of 
climate -
induced 
rainfall variability 
and droughts  Activity 1.1 : 
Establish large-
scale irrigation infrastructure to 
bring irrigation 
water to eight farming areas across the target regions  - - 119,995,000  119,995,000  2,795,284  
Activity 1.2: 
Establish last -mile 
connections between WEIDAP irrigation 
infrastructure and 
the poor and near poor farmer lands to help cope with increasing rainfall variability and 
drought  7,456,870  951,862  - 8,408,732  195,881  
Activity 1.3: 
Enhance supplementary 
irrigation for rain fed 
smallholders to 
cope with rainfall 
variability and drought  3,111,419  2,196,313  - 5,307,732  123,644


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 102 
 
 B 
Activity 1.4: 
Increase 
smallholder 
capacities to apply 
on-farm water 
efficient practices and technologies to maximize water productivity in coping with rainfall 
variability and 
drought  4,468,867  - - 4,468,867  104,102  
Output 1 Sub total  15,037,156  3,148,175  119,995,000  138,180,331  3,218,911  
Output 2  
Increased 
resilience of smallholder 
farmer 
livelihoods through climate -
resilient 
agriculture 
and access to climate 
information, 
finance, and markets  Activity 2.1  
Investments in inputs and capacities to scale 
up climate-resilient 
cropping systems and practices (soil,  
crop, land management) 
among smallholders 
through Farmer Field Schools  12,039,312  - - 12,039,312  280,455  
Activity 2.2:  
Technical 
assistance for 
enhancing access to markets and 
credit for sustained 
climate -resilient 
agricultural investments by smallholders and 
value chain actors  547,225  824,000  - 1,371,225  31,943  
Activity 2.3: Co -
development and use of localized 
agro-climate advisories by smallholders to enhance climate-
resilient agricultural 
production  1,155,085  - - 1,155,085  26,908  
Output 2 Sub total  13,741,622  824,000  - 14,565,622  339,306  
Project Management Cost  1,426,589  465,300  1,655,000  3,546,889  82,625  
 Total Financing  30,205,367  4,437,475  121,650,000  156,292,842  3,635,019  
 
a Includes GoV c o-financing from the Central and Provincial governments  i) USD 3 ,437,475 in the form of cash ii) USD 1,000,000 in the form of in -
kind co- financing.  
b WEIDAP c o-financing incudes  i) USD 99,590,000  from ADB in the form of a loan (refer Table with Break -up WEIDAP Project funding) ; and ii) USD 
22,06 0,000 from the Govt. of Vietnam


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 102 
 
 B 
* 1 USD = 23,295 Vietnamese Dong (VND)  
 
The currency of disbursement is USD . The Accredited entity fee is excluded from the budget breakdown.   
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount Currency  
(USD)  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  156,292,842  USD   
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants *  
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
                    
     30,205,367  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
 
USD  (  )  years  
(  )  years  
 
 
 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
 
 
 
* Economic and financial justification is provided in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is requested to 
provide, particularly in regard to grants.  
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)                
30,205,367  USD   
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount Currency  
(USD)  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
Loans  
Grant  
Grant  
 
In-kind 
Grant  
 
In-kind 99,590,000  
 
22,060,000  
406,277  
 
77,550  
3,031,198  
 
922,450  USD  
 
USD  
USD  
 
USD  
USD  
 
USD  ADB (WEIDAP)8 
 
GoV (WEIDAP) 
GoV (MARD  
Central Govt)  
GoV (MARD 
Central Govt)   
GoV ( 5 DARDS 
representing the 5 
Provincial Govt s) 
GoV (5 DARDS 
representing the 5 
Provincial Govts)  (25)  years  
 (2.0) % 
  senior  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution:  Asian Development Bank  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
(d) Financial 
terms Not applicable.  
 
8 The loan agreement was signed between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and Asian Development Bank on 28th Dec 2918. Terms 
and details are available at -  https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project -documents/49404/49404- 002-lna-en.pdf


---
*Page 13*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 102 
 
 B 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
17. Viet Nam is particularly vulnerable to climate change and already impacted by more irregular and intense climate 
variability and change. When considering climate change exposure, sensitivity and the capacity to adapt, the country 
is consistently classified as under ‘very high risk’ or ‘extreme risk’.9  Every year the country is affected by a range of 
hydro- meteorological and climatological hazards: droughts and forest fires during January -April; tropical, hail and 
wind storms; coastal, riverine, and flash floods; heavy rainfall and landslides in June- December and extreme 
temperatures (cold and heat waves) throughout the year.10 Increased exposure of people and economic assets has 
been the major cause of long- term increases  in economic losses from weather - and climate- related disasters.11,12 
Changes in precipitation are leading to hotter and wetter wet seasons and hotter and drier dry seasons, resulting in 
periods of increasing deficits in surface and ground water availability for agricultural production with longer periods of 
severe water scarcity during the dry season and increased frequency and intensity of droughts. As a consequence, overall agricultural productivity is falli ng, with the corresponding declines in yields and incomes particularly harmful 
to small -scale farmers vulnerable to reduced water availability on rain fed lands and within this group, poor and near -
poor, ethnic minority and women farmers.  
18. Two of the regio ns most vulnerable to climate risks are the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast. Agriculture 
and water resources are the foundation of the livelihoods of about 64% of the people in the Central Highlands  of 
Vietnam, especially the ethnic minorities ac counting for 36.4 –  39.1% of the region’s population. The Central 
Highlands are susceptible to changes in water availability in the dry season when there is little rain and low river flow. Only about 27.8% of the region’s agricultural land is irrigated, and farmers are forced to exploit groundwater for 
irrigation. The Central Highlands region constitutes Vietnam’s largest perennial crop zone, where smallholders 
produce coffee, pepper, cashew, rubber, tea, and a variety of fruit, primarily for market. In addition, they produce rice, 
maize and cassava, chiefly for local consumption, especially by the poorest. Farmers in the region currently intercrop perennial crops or combinations of perennial and annual crops as a strategy to mitigate the risk of drought and  market 
price fluctuation. However, under increasingly extreme climate change- induced drought, farmers’ coping strategies 
are progressively less effective. During droughts, groundwater levels can plunge throughout the region from 80- 100 
m in depth. Many farmers drill three or four wells but are still unable to obtain sufficient water, augmenting their dependence on increasingly variable rainfall.  
19. Around 48% of the people in the South -Central Coast region of Vietnam rely on agriculture for their livelihoods , with 
ethnic minorities comprising from 5.7% of the population in Khanh Hoa province to 23.1% in Ninh Thuan. Sufficient, 
reliable water sources are particularly critical as the South- Central Coast is the driest area of the country with a long 
dry season, the lowest rainfall, and a relatively small river system. Only around 30% of agricultural land is irrigated, leaving many farmers reliant on rainfall. Under climate change, droughts in the region are becoming more extreme, and it’s anticipated that many of  the poor/near -poor
13 are likely to face food insecurity and increasing poverty.  
 
9 The World Risk Index ranks Viet Nam as 18th most at -risk in the world , under the category of ‘very high risk’, see: Alliance 
Development Works, United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security (2016). World Risk Report 2016. Foc us: 
Logistics and Infrastructure. www.WorldRiskReport.org. The Climate Change Vulnerability Index ranks Viet Nam 13th, under the 
category of ‘extreme risk’, see: Maplecroft (2011). Climate Change Risk Atlas 2011. maplecroft.com/about/news/ccvi.html.  
10 Classification by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters’ Emergency Events Database, 
http://www.emdat.be/classification  .  
11 Institute of Meteorology, Hydrology and Climate Change (IMHEN) and UNDP (February 2015). Viet Nam Special Report on 
Managing the Risks of Ext reme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. Summary for Policymakers.  
12 According to MONRE, 2016 was particularly severe, with an acute El Niño- induced drought and saline intrusion affecting a third of 
the country, followed by a sequenc e of typhoons, tropical depressions and heavy rainfall  events causing flooding in the North and 
South- Central Coast and Central Highlands regions. In 2016 alone, more than 2.2 million people were affected, 230 people lost their  
lives, and an estimated US$1.7 billion of damage and loss occurred, or approximately 0.83 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic 
Product.12 In 2017, Viet Nam was affected by a number of tropical storms, floods (riverine and flash), heavy rainfall, landslides, and a  
heatwave, resulting in more than five million people affected, 400 deaths and 650 people injured, 558,000 houses damaged, flooded  
or destroyed and 350,000ha of crops affected. Typhoon Damrey in November 2017 caused the most damage, with 4.3 million people  
in 15 provinces in Central Viet Nam estimated as being affected, 123 people who lost their lives, and 305,254 houses damaged, 
flooded or destroyed.12


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 102 
 
 C 
20. National Climate Change Response : The first national program on climate change in Vietnam, the National Target 
Program to Respond to Climate Change (NTP-RCC) , was issued in 2008. It stressed the need to mainstream climate 
change responses into social and economic development, while pursuing broader sustainable development and 
considering gender equality and poverty reduction. Once the National Climate Change S trategy  was approved in 
2012, the NTP -RCC was updated and became the National Action Plan on Climate Change 2011- 2020. The National 
Climate Change Strategy (NCCS) for 2011- 2020  recognizes that climate change brings significant risks to food 
security and ag ricultural development, human health, natural resources and ecosystem function, and overall 
sustainable development. The strategy links the response to climate change to greenhouse gas emissions reduction 
and a shift towards a low -carbon economy but priori tizes adaptation due to Vietnam’s current stage of development.  
The NCCS  and National Action Plan on Climate Change 2011- 2020  outline a large number of priority actions, 
including upgrading the hydro- meteorological forecasting and early warning systems; re structuring agricultural 
systems towards more climate- resilient crops and animal husbandry, guaranteeing food and income security; 
modernizing farming practices, applying more water and energy -efficient techniques and integrated farming systems; 
and sustai nable management of water resources, with repair and improvement of dams, reservoirs and irrigation 
systems. The project is included in the GoV’s GCF Country Work Program (TBC) as well as UNDP’s Work Programme 
as an Accredited Entity to the GCF.  
21. To advance Viet Nam’s commitments towards the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement and the country’s Nationally 
Determined Contri bution ( NDC)14, the GoV has approved a specific implementation plan in October 2016. The plan 
includes priority activities for the period until 2020 (‘readiness’ phase) and 2021 -2030 (‘implementation’ phase) on 
five components: mitigation; adaptation; human, technologic al and financial resources for implementation; 
measurement, reporting and verification systems; and the institutional and policy framework. For the period 2016-
2020, priority activities for climate change adaptation relevant to this project are, among others: support livelihoods 
and production processes that are appropriate under climate change conditions and are linked to poverty reduction 
and social justice; implement community -based adaptation, including using indigenous knowledge, prioritizing the 
most vulnerable communities; implement integrated water resources management and ensure water security; ensure 
food security through protecting, sustainably maintaining and managing agricultural land; restructuring of crop and livestock systems; a dopt technolog
y for sustainable agriculture production and the sustainable use of water 
resources; and adopt technology for real -time forecasting, early warning, and sharing information system on real -time 
hydro- meteorological monitoring.  
22. MARD has been step by step developing a mid -term and long- term strategy for the improvement and restructuring of 
the irrigation sector in order to optimize the efficiency of irrigation works, contribute to implement National Target 
Program on new rural construction. The elements of the restructuring strategy related to irrigation and agriculture 
services, which integrate approaches to a "smart response to climate change" agriculture following commercial 
agriculture scenario. The developed orientation of the irrigation sector to 2030 is t o value the development of irrigation 
in term of serving agro- forestry production restructuring and diversification of crops, ensuring food security under 
pressure. population growth, extreme weather and global instability, and the need to address water resources for 
daily life, industry, fisheries, tourism, maintenance and improvement of the ecological environment , hydropower.  
C.2. Project  Objective  against Baseline  
Climate Change in Vietnam:15  
23. Average annual temperatures increased in Vietnam by 0.62°C in the period 1958- 2014, with temperatures increasing 
by 0.38°C over the last 20 years compared to the period 1981- 1990.16 Changes in precipitation patterns include a 
15-20% increase in the wet season, and 10% decrease in the dry season,17 thus contributing both to wetter wet 
seasons and drier dry seasons, with shifting seasonality and increased risk of severe droughts.18 Futur e climate 
scenarios for Viet Nam - with significant regional variations - project a further increase of annual temperature and 
rainfall, increased number of hot days, shifting rainfall and dry seasons, a higher than average global sea level rise 
 
14 http://www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/PublishedDocuments/Viet%20Nam%20First/VIETNAM%27S%20INDC.pdf  
15 For further detail, please see the Feasibility Study, annexed to this document, section 1.3 Observed and projected climate 
variability and change.  
16 MoNRE ( 2016). Climate Change and Sea Level Rise Scenarios for Vietnam. Summary for Policy Makers. Triangulated with: 
IMHEN, UNDP (Ibid.), and J.J. Katzfey, J.L. McGregor, and R. Suppiah (2014). High- resolution Climate Projections for Vietnam. 
Technical Report. IM HEN, CSIRO.  
17 Ibid. 
18 MoNRE (2016) (Ibid).


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 102 
 
 C 
and more i rregular and extreme weather events such as strong to very strong typhoons, heavy rainfall, heat waves 
and intense droughts.19  
24. Climate change- induced rainfall variability and droughts are leading to reduced water availability for smallholder 
agriculture, r esulting in increasing declines in agricultural production.20 These impacts are being particularly felt in the 
Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions of Vietnam where droughts, although projected to occur less 
frequently, are also expected to bec ome more extreme and last longer when they do occur.  
Climate change in Central Highlands and South -Central Coast21 
25. Current observed changes in climate and weather -related events in the Central Highlands and South -Central 
Coast , based on available data for the period 1960- 2010, show the following trends and patterns: 22 
Temperature increase  
26. In Central Highlands , there is a significant trend of about 0.04 to 0.35°C temperature increase per decade. Minimum 
temperatures increased be tween approximately 0.18°C per decade in Da Lat (South- Central Highlands) to 0.65°C 
per decade in Kon Tum (North Central Highlands). While the maximum daily temperature has no increasing trend, 
the number of extreme hot days has increased by about nine day s per decade, and the number of extreme cool days 
decreased by about eight days per decade. In South -Central Coast , annual temperature has slightly increased, with 
a trend of about 0.08 to 0.16°C increase per decade. While minimum daily temperature has inc reased significantly 
by up to approximately 0.36°C per decade, the change in maximum daily temperature is small and not significant for most parts of this region. The number of hot days (days with maximum temperatures above 35°C) has increased 
significantl y by up to 4 days per decade, particularly in the southern part of this region.  
Changing precipitation patterns  
27. In the Central Highlands  there is an overall slight increase in annual rainfall but with variations per location, with some 
showing significant  increases while others show little change. There are, however, increased extreme rainfall 
amounts. Annual maxima of 1- day and 5- day rainfall amounts have increased by around 12 and 9 percent 
respectively. The number of very wet days has also increased significantly by up to 2 days per decade. In South -
Central Coast , annual rainfall has increased significantly, with local increases of up to 13 percent particularly in the 
southern parts of this region. However, there are differences between seasons, with the amount of rainfall declining 
during the dry season but increasing during the rainy season.23 There have been Increased extreme rainfall amounts. 
Annual maxima of 1- day and 5- day rainfall amounts and the number of very wet days have increased throughout the 
region, the latter with up to three days per decade.  
Drought and flood risk  
28. For the entire Central Highlands  region, the most frequent disaster events have been heavy rainfall with floods, 
storms, landslides and drought.  Droughts are becoming more sever e and are impacting a larger area than before. 
For example, the area most severely impacted by the recent drought in 2015- 2016 was 2.1 to 2.5 times larger than 
in 2010. In addition, areas that have never experienced drought are now also increasingly affect ed. The main climate 
factors causing droughts in this region are reduced dry season rainfall and a longer than usual dry season.24  The 
recent drought, with 40 percent less rainfall than normal in Dak Nong and 49 percent less than normal in Dak Lak for 
June- September, has been historically considered as a 1 in 100 years event. However, for the coming 25 years, there 
is a 22 percent chance that a similar event will occur.25 For the entire South- Central Coast , the most frequent disaster 
events have been floods,  drought, heat waves and strong winds.  
 
19 MoNRE (2016) (Ibid).  
20 GoV (2012). National Climate Change Strategy; GoV (2015). Intended Nationally Determined Contribution; and USAID (2017). 
Fact sheet. Climate change risk profile. Vietnam.  
21 More detail on climate change affecting the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast can be found in section 1.3 of the 
Feasibility Study.  
22 IMHEN, CSIRO (2014). High- resolution Climate Projections for Vietnam. Regional Summary Central Highlands.  
23 Hien T. T. L., Thang N. N., Hens L. (November 2015). Assessment of the Irrigation Capacity during the Dry Season Using Remote 
Sensing and Geographical Information (Case Study in Binh Thuan Province, Vietnam).  
24 Including source of graph and maps; Nguyen T. T. H., Mai  T. N., Bui D. C., Nguyen T. P. T. (November 2016). Mapping Droughts 
over the Central Highlands of Vietnam in El Niño Years Using Landsat Imageries.  
25 Wade S., Colledge F., Nguyen V. M., Hall J. and Parker D. (June 2017). SC 108211 VIE: Water Efficiency Im provement in Drought 
Affected Provinces: Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment. UK Met Office, ADB, p.9.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 102 
 
 C 
Future climate scenarios for the Central Highlands and South -Central Coast indicate the following:26 
Temperature increase  
29. In the Central Highlands , an increase in overall temperatures is expected of about 1.2 to 2.6°C by mid- century and 
2.2 to 4.5°C by end- of-century for the higher (RCP8.5) greenhouse gas scenario. Average temperature increase will 
be slightly higher in the wet season than in the dr y season. The number of hot days (days with maximum temperatures 
above 35°C) is projected to increase by 15 to 20 days a year in the lower lying parts of this region, except in the 
mountainous areas. In some years, the maximum temperature will exceed 40°C.  In the South -Central Coast , an 
increase in annual temperatures of about 1.2 to 2.5°C by mid- century and 2.4 to 4.3°C by end- of century is predicted 
under the higher (RCP8.5) greenhouse gas scenario. An increase in the number, length and intensity of heat waves 
and number of hot days (days with maximum temperatures above 35°C) is predicted by end- of-century.  
Changing precipitation patterns  
30. In the Central Highlands , a 15 to 20 percent increase in rainfall in the wet season - which will start earlier and end  
later -, and 10 percent decrease and more irregular rainfall in the dry season are predicted. Larger variations between 
minimum and maximum amounts will occur. There is likely to be more intense extreme rainfall events for southern 
parts of the Central Hi ghlands but little change in the northern parts. In addition to a delayed onset, the length and 
intensity of the southwest monsoon are both expected to decrease slightly by mid- century and continue to decrease 
further by end- of-century, bringing less overall rainfall to the region. In the South- Central Coast , overall, shorter and 
higher intensity of monthly rainfall, with large variations in terms of months and amounts is expected. Rainfall in the 
wet season is projected to increase by 20 percent, particularly in October -November, but rainfall in the monsoon 
months, June till September, is likely to decrease. The wet season is likely to be shorter, starting later (up to 15 days) 
and ending earlier (up to 30 days).27  Extreme rainfall events are projected to b e less intense. In addition to a delayed 
onset, both the length and intensity of the southwest monsoon are expected to decrease significantly. By mid- century, 
the season length is projected to be reduced by about two weeks and rainfall reduced by 40 percen t.  
Drought and flood risk  
31. The magnitude and frequency of floods during wet season are expected to increase in the Central Highlands  due to 
increased intense rainfall linked to longer and wetter monsoon conditions. Droughts are projected to become more 
severe due to rising temperatures and rainfall deficits in the dry season, particularly in the northern part of the region. 
Short durat ion droughts will likely increase, while long duration droughts would decrease. The number of typhoons is 
likely decreasing, but the number of strong to very strong ones shows a growing trend, increasing the risk of floods 
and landslides. In the South- Cent ral Coast , droughts in general are projected to occur less often but become more 
extreme and last longer due to rising temperatures, a changing monsoon and rainfall deficits in the dry season. While 
small to medium droughts are expected to remain manageabl e, extreme droughts, similar to those in 2015- 16, will 
become a major risk. Flood risk will also increase, but mainly in the upland areas and the northern part of the region. 
The number of typhoons is likely to decrease, but the number of strong to very st rong typhoons will increase. Sea 
level rise is projected to be higher than the global average but with a lower area potentially affected than in the 
Mekong River Delta. Coastal areas are expected to face increased salinity intrusion.  
Climate Change- induced  water insecurity affecting smallholder agriculture :  
32. Key impacts of climate change on the Central Highlands  and South -Central Coast  relate to water availability and 
its effect on agricultural productivity.28 Water resources will be impacted adversely due to increased evaporation, 
reduced water availability, reduced flows and groundwater levels, degraded water quality, and destruction of water infrastructure. Overall, for both regions, a slight increase in availability of water is expected in the warm- wet and hot -
wet scenarios due to an expected increase in rainfall. However, inter -seasonal differences will become larger with 
higher rainfall than currently occurs in the wet season and less water availability in the dry season, requiring adequate 
storage options. Under the hotter scenario, water shortages caused by increased demand and higher evaporation 
will occur.
29 The highest risk for w ater availability in both regions is extreme drought. As droughts are predicted to be 
longer and more severe, farmers are expected to depend on groundwater resources at least 15% of the time, and 
 
26 IMHEN, CSIRO (2014) (Ibid), MoNRE (2016) (Ibid) and USAID Mekong ARCC Program (2013). Vietnam Climate Change 
Vulnerability Profile.  
27 Dout reloup S., Erpicum M., Fettweis X., Ozer P. (August 2011). Analysis of the past (1970- 1999) and future (2046- 2065 and 2081-
2100) evolutions of precipitation and temperature, in the province of Binh Thuan, South East Vietnam, based on IPCC models.  
28 GoV (2012). National Climate Change Strategy, and USAID (2017). Fact sheet. Climate change risk profile. Vietnam.  
29 ADB (June 2017). Climate Risk Assessment and Management for the Project ‘Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected 
Provinces’.


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 102 
 
 C 
groundwater extraction is expected to increase.30 Water avail ability for rain fed crops in upland areas and with limited 
storage options will remain constrained or decline. The crop- water balance is particularly under threat during extreme 
droughts and in the hottest scenario when rainfall declines and evaporation i ncreases.  
33. Climate exposure and sensitivity will impact agriculture, including fisheries through damage to crops, loss of arable 
lands, decreased agricultural productivity, and overall loss of livelihoods and incomes. Climate change is therefore 
expected to  severely impact agricultural productivity in both regions. Crop productivity will be most impacted by 
reduced water availability during longer dry seasons, extreme droughts and under the hotter scenario. Extreme 
drought periods can result in 40 to 70 perc ent less water available for crops, which especially affects perennial 
crops31. Crop yields in upland areas will be negatively impacted by seasonal changes (e.g. delayed onset of the rainy 
season) and more unpredictable precipitation patterns.32 For the main crops currently cultivated in both regions, 
vulnerability for observed and projected climate conditions were analyzed33 in the Feasibility Study (Annex II). 
Perennial crops such as coffee34 and pepper35 and annual crops such as rice36 and maize, are the most vulnerable. 
Monocultural farming systems are particularly vulnerable to changing temperature and precipitation patterns. Maize and rice yields are projected to decrease under climate change. Upland rain- fed crops are particularly vulnerable to 
seasonal cha nges, including imbalanced rainfall distribution and unseasonal rainfall. All crops will be affected by 
increased rainfall variability and extreme weather events such as droughts, particularly during flowering, fruiting and harvesting periods.  
34. In both regions, there is a strong positive correlation between vulnerability and poverty, gender inequality and membership in an ethnic minority. The population of ethnic minorities is unevenly distributed across the five provinces 
of the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions with the majority in the Central Highland provinces of Dak 
Lak and Dak Nong (20% -  30% of the population) and of Ninh Thuan with similar levels, and a smaller number in the 
South- Central Coast provinces of Khanh Hoa and Binh Thuan (5.7% and 7.4% of the total population, respectively). 
Indigenous ethnic minorities in South- Central Coastal provinces are mainly Cham, Raglei, and Chau Ro, while those 
in the Central Highlands include E De, Gia Lai and Mo Nong (M’Nong). Immigrant ethnic minorities to the target area 
are mainly Tay, Nung Thai, Muong, H’Mong, K’Ho, and Chu Ru.
37  
35. Small- scale farmers –  particularly poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers -  with plots of less than 1.0 ha, 
who are dependent on one or two rain- fed crops p er year, are the most vulnerable to climate change impacts. Women 
make up the majority of manual labor on these small farms, since men increasingly migrate to urban areas in search 
of wage labor. The labor burden of these women further increases during per iods of water stress as they are required 
to spend more time and energy to source water not only for irrigation but also for domestic consumption. Various inter-agency assessments conducted during the recent drought confirm that women and girls are more severely 
affected than men and boys
38. Major barriers preventing women from adopting or influencing household and 
community climate resiliency strategies are factors such as: women’s heavy workloads in terms of domestic and caring work, as well as production;  lower recognition of women’s work; an imbalance towards lower -valued farming 
work, with women and marginalized farmers of majority Kinh and ethnic minorities proportionally over -represented 
on the production side of the value chain; limited decision- making power in the community and at governance levels, 
with men and the Kinh majority in dominant roles; significant difference between men and women, ethnic minorities 
and other marginalized groups in terms of education and literacy; lower participation of women compared to men in 
community meetings or in extension service trainings; and unequal access to and control over resources such as 
market and climate information, technical support, agricultural inputs, productive land, climate -smart technologies, 
 
30 ADB (June 2017). Climate Risk Assessment and Management for the Project ‘Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected 
Provinces’.  
31 Wade S., Colledge F., Nguyen V. M., Hall J. and Parker D. (June 2017). SC 108211 VIE: Water Efficiency Improvement in 
Drought Affec ted Provinces: Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment. UK Met Office, ADB, p.9.  
32 Hien Thi Thu Le, Thang Nguyen Ngoc and Luc Hens (November 2015) (Ibid.)  
33 Source of crop information: ICEM (February 2014), Impact and Adaptation Study. Agricultur e Report. USAID Mekong ARCC 
Program; and FAO (2004), Fruits of Vietnam, http://www.fao.org/docrep/008/ad523e/ad523e05.htm   
34 ICEM (February 2014), (Ibid.), and Jeremy Hagger and Kathleen Schepp (February 2012). Coffee and Climate Change. Impacts 
and options for adaptation in Brazil, Guatemala, Tanzania; and Vietnam. GIZ and University of Greenwich Natural Resources 
Institute, W orking Paper Series No.4 on Climate Change, Agriculture and Natural Resources.  
35 Kandiannan K., Krishnamurthy K. S., Anke Gowda S.J., Anandaraj M., (January 2014). Climate change and black pepper 
production.  
36 Suzanne K. Redfern, Nadine Azzu and Jesie S. B inamira (2016). Rice in Southeast Asia: Facing Risks and Vulnerabilities to 
Respond to Climate Change.  
37 Poverty Situation Analysis of Ethnic Minorities in Vietnam 2007- 1012. Irish Aid, CEMA, UNDP. Hanoi, 2013.  
38 GoV-NGO -United Nations joint damage and needs assessments for the drought emergency (April 2016); and UNDP (July 2016), 
Vietnam drought and saline water intrusion: transitioning from emergency to recovery. UNDP policy analysis. Verified by field  
consultat ions.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 102 
 
 C 
flexible finance, means of transport and communication, etc.39 Apart from other shared characteristics with other 
marginalized groups, specific barriers to ethnic minority participation (particularly indigenous groups)  include 
unsustainable traditional farming practices and non- fluency in Vietnamese, and low literacy in general (particularly 
regarding technical information directed at them).  
36. Baseline Efforts and Investments : Over the past two decades, GoV has channeled a significant portion of  75% of  
public agricultural investment to irrigation with a focus mainly on water intensive rice systems aimed at ensuring long-
term food security. Irrigation has been extended to cover higher value crops that help enhance farm income, including fruit and other p erennial crops. These include the ‘ Phan Ri -  Phan Thiet Irrigation’  project (2001 to 2006) in Bac Binh 
district in Binh Thuan, funded through a US$ 46 million loan from Japan; the ‘ Binh Thuan Water Sector Project’  (2008 
to 2014) funded through a US$ 18 mil lion loan provided by the Italian Government; the project ‘ Harnessing water 
resources in Ninh Thuan Province’, (2010 to 2013) with a US$ 27 million loan and US$ 327,000 grant from the French 
development agency AFD; the project ‘ Introducing Low -cost Micro I rrigation Technology for Poor Farmers in South 
Central Vietnam’  (2009 to 2016) in six districts in Ninh Thuan, with funding from the Swiss Government; and, a 
research project in Ninh Thuan called ‘ Linking increases in water use efficiency for food producti on at the farm scale 
to global projections’  (2012 to 2014).  
37. While all districts in both the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions have benefitted from past  
investments in medium to large- scale rural infrastructure, including irrigation systems,  rural water supply, and 
drainage, current irrigation systems have not been designed to meet the challenges and impacts of changing weather 
and climate change and do not necessarily reach the most vulnerable. A number of investments have been planned 
to modernize irrigation systems, and water pricing for irrigation will be re- applied starting July 2018, as per the newly 
issued Irrigation Law to incentivize water use efficiency.  
38. The Government has supported irrigated agriculture with 65- 70% of public agricultural investment over the period 
2009- 2015. The GoV invested heavily in reservoir development to retain rainfall in the upper catchments for delivery 
to the coastal area where rice- dominated irrigation systems are found, but the sustainability of these investments is 
at risk from low water productivity and the impacts of climate change.40 The design and management of these large 
systems does not include analysis of climate information influencing water availability, and, as a result, supply from 
reservoirs is insufficiently modulated in addressing rainfall variability. The GoV has comprehensive plans to build or 
modernize reservoirs, dams, sluices and other large water and irrigation infrastructure. These include large scale loan 
programs funded by the World Bank and the ADB, including the modernization of key irrigation schemes through the 
planned ADB -financed Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected Provinces, (WEIDAP ) project, which will 
serve as underlying water -delivery infrastructure and leveraged co- financing for the GCF project proposed here, as 
well as  the project ‘Irrigation development in sustainable coffee areas in Dak Lak’  (2015 to 2020), under PPC 
Resolution 153/2015/NQ -HĐND, with a planned budget of US$ 296.3 million.   
39. Government, devel opment partners and private sector support to conventional agricultural modernization and value 
chain development is considerable, particularly for high value crops and in areas well connected to markets.  These 
include: the UN -supported program ‘ Support t o the National Target Programme on the New Rural Development ’ 
(2014 to 2017); the project ‘ Productive Rural Infrastructure Sector Project in the Central Highlands ’ (2014 to 2019), 
in all five Central Highlands provinces, through a US$ 80 million loan from the ADB Asian Development Fund;41 the 
project ‘ Enhancing Agricultural Competitiveness in Viet Nam’  (2017 – 2020) in Khanh Hoa, Can Tho and Thai Binh, 
with a US$ 1.8million grant from the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction; the ‘ Vietnam Sustainable Agriculture 
Transformation Project’ or VnSAT project (2015 to 2020), mainly funded through a US$ 238million loan from the 
World Bank; the ‘ Private Sector Engagement for Agricultural Development ’ project, through a US$ 7.6million grant 
from the Government of Canada; and the ‘ Agriculture, Farmers and Rural Areas Support Project ’ (2011 – 2017) in 
Ninh Thuan funded through a US$ 12.8  million loan from IFAD, a US$ 3.3 million Government contribution and an 
estimated US$ 1.5  million as beneficiary contribution. However, farming systems and strategies remain more focused 
on volume of agricultural outputs than on quality, using resource- intensive and non -climate -resilient practices, whose 
long-term application results in water and soil degradation. The s hift to more resilient and sustainable agricultural 
production systems is still limited, and inclusion of poor smallholders –  particularly women and ethnic minorities -  is 
a particular challenge. Two initiatives with this aim are the ‘ Sustainable Economic Empowerment of Ethnic Minorities ’ 
 
39 ADB (July 2017). WEIDAP Project. Poverty and Social Assessment Report, UN Women and Institute for Family and Gender 
Studies (2016). Female Farmers and Inclusive Growth in Vietnam; and CARE International in Vietnam (July 2015). Win- win results. 
Gender equality in climate change programming. Learning Series Issue 1. Verified by field consultations.  
40 Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought -Affected Provinces (WEIDAP), Viet Nam (TA 9147- VIE): Project Preparation 
Consultancy Services. Mid Term Report 2017 
41 The districts covered by this project in Dak Lak are: Ea Sup, Krong Nang, Lak, M’Drak and Buon Ma Thuot city.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 102 
 
 C 
project (2010 – 2016) in Dak Nong through a US$ 12.8 million loan from IFAD, a US$ 0.3 million grant from IFAD, a 
US$ 2.3 million Government contribution, including US$ 0.9 million from the Vietnam Bank for Agricultural an d Rural 
Development (VBARD) and an estimated US$ 0.7 million as beneficiary contribution; and the ‘ Market Access for the 
Rural Poor – Through Value Chain Promotion Programme’ ( 2012 – 2016) with a US$ 5.3million grant from the Swiss 
Agency for Development a nd Cooperation.  
40. Despite significant investments, particularly over the past 10- 15 years, the links between climate change, livelihoods 
and the specific vulnerabilities of ethnic minority and women farmers have been only addressed in a relatively 
piecemeal fashion in their design and implementation. Increasing climate variability has, as well, begun to undercut 
the development investments.  This augments the burden on the government, as development progress is continually 
affected by climate- driven extreme w eather events such as sudden, intense rainfall or drought as well as by the 
gradual degradation of soils and water from maladapted cropping systems.  As a result, these impacts further 
aggravate the vulnerabilities of poor and near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers.   
41. The GoV  has also invested in building climate change resilience through support from projects such as  the research 
project ‘ Managing groundwater access in Tay Nguyen (Central Highlands) Vietnam’ ( 2005 to 2008), in Dak Lak, with 
a US$ 402 ,912 grant from the Australian Government; the pilot project ‘ Re-hydrating the earth by sustainable, small 
scale sub- surface water retention techniques ’ (2007 to 2009) in Ninh Thuan; the pilot project ‘ Augmenting 
groundwater resources by artificial recharge in Binh Thuan province, Viet Nam’  (2004 to 2010), funded by the Italian 
Government, UNESCO and the International Council for Science; the project ‘ Integrating Water Security and Climate 
Resilience Programmes into Vietnam Irrigation Management Plan’ (2014- 2019); through the multi -country ‘ Integrating 
Agriculture in National Adaptation Plans (NAP -Ag)’ program, funded through the German Government’s International 
Climate Initiative;42 the program ‘ More coffee with less water –  towards a reduction of the blue water footprint in coffee 
production’  (2014- 2019) with US$ 2.2million funding from the multinational Nestlé and the Swiss Agency for 
Development and Cooperation; and the project ‘ Cultivation Soil Management and Water Conservation project’ in Dak 
Lak and La m Dong with funding from Jacobs Douwe Egberts/Mondelez Internatinoal (2016- 2018).  
42. Improving climate information for better risk management has also received support from GoV and other donors through projects including: the research project ‘Building Drough t Maps for Viet Nam’  (2013 to 2014) financed with 
Government funding; the research- for-development project ‘ Agro- Climate Information Services for Women and Ethnic 
Minority farmers in South- East Asia’  targeting 200,000 farmers in Viet Nam (Dien Bien and Ha Tinh), Cambodia and 
Lao PDR supported by CARE and ICRAF;  the project ‘ Agro -climate forecast and information system for enhanced 
resilience of poor farmers ’ in Quang Tri supported by Oxfam in partnership with IMHEN; the project ‘ Forecast -based 
Financing for Drought Preparedness and Early Action of Women Farmers in Vietnam’  in Gia Lai and Ca Mau, with a 
US$ 950,000 funding from the European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations program; and the project 
‘Applying seasonal climate forecasting and in
novative insurance solutions to climate risk management in the 
agriculture sector in South- East Asia ’ supported by CIAT, WMO the University of Southern Queensland and Willis 
Ltd.   
43. Since 2015, the Vietnamese enterprise AgriMedia is offering SMS -based weath er and market information services to 
farmers, agricultural enterprises, reservoir operators and agricultural planners through its iMetos system. The system 
includes the installation of small -scale weather stations operated at the local level but linked through a server 
managed in Hanoi. Currently 60 weather stations have been installed across the country, including in Dak Lak, and 500,000 farmers have signed up to the SMS service, paying a monthly subscription fee. By 2018, the company aims to install up t o 200 to 300 weather stations to cover the entire country. In addition to iMetos, in August 2017, AgriMedia 
in partnership with VinaPhone also launched a call -center, manned by more than ten technical experts to provide 
advice to farmers.  
44. The Feasibility S tudy describes the most relevant past and ongoing programs and projects for the five target 
provinces, in line with the country’s policy framework under Chapter 3 Past and Ongoing Efforts to Improve the Lives 
and Livelihoods of Small -scale Farmers in the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast. While many of the efforts 
detailed address development challenges and aim at enhancing resilience to climate change, only  a small number 
focus specifically on tackling climate risks, both current and expected, and even fewer support full, integrated adaptation solutions. While there have been several geographically targeted interventions, coordinated solutions that 
address s mallholder capacities at scale in the context of multi -stakeholder value chains in an emerging market 
 
42 The program is also implemented in Thailand, the Philippines, Uganda, Kenya, Zambia, the Gambia, Guatemala, Colombia and 
Uruguay.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 102 
 
 C 
economy are still inadequate. There is a lack of focused efforts to directly address the vulnerabilities of poor/near -
poor, ethn ic minority or women farmers.  
45. Adaptation Solution : With continued growth of climate variability and change, the current strategies of small farmers 
in the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions to cope with climate change- induced water insecurity are 
increasingly ineffective and require transformational adaptation investments to achieve lasting climate resilience 
among smallholder farming hous eholds.  For  farmers to effectively adapt to ongoing climate- driven rainfall variability 
and drought, the GoV must adopt a paradigm shift in the way smallholder agricultural development is envisioned and supported. This will require supply - and demand- side solutions to agricultural resilience starting with enhancing water 
security  and guaranteeing access; scaling up adoption and application of resilience -enhancing agricultural practices 
and cropping systems; and creating climate risk -informed and climate resilient value chains to support diversified 
agricultural systems
. This approach directly addresses climate risks while also establishing or strengthening 
institu tional capacities for long- term multi -stakeholder support to vulnerable smallholders.  
46. For smallholders in the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions to successfully build and sustain the 
resilience of their agroecosystems in the face of increas ing rainfall variability and drought, they will need to access 
sufficient water for crop production through irrigation, where possible, and through improved soil and water 
management on irrigable and rain fed lands, and smallholders will need to be able to plan and manage cropping 
systems that maximize water productivity through efficient use. However, t o adapt to evolving climate risks, 
smallholders need timely access to climate information and agricultural advisories so they can understand climate 
risks a nd agroecosystem vulnerabilities, identify and implement management measures to build resilience of crop, 
soil and water resources,  and carry out climate- informed planning and decision- making to sustain climate- resilient 
agricultural production over time. Access to value -chains, markets and finance is fundamental to sustain the 
transformational change towards climate- resilient production systems over time, enabling farmers to develop small 
farm enterprises and then re -invest the ensuing profits in the input s needed to maintain climate- resilience of their 
agro- ecosystems.   
47. Therefore, the proposed adaptation solution hinges on two mutually reinforcing elements: (i) a supply -side 
intervention to improve water security for agricultural production in light of rainfall variability and drought, including 
through large- scale and supplementary irrigation and water storage for rainfed farmers, and (ii) a demand- side 
intervention to promote adoption of climate- resilient agriculture practices, enabled through climate- risk informed 
planning, innovation, and market development. To achieve this adaptation solution, however, several barriers must be overcome:  
Gaps and Key barriers:  
48. Limited financial capacity among sma llholder farmers and government to invest in additional sources of 
water to cope with climate change -induced rainfall variability and drought  
49. Most smallholder farmers in the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions have limited access to reliable 
sources of water for agricultural production under conditions of increasing climate- driven rainfall variability and 
drought. During severe and prolonged droughts, smallholder farmers are unable to access sufficient water to maintain 
agricultural productivity since existing irrigation systems are unable to meet the corresponding growth in demand for 
water, and alternative sources such as rivers, streams, ponds an d wells are easily depleted or insufficient. While 
Government is continuing to invest in baseline infrastructure to bring water for irrigation more broadly to the affected 
areas, fiscal constraints impede investments in the additional costs of ensuring smallholder connectivity to this 
infrastructure and subsequent efficient use by smallholders of water resources for agriculture. At the same time, those 
baseline investments that have occurred do not address current or future climate impacts in their design. For 
poor/near -poor smallholders in the two regions, investment in connectivity, storage, and efficient irrigation equipment 
is limited given their weak financial capacities, which are further undermined by climate change.  
50. As such,  poor and near poor small holders, especially ethnic minorities and women, have limited resources to invest 
in additional costs of water storage infrastructure or last mile access to irrigation as they are caught in the vicious 
cycle of productivity loss resulting in insufficient income,  leading to inadequate investments in water security and 
resilient agricultural systems. Although technologies exist to improve water productivity, adoption by poor/near -poor 
farmers has been hindered by a lack of awareness, technical knowledge and f inancing, including difficulties accessing 
credit to purchase the technologies , or repay ing loans.  
51. Lack of awareness among smallholders and weak technical capacities across extension support to scale up 
adoption of climate -resilient agriculture


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 102 
 
 C 
52. In both ta rget regions, agri cultural policy has been focused on producing higher yields while neglecting longer term 
adaptability of agriculture to climate change. Most farmers in these regions are aware of changing temperature and 
precipitation patterns and increas ing intensity and frequency of extreme weather events such as droughts. Although 
farmers increasingly apply conventionally modern practices and inputs to agricultural production and water 
management, these are progressively less and less effective in coping with the growing variability in rainfall and other 
climate hazards. The majority of farmers use water inefficiently. Cropping systems are less diverse with a bias towards 
more climate- vulnerable monocultures, and traditional knowledge of such climate -resilient farming systems as inter -
cropping, agroforestry and integrated crop- animal systems using non- rice crops is undervalued. Smallholders 
generally lack information and knowledge of how to improve productivity of irrigation, soil and nutrient management,  
and crop diversification with the aim of enhancing and maintaining climate- resilience of agro- ecosystems.  
53. Although demand exists, most farmers have never received or participated in a training event on climate risk and 
accessible methodologies for agro- ecosystem vulnerability analysis, farm resource planning and management, 
resilient agricultural techniques, or water efficiency practices. This is largely due to the limited technical capacities of agricultural extension agencies to support climate- risk management and resilient agriculture. Current MARD capacity 
to provide climate- risk informed agricultural and water management information and capacity building to climate-
vulnerable smallholders is limited.  Presently, extension services lack the capacity to systematically generate and 
disseminate climate and other information relevant to vulnerable smallholder farmers , as well as to design and deliver 
training in climate- resilient agriculture and water management. Women and ethnic minority farmers  are particularly 
disadvantaged in that they tend to be poorer and less educated,  with some ethnic minorities suffering from lack of 
fluency in the majority Kinh language and women having less decision- making authority.  
54. Limited technical capacities among institutions to generate and disseminate timely, integrated and 
actionable agro -climatic information for on -farm climate risk- informed water management and agricultural 
planning.  
55. Although conventional agricultural extension is available to farmers througho ut the Central Highlands and South-
Central Coast, GoV has been unable to provide sufficient, appropriate climate and weather information to help 
smallholders manage climate risk and adapt to the impacts of climate change. Demand for localized, reliable, ti mely 
and integrated climate and agricultural information is very high among poor farmers in the target regions, especially for ethnic minority farmers. Across the country, projects aimed at providing climate information have invested primarily 
in building capacity and information systems at the national level but have done limited work to build the capacity of 
provincial, district and commune meteorological and agricultural staff to generate and disseminate localized, 
actionable agro- climatic advisories. Po or, smallholder farmers with rain- fed crops, who are highly vulnerable to rainfall 
variability and extreme weather events, need adequate and timely information to help limit their risks.  
56. Technical advice on water conservation, seasonal calendar changes or  cropping techniques is developed by local 
authorities and distributed through television and extension services, however, they do not reach all vulnerable groups 
nor are they detailed enough or actionable. Climate and weather information received through television is too general 
and not downscaled enough to be useful for decision making at the local level. Information on rainfall or drought is 
not linked to actionable advice on how to mitigate or prevent damage to crops. Information transmitted through th e 
loudspeaker system or from GoV staff is perceived as not timely, unpredictable, scattered, with limited integration, 
difficult to understand or interpret, and not reaching sufficient numbers of farmers, particularly the most marginalized 
i.e. women, ethnic minorities, poorer Kinh farmers. In addition, most information is developed in a top- down manner 
without much involvement of farmers or without building on farmer learning and experience, resulting in a mismatch 
between available information and user re quirements.43  
57. Limited access to credit and market information  to sustain investments in resilient water and agricultural 
systems for agricultural production in light of evolving climate risks  
58. Enhancements to the climate resiliency of smallholder agroecosys tems and their corresponding small businesses 
must be sustained over time and adaptable to the inevitable evolution of climate variability over the coming years and 
decades. For smallholders to sustain climate resilient practices and production systems, th ey must have the ability to 
continuously invest in climate- resilient agricultural technologies and practices, operations and maintenance of 
resilient -irrigation infrastructure and efficiency equipment, and acquisition of inputs essential to on- going maintenance 
of climate- resilient agro- ecosystems. Smallholders, particularly the poorest farmers, require financial resources from 
access to credit to diversify towards climate -resilient inputs, technologies, and crops and build the resiliency of their 
 
43 RIMES,  CGIAR (2015). State of Climate Information Products and Services for Agriculture and Food Security in Vietnam.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 102 
 
 C 
agroecosy stems. With growing rainfall variability and droughts, the risk to farmers and agroecosystem productivity 
from not investing in climate resiliency increases.  
59. The incremental costs to poor/near -poor smallholders of start -up investments in water security an d resilient 
agricultural practices are initially prohibitive. At the same time, if initial investments in climate resiliency of 
agroecosystems are obtained, they must be sustained, and farmers must be able to cover the additional costs of 
necessary re- investment in irrigation maintenance and inputs to climate resilient agricultural systems.  At the current 
time, only 25% of poor farmers in both regions have taken out loans to invest in farm inputs through the formal system, with the primary sources of these  loans being the Agricultural Bank and the Vietnam Bank for Social Policies. 
Obstacles to access to credit by poor/near -poor smallholders, particularly women and ethnic minorities, include lack 
of awareness and knowledge of risks of adaptation investments both among farmers and financial intermediaries, 
lack of climate risk -informed planning and management of the agricultural systems that can inform the design of 
appropriate credit instruments, need for high amounts of collateral, especially in the absence of good understanding 
of risks. Apart from the need to lower financial risk by overcoming barriers to improved, climate- resilient production 
skills (see barrier 2, above), improved water security from last -mile connectivity, storage and irrigation efficiency 
(barrier 1), and more robust technical assistance and information services for climate resilient production (barrier 3), 
it is also important that financial intermediaries have the knowledge and capacities to assess climate risks and 
adaptation investme nts and policies, the instruments, and the expertise calibrated to enhance access to credit by 
smallholders to support investment in climate resilient water infrastructure, crop production and marketing.  
60. To engender a shift to climate- resilient technologie s and practices and sustain investments in operations and 
maintenance of infrastructure and equipment, farmers need to secure the move towards diversified systems financed with increased revenues enabled by access to value- chains and markets. While value- chains and markets in both 
regions are fairly well developed, particularly for major crops such as rice, coffee, pepper, cashew and fruits, diversification into and long -term cultivation of climate- resilient crops will require stronger linkages across diver sified 
value- chains and access to markets for the resilient crops. Analysis of pricing and market trends is generally 
inaccessible to poor/near -poor smallholders – particularly women and ethnic minority farmers - thus hindering their 
ability to adequately manage climate risk. Access to market by poor/near -poor smallholders is impeded by lack of 
timely and actionable information on demand, prices, logistics, weather, etc., which can be key to effectively managing 
the financial impacts of climate shocks. Thes e farmers lack the skills to successfully navigate the relatively complex 
marketing systems prevailing in towns  and cities around the two regions, as well as nationally and for export. Where 
information systems exist on- line, poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers often lack access or the 
information is in a form or language they have difficulties comprehending.  
 
Project objective, outcomes, and impacts  
61. The key problem the project proposes to address  is the threat to vulnerable smallholder agricultural production posed 
by the impacts of climate- change induced rainfall variability and drought.  
62. The objective  of this project is to empower vulnerable smallholders in the Central Highlands and South- Central  Coast 
regions of Vietnam –  particularly women and ethnic minority farmers -  to manage increasing climate risks to 
agricultural production by securing water availability, adopting climate- resilient agricultural practices, and 
strengthening access to action able agro- climate information, credit and markets.  
63. The project advances a paradigm shift away from short -term, stop- gap measures to more integrated, multi -
stakeholder coordination of investments to sustain smallholder agricultural production through clima te-risk informed 
water and agricultural management . The project is underpinned by the Theory of Change  depicted below:


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
 
 
       
        
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64. The project comprises two interlinked outputs that build on best practices and lessons learned from previous and 
ongoing projects and experiences. These include: 1) Enhanced water security for agricultural production for 
vulnerable smallholder farmers in the face of climate -induced rainfall variabilit y and droughts  and 2) 
Increased resilience of smallholder farmer livelihoods through climate -resilient agriculture and access to 
climate information, finance, and markets . The project will directly address the need for greater investment in 
water security (Output 1) through the ADB -financed WEIDAP mainline irrigation infrastructure in the five provinces, 
together with GCF -financed last -mile connections to these systems for farmers whose vulnerability to climate change IR3. Improved capacities of small -
scale farmers and institutions to 
generate localized climate info 
for agricultural and climate -risk 
management and to access 
markets and credit  
  IR2. Strengthened resilience of 
agricultural systems through 
climate -resilient agricultural 
practices  
  IR1. Modernized irrigation 
systems providing on -
demand irrigation services 
to farmers in the five 
participating provinces  
Climate change drivers:  Changes in precipitation patterns: 15 -20% increase in wet season, 10% decrease in dry season  
   Tempe rature increase  Climate change risks:  Wetter wet seasons and drier dry seasons, with shifting seasonality and increased risk of severe droughts  Climate change impacts:    Increasing imbalance in surface and ground water availability for agriculture; with longer 
periods of severe water s carcity during dry season and droughts and increased intensity of 
floods. => leading  to Reduced crop productivity (yields, incomes)  Problem statement:  Reduced water availability and agricultural productivity of small -scale farmers due to climate 
change- induced rainfall v ariability, droughts  
 (2.0) Increased resilience of 
health and well -being, and 
food and water security  
 
 
 
  GCF paradigm shift:  
Integrated, multi -stakeholder coordination of investments to sustain 
smallholder agricultural production through climate- risk informed water 
and agricultural management   
 
 
  
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks of small -scale farmers in Central 
Highlands and South- Central Coast regions of Vietnam  
 
 
 
  GCF impact   
 
 
 
  (1.0)  Increased resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most vulnerable 
people, communities, and regions  
Intermediate 
results  
  
Modernized irrigation 
systems developed and 
upgraded through WEIDAP 
trunk lines and last-mile 
connections  to the trunk 
lines  
 Strengthened capacities of 
smallholder farmers to apply climate information, and 
access credit and markets to 
sustain investment in climate -
resilient water and agricultural 
management  
Farmers are unable to apply 
appropriate climate -resilient 
water and agricultural 
management practices owing 
to weak technical capacities 
for climate  risk management  Key causes 
and barriers  
 
 
  Climate change -induced 
rainfall variability and 
drought are increasing the 
need for greater investment in 
reliable sources of water to 
enhance climate- resiliency of 
agricultural production   
 
  Farmers have limited 
access to credit and 
markets to sustain 
diversification of 
technologies and practices 
for resilient agricultural 
production in light of 
increasing water insecurity  Smallholders have limited 
access to timely, 
integrated and actionable 
agro- climatic information 
for on- farm climate risk -
informed water 
management and 
agricultural planning.  
  Improved climate -resilient 
crop, soil and water 
management by vulnerable 
smallholder farmers for 
climate -resilient agricultural 
production in the face of 
climate -induced rainfall 
variability and drought  GCF project 
outcomes


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 102 
 
 C 
is compounded by socio -economic vulnera bility: poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers  whose income 
does not permit investment in climate resilience- enhancing inputs, technologies or infrastructure to cope effectively.  
At the same time, for those farmers on the periphery of the basel ine infrastructure the project will support them to 
rehabilitate or construct  household and communal water storage ponds i n key , vulnerable,  rain fed areas. The project 
will provide access to high efficiency irrigation technologies to vulnerable farmers and train  them in water, biomass 
and soil moisture management to enhance the climate- resilience of critical water resources.  
65. Taking full advantage of secure and reliable water supplies, farmers will cultivate staples and high value crops using 
climate -resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems learned in Farmer Field Schools (Output  2). Resilient 
practices and cropping systems were identified during project preparation based on a series of criteria including climate vulnerability, soil type, potent ial marketability of climate-
resilient products, and other factors. Resilient 
cropping systems will favor agroforestry, though not exclusively, as it provides permanent soil cover, optimal use of water, and synergistic economic and environmental benefits f rom multiple cropping patterns. Farmers will also benefit 
directly from localized agro- climate information in the form of advisories that are readily accessible to ethnic minority, 
women and other vulnerable farm households. With co- development of these advisories, farmers will be able to 
synthesize traditional knowledge with contemporary scientific information to produce advice and guidance for climate risk management at local levels. Initially, inputs and technologies for water -efficient, climate- resilient agricultural 
production will be made available to vulnerable poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers for the first two 
years of production through a voucher system. Beyond that, the project will work with lenders to enhance access by 
smallholders to credit for climate- resilient agricultural production through training, information, and coordination with 
financial institutions.  
66. The project is designed so that secure water resources and improved soil and water management and more efficient 
water use (Output 1), together with climate- resilient crop production using localized agro- climate information to 
mitigate risk (Output2), provide the foundation for increased yields. To increase incomes, surplus yields of climate-
resilient produce should be equi tably marketed. The project will form multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation Platforms 
comprised of representative producers, input suppliers, technical assistance providers, buyers and others to enhance 
value chain coordination and collaboration through pra ctical and strategic partnerships. These value chain 
partnerships will address production problems and bottlenecks, negotiate contractual arrangements, and smooth 
access to existing markets. By increasing access to credit and markets, poor/near -poor, ethni c minority and women 
farmers will be able to market surplus yields and, with the increased incomes, increase their resilience to climate change impacts.  
67. This project builds on lessons learned and best practices from a number of successful initiatives involving irrigation innovations, Farmer Field Schools, voucher systems, and small farmer credit access and financial management. A 
number of these projects were explicitly aimed at improving the capacities of ethnic minority, women and other 
vulnerable groups . The following projects are particularly relevant: Forecast -
based Financing for Drought 
Preparedness and Early Action of Women Farmers in Vietnam’  in Gia Lai and Ca Mau, supported by FAO, UN 
Women and Save the Children; ‘ Sustainable Economic Empowerment of Ethnic Minorities ’ in Dak Nong supported 
by IFAD; ‘ Agriculture, Farmers and Rural Areas Support Project ’ supported by IFAD; ‘ Private Sector Engagement for 
Agricultural Development ’ project supported by the IFC and the Government of Canada; a nd ‘Introducing Low -cost 
Micro Irrigation Technology for Poor Farmers in South Central Vietnam’  in six districts and ‘ Linking increases in water 
use efficiency for food production at the farm scale to global projections ’ both in Ninh Thuan.  For more detai ls please 
see Chapter 3 of the Feasibility Study  (Annex II) . 
C.3. Project D escription 
Rationale and methodology for targeting of the project areas and populations  
68. The starting point for geographical targeting of the proposed project was the targeting (and design) of project 
interventions in conjunction with the WEIDAP project command areas, informed by the analysis of climate vulnerability 
across the five provinces of Dak Lak and Dak Nong in the Central Highlands, and Khanh Hoa, Ninh Thuan and Binh 
Thuan in the South- Central Coast, particularly in terms of seasonal rainfall variability and drought and flood risk. Eight 
sites have been selected by MARD with technical support from ADB for sub- projects to upgrade  existing irrigation 
mainline systems and support water use efficiency; these sites have been selected for their exposure to climate risks , 
as well as their potential to shift from lower -value to higher -value cropping systems. Within those five provinces and 
with the WEIDAP project  areas as a starting point, an intersecting approach should be used to guide the geographical 
targeting for the MARD -UNDP project proposed to the GCF, with the following filters applied,  as informed by the 
climate risk analysis in previous chapters:


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 102 
 
 C 
i) Areas that are prone to identified climate risks: seasonal variability and drought and flood risk;  
ii) Areas that are most affected by major climate change impacts on water and agriculture, currently and as 
projected: increasing imbalance in surface and ground water availability (for production); with longer periods of 
severe water scarcity during dry season and increased intensity of droughts; and reduced crop productivity (in terms of yields, inc omes);  
iii) A combination of rainfed and irrigated areas: with upland and lowland areas with rain- fed cultivation most 
vulnerable to wetter wet seasons and drier dry seasons and an increased risk of extreme droughts, while irrigated areas mainly impacted by ext reme droughts. Both will be severely affected under the hottest climate change 
scenario;  
iv) Areas with high social vulnerability factors or density of at -risk populations, such as ethnic minority population, 
poor and near -poor, and number of women- headed hous eholds.  
69. Overlaying these filters in the five selected provinces results in the priority geographical selection of 14 districts 
encompassing 60 communes for the proposed MARD -UNDP GCF project. The majority of the 60 communes 
(including all communes served by WEIDAP) are a mosaic  of irrigated and rainfed cropping systems, with 17 
communes more irrigated than rainfed, and 43 communes more rainfed than irrigated: as per the analysis of climate 
risks in section 1.4  of the FS , rainfed areas are more vulnerable to the identified climate risks than irrigated areas, so 
the share of rainfed areas within the total number of selected areas is higher . 
70. The proposed project, therefore, targets communities in and around WEIDAP sub -project boundaries (the command 
areas) most affected by major climate change impacts on water and agriculture, both current and projected, including 
increasing imbalance in surface and ground water availability for agricultural production, longer periods of severe water scar city during the dry season, increased intensity of droughts, and reduced crop productivity impacting both 
yields and incomes. Geographic targeting was further refined with an analysis of areas with high social vulnerability 
factors or density of at -risk po pulations, such as ethnic minority population, poor and near -poor, and women- headed 
households. Finally, a variety of farming areas were targeted within the refined geographic areas to ensure equitable 
coverage of irrigable and rainfed systems; this includ ed targeting communes and vulnerable populations with climate 
and social vulnerability characteristics in and around the proposed MARD -ADB WEIDAP project sites in the five 
provinces affected by the severe drought of 2015- 2016.  
71. This targeting process resul ted in the selection of 60 communes in 14 districts  (“Project Area” ):   
 
Province  Districts  Communes  
Khanh Hoa  Cam Lâm  For a complete list of communes, please see 
the Feasibility Study for  Figure 44a-e: Selected 
provinces with proposed districts and 
communes for the GCF -financed project, 
indicating major climate risks . Ninh Thuan  Ninh H ải, Ninh Sơn, Thu ận Bắc, Bác Ái  
Binh Thuan  Hàm Thu ận Nam, Đ ức Linh  
Dak Nong  Cư Jut, Đăk Mil, Krông Nô  
Dak Lak  Ea Hleo, Cư M'Gar, Ea Kar, Krông Păc  
72. In terms of more precisely selecting direct beneficiaries within the selected communes  of the project area, targeting 
is in line with key social vulnerability factors identified in the analysis in the Feasibility Study (see Section 6.1 for 
targeting criteria and selection process) and above. The people who are the most vulnerable and have the least 
resources to deal with increasing climate risks are prioritized. Government statistical indicators for these factors are 
available – down to commune level – and have been used for quantitative targeting, while additional qualitative 
targeting and monitoring will be applied throughout project implementation as verification and additional quality 
control. These selection criteria include:  
i) Small- scale farmers, with one hectare or less of farming land,44 who possess at least one of the following 
characteristics:  
ii) Membership in an ethnic minority  of the host country ;  
iii) Poor and near -poor household status  based on the official Vietnamese poverty line; and  
 
44 While indirectly also affected by the identified climate risks and impacts, landless people will only be indirectly targeted by the 
project through better access to information on weather, climate risks, credit, opportunities for agricultural labor and other 
information.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 102 
 
 C 
iv) Women -headed households, single women, and women in families with high dependency rates/disabled 
members  
73. Before 2016, the GoV used an income- based national poverty line for targeting of beneficiaries in poverty reduction 
programs. However, since then the GoV has adopted a ‘rights -based multi -dimensional poverty approach’ for 
targeting beneficiaries, which has been applied by this  project. This new multi -dimensional poverty measurement 
measures a combinatio n of deprivation of income together with ten indicators on access to basic services. Provinces 
are requested to monitor and report the list of poor and near poor three times a year (early, mid and late period).  
Project Description: 
74. To achieve its objective, the project  addresses climate- induced water stress through a two- pronged approach: (i) from 
the supply -side, with provision of water efficient irrigation infrastructure and increasing water storage capacity to 
address the risk of water scarcity;  (ii) from the demand- side, through introduction of climate- resilient crop 
diversification, land treatment and agronomic practices that reduce water input requirements for food / agricultural 
production. As such, the project invest s in enabling smallholder s, particularly poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and 
women farmers,  to adapt to increasing climate- driven rainfall variability and drought through implementation of two 
inter-linked Outputs:  
Output 1: Enhanced water security for agricultural production for smallholder farmers in the face of climate-
induced rainfall variability and droughts  
75. This Output will overcome barriers to water security for climate- resilient production through investment in irrigation 
systems and technologies, including storage and water -efficient equipment. Modernization and expansion of irrigation 
systems will provide farmers access to water, allowing them to diversify and expand the area under climate- resilient 
cropping systems. Under this Output, the project directly complements in i ts scope the loan provided by A DB to GoV45 
to establish large- scale irrigation infrastructure – the WEIDAP project -  bringing water to eight different farming 
(command) areas across the two target regions.  
76. While this baseline investment will make primary irrigation infrastructure available to all smallholders with in the eight 
project areas, GCF financing will cover the incremental costs of accessing this infrastructure by  those farmers whose 
vulnerability to climate change impacts on agricultural production are compounded by their socio- economic status, 
defined officially as poor or near -poor. For these farmers to successfully cope with climate vulnerability they need 
access to secure sources of water for crop production, but they currently lack the ability to connect to this infrastructure or invest in irrigation, water storage or water efficient technologies.  
77. The ADB -financed WEIDAP project carried out a thorough analysis of water sources to be used for irri gation in the 
eight distinct irrigation schemes.  The sources of water for WEIDAP are existing reservoirs and canals –  the WEIDAP 
project improves and connects canals and pipe systems to these sources. Irrigation water under Output 1, Activity 
1.2, below, comes from the WEIDAP system. The sources of water for the GCF -funded water harvesting systems 
under Activity 1.3, below, is rainfall and ensuing surface flow in the micro- basins surrounding the ponds that are the 
ultimate sink for the harvested water.
46  
78. The complementary GCF grant resources will finance the incremental costs of achieving last -mile connectivity for the 
targeted poor/near -poor smallholders under the WEIDAP command areas by linking their plots to the WEIDAP 
irrigation systems. For the targete d rain fed farmers on the periphery of  the WEIDAP irrigation trunk lines, this Output 
will address water deficiencies due to climate change- induced rainfall variability and droughts. This Output will 
combine GCF and provincial government resources to support supplementary irrigation from localized sources, as 
well as enable farmers to increase on- farm productivity with efficient technologies such as sprinklers and drip 
irrigation. These investments will work in tandem with the resilient agricultural practic es promoted under Output 2 to 
augment water productivity of diversified cropping systems, for instance, though intercropping, agroforestry, etc.  
Activity 1.1: Establish large- scale irrigation infrastructure to bring irrigation water to eight farming areas across 
the target regions  
 
45 From 2018 to 2022, MARD and provincial PPCs will implement the project ‘Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected 
Provinces’ (WEIDAP) in five provinces: Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan and Khanh Hoa. Total WEIDAP budget  is 
$124.26 million, of which co- financing of 23.22 million.  
46 Annex IIa of the Feasibility Study section 1.4 Climate change impacts on key sectors and socio- economic groups (Table 1, page 
18) lists climate impact on water resources in the project provinces.  Section 1.5 Irrigation Sector provides more detail regarding 
water sources; climate change impacts on water; irrigation management and water use efficiency, etc.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 102 
 
 C 
79. This activity is co -financed with the ADB/GoV loan for the Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected 
Provinces  (WEIDAP) project in Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan and Khanh Hoa provinces, comprising 
the overall geographic target  area of the project proposed here. The WEIDAP project will be implemented to provide 
water to eight specific farming areas in the five provinces and improve agricultural water productivity (‘crop per drop’) 
by increasing water use efficiency in irrigated agriculture. WEIDAP47 will provide irrigation water through 
development, upgrading or rehabilitation of mainline irrigation infrastructure.  
80. ADB/GoV financing for WEIDAP constitutes co- financing for the GCF -funded portion of this Output (Activities 1.2- 1.4, 
below). GCF funding will not be used for the implementation of this activity  but will enhance the climate resilience of 
the WEIDAP investment  by financing subsequent activities, as presented below.  WEIDAP provides significant 
investment under Activity 1.1 to establish functional large- scale irrigation infrastructure in the Central  Highlands and 
South- Central Coast regions, including both construction and improvements to manageme nt, operations and 
maintenance. GCF funding (through Output 2) will ensure adoption of climate- resilient agricultural practices  and co-
development and use of agro- climate information for climate risk management by all farmers in WEIDAP -served 
areas regardless of socio- economic status, as well as multi -stakeholder coordination for climate- resilient value chain 
development through climate innovation p latforms.  
81. WEIDAP’s eight irrigation systems that will be upgraded, rehabilitated and expanded are described in the table below 
and can be grouped into three categories (i) main pipeline systems connected to current reservoirs (either pumped 
or gravity fed); (ii) up graded canals; and (iii) new weirs to provide improved pumping ponds from which farmers will 
extract water suited to their own requirements. The capacity of these irrigation systems considers  the hydrology of 
the catchments supplying water and the potential coverage areas of the various crops and their respective water 
requirements as well as the requirement to sustain environmental river flows downstream of off -take or management 
structures. Modernization and expansion of irrigation systems will provide a higher level of resilience and water 
security to farmers allowing them to diversify, spread risk and expand the area of higher value crops.  
Table 2 of the Feasibilit y Study : List of resilient irrigation systems supported by the WEIDAP project in 
the five target provinces. For details, including detailed maps, see Annex II -a sub -assessment report.  
 
 
47 ADB, MARD (April 2017). Water efficiency improvement in drought -affected provinces (WEID AP), Vietnam (TA 9147- VIE): project 
preparation consultancy services. Mid Term Report.  
Map 2: Depicting geographic distribution of WEI DAP and GCF 
investments  
 Map1: Depicting geographic distribution of WEIDAP 
investments


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 102 
 
 C 
Province  Subproject  Technical specifications  
Khánh 
Hòa 1. Cam Ranh 
- Suoi Dau - 2 separate storage irrigation systems supplied from existing Suoi Dau 
and Cam Ranh reservoirs. Both combine rehabilitation of existing gravity 
canal systems and new pumped pipe systems.  
- 5 subsystems with pumping stations and ring main distr ibution pipelines 
to meet the adopted level of irrigation service.  
Ninh 
Thuậ n 2. Nhon Hai – 
Thanh Hai  - Each 1 new pumped pipe system consisting of 6 subsystems with 
standard hydrant manifolds, with the entire pipe system connected to the 
existing Tan My pipeline which is supplied by the Tan My weir and runs 
through the two sub- project sites.  3. Thanh Son 
– Phuoc 
Nhon  
Bình 
Thuậ n 4. Tra Tan  - 1 new pumped pipe system linked to an existing storage reservoir and 
canal system  
5. Du Du – 
Tan Thanh  - 1 single new gravity pipe system, at existing Tan Lap reservoir  
- Ring main distribution pipelines with hydrant manifolds  
- Paved inspection roads  
Đăk Lăk  6. Doi 500 – 
Buon Yong –  
Krong Buk Ha 
– Ea H’Leo – 
Ea Kuang  - 8 new storage irrigation systems (pumping stations, pipes, hydrant 
manifolds), to be supplied from five existing reservoirs  
Dak Nong  7. Cu Jut  - 10 permanent weirs to replace farmers’ temporary weirs, supplied from 
the existing Dak Dier and Dak Drong Reservoirs,  
- 2 pump- pipe demonstration irrigation systems, supplied from new weirs 
2 and 9, each serving 50 ha, and  
- Upgrading of 10.95km of access road.  
8. Dak Mil  - Upstream: rehabilitation of 24 existing structures, including structures on 
4 existing storage reservoirs, 5 existi ng diversion weirs, construction of 
2.75km of reinforced concrete box culvert, construction of a new pumping 
station, to replace a temporary one, on Reservoir #1;  
- Downstream: replacement of farmers’ temporary weirs with 3 permanent 
un-gated weir structures; and  
- Road upgrading together with bridge/culvert crossings.  
 
82. Technical specifications for the proposed irrigation systems supported by the WEIDAP project in the five provinces can be found in section 6.2 of the Feasibility Study . Detailed maps and other information can be found in the Sub-
assessment Report on Water Storage and  Irrigation  annexed to the Feasibility Study.  
83. In addition to the infrastructural investments, the WEIDAP project will also strengthen irrigation management services, specifically water allocation and delivery services, as well as maintenance of irrigation systems by conducting surface 
water balance assessments; (b) groundwater assessments in applicable subproject command areas; (c) developing 
an irrigation water sharing and allocation framework; and (d) provision of a real -time decision support system for 
farmers on optimizing crop water application. The WEIDAP project will also ensure adoption of on- farm water 
management practices focused on improving on- farm w ater productivity with in the subproject command areas. 
Productivity assessments will help benchmark water productivity standards for different crops under different agro-
ecological conditions and be the basis for advisory services (information and training) to farmers on improving on-
farm water management to cope with climate variability. Men and women farmers will be consulted and also receive 
technical advice on identifying and developing appropriate Water Efficiency Application Technologies (WEAT) 
system s that meet their individual requirements.48 
 
48 Irrigation infrastructure built, repurposed or rehabilitated through the WEIDAP project will be maintained by the correspondi ng IMCs. 
The IMCs will be in charge of registering farmers, monitoring meters and charging farmers for water use (recovering O&M costs at a 
minimum), flush sediment, and management of overall water flow release from the reservoirs to avoid wastage and unregulated u se. 
For further information, please see the WEIDAP project description from the MARD -ADB project documentation, attached.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 102 
 
 C 
Key sub- activities will include:  
1.1.1 Install 185 km of new pressurized pipe systems taking water from canals or reservoirs, and supplying 
hydrants located at a reasonable distance49 from farmers’ fields;  
1.1.2 Carry out modernization of main systems, including canal lining, control structures, balancing storage and 
installation of flow controls and measurement devices with remote monitoring for 19,200 ha;  
1.1.3 Provide new and improved weirs replacing farmer -constructed temporary weirs, permanent ponds/storage for 
irrigating HVCs, and upgrades of upstream storage and supply systems.  
Activity 1.2: Establish last -mile connections between WEIDAP irrigation infrastructure and poor and near -poor 
farmer lands to help cope with increasing rainfall variability and drought 
84. This activity will support vulnerable poor/near -poor farmers with less than one hectare of land to adapt to climate 
variability by overcoming barriers to last -mile connectivity to the WEIDAP systems constructed u nder Activity 1.1, 
thus enabling them access to sufficient, reliable water  during extreme drought. These actions will link to and build 
directly on government WEIDAP investments to build 13 weirs, upgrade canals and build pipeline systems to connect 
15 res ervoirs across the five target provinces. GCF resources will cover the costs of meeting the additional demands  
from poor/near -poor farmers  for water security  due to climate change. In close coordination with WEIDAP project 
management, GCF resources will deliver technical expertise to cover the additional costs of incorporating climate risk mitigation into the design and implementation of smallholder connections to WEIDAP infrastruc ture, as well as 
resources to cover the costs to poor/near -poor farmers of installing these connecting systems (pipes, water shifting 
valves , small water storage  and others). Connectivity will be achieved through financing ( contingent on completion of 
initial equipment training) , and smallholder contributions of labor in co- designing, installing and maintaining the 
connecting systems. This support will be provided only after successful participation in Farmer Field Schools (FFS) 
(see Activity 2.1, below) an d completion of courses on climate- resilient farming (including water efficiency practices) 
conducted in the commune. Note that irrigation from last -mile connections will be applied to cultivation of high- value 
crops promoted under Output 2, Activity 2.1. These include various intercrop mixes including species such as  mango, 
banana, custard apple, cashew , vegetables, avocado, durian and others (please see Table 6 of Annex 2b of the 
Feasibility Study for more details).  
85. To ensure last -mile connection by poor and near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers to WEIDAP irrigation 
infrastructure, Activity 1.2 will provide them with locally available on-farm irrigation systems , pumps, water meters, 
shifting valves and small -scale , on-farm water storage for last -mile connection (‘last -mile connectivity support 
packages’). As the water supply will be regulated, farmers require on- farm storage systems as part of this support 
package to cover the gap between receiving the water from th e irrigation system and using it on- farm as well as to 
mitigate risks of weather variability and extreme weather events. Technical expertise for the detailed on- farm design 
of the individual or shared distribution systems also needs to be provided in tandem with farmer in- kind support. 
Details on the recommended last -mile connectivity support packages for each location are provided in the table below.  
Table 3 of the Feasibility Study: Proposed last -mile connectivity support to be pr ovided by the MARD -UNDP project. 
For technical details, see sub -assessment report on water.  
 
Province  District  Last-mile connectivity support  
Khánh 
Hòa Cam Lam  - Shared/private pumps and pipelines to connect to the improved canal 
system’ manifolds (up to 2000m, but mainly within 1000m)  
- Water meter, control valves, transit tanks, shared/private pumps and 
pipelines, and on- farm storage systems to connect to the new ring main 
pipeline system (up to 500m, but mainly within 300m)  
Ninh 
Thuậ n  Ninh Hai, 
Ninh Son, 
Thuan Bac 
and Bac Ai  - Water meter, control valves, transit tanks, and shared/private pipelines, 
to connect to the improved canal system’ manifolds (up to 500m, but 
mainly within 350m)  
 
49 Typically, 63 mm in diameter, with flows of about 5 l/s and within a range of 500 to 1,000 m from a field


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 102 
 
 C 
Bình 
Thuậ n  Duc Linh and 
Ham Thuan 
Nam  - Water meter, control valves,  transit tanks, and shared/private pipelines, 
to connect to the gravity branched and new ring main pipeline system (up 
to 500m, but mainly within 300m)  
Duc Linh  - Shared/private pumps and pipelines, water meters, control valves and 
transit tanks, to connect to the gravity canal system (up to 1000m, but 
mainly within 700m)  
Đăk Lăk  Ea Hleo, Cu 
M’Gar, Ea 
Kar and 
Krong Pac  - Water meter, control valves, transit tanks, and shared/private pipelines, 
to connect to the improved canal system’ manifolds (up to 500m, but 
mainly within 300m)  
Dak 
Nong  Cu Jut, Dak 
Mil and 
Krong No  - Shared/private pumps, control valves, transit tanks, and pipelines, to 
connect to the improved weir -canal system (up to 1000m, but mainly 
within 700m)  
- Water meter, control valves, transit tanks, and shared/private pumps and 
pipelines, to connect to the new ring main pipeline system (up to 1000m, 
but mainly within 700m)  
 
86. Proposed last -mile connectivity support to be provided with GCF funding will include shared/private pumps and 
pipelines to connect to the improved canal systems’ manifolds, water meters, control valves, transit tanks, 
shared/private pumps and pipelines, and on- farm storage systems.  For province -by-province description of specific 
district level equipment and light i nfrastructure, please see Chapter 6, Table 12 of the Feasibility Study.  
87. To ensure ownership, benefit ing households will be required to provide in- kind contributions of labor and use of small 
locally available construction tools, as part of design, construc tion and maintenance phases. The ‘last -mile 
connectivity support packages’ will be provided –  combined with technical guidance, manuals and mentoring –  using 
GCF financing since poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers are unable to afford this ad ditional cost of 
adapting to climate- driven water insecurity. To not do so would leave them at a higher risk of water insecurity 
compared to non- poor farmers , particularly during extreme weather events.  
88. In terms  of O&M of the last -mile connectivity support packages, the connection systems require some  small  
maintenance and can therefore should be divided by benefitting households with minor technical or peer -to-peer 
assistance. For shared systems, a water -users ’ group will be set -up or an existing farmer group engaged. In line with 
good practice on irrigation management in Viet Nam (see section 5.1 of the Feasibility Study), these groups will be 
self-selected, manage their own codes of conduct and be mentored by l ocal commune technical staff. Pictorial and 
local language O&M guidance notes and manuals will be developed and disseminated. The DARD s’ (provincial 
Departments of Agriculture and Rural Development) will, as Responsible Part ies, through their Irrigation Department 
and IMC’s technical staff will provide on- going technical support to all households with private and shared systems 
and throughout the project timeframe and immediately after.  
89. Note that post project O&M is esti mated at USD 5,377 ,752 for a period of 10 years after  the 6-year project 
implementation period.  Of this amount , the provincial and district authorities will commit USD 1, 300,000 while 
smallholder contributions are calculated at approximately USD 4,077,752 . Of the total post project O&M, USD 
1,286,12 0 would be towards their respective irrigation connections to the WEIDAP infrastructure, USD 2,224,400  
towards on- farm water storage facilities  including moni toring, minor repairs and maintenance costs of the water 
collection system , and USD 1,862,136  towards maintenance of on- farm technologies.   
90. For detailed information for each project area, please see Chapter 4 of the Sub- assessment Report on Water Storage 
and Irrigation attached to the Feasibility Study.  
Key sub- activities  include:   
1.2.1 Design and construct 4,765 connection and distribution systems , including installation and maintenance of 
irrigatio n equipment to cope with climate variability  on 1,43 0 hectares  
1.2.2 Train 4,765 poor and near -poor farmers (one connection/distribution system per farmer) on climate- risk 
informed utilization of irrigation equipment and system maintenance


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 102 
 
 C 
1.2.3  Establish Water Users Groups  for O&M of communal or shared systems, including structures and agreements 
on potential funding mechanisms   
Activity 1.3: Enhance supplementary irrigation for rain fed smallholders to cope with rainfall variability and 
drought 
91. This activity will support poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers to co pe with the climate change- driven 
impacts on water availability on their rain fed agricultural systems.  One of the pillars of an effective adaptation 
solution, the project will support construction or enhancement of existing supplementary water storage systems to 
enabl e farmers to better maintain minimum irrigation water supply during climate- induced droughts.   Current 
investments in water storage are at risk as these invest ments are not made with a climate change risk management 
approach. Investment in water storage facilities will incorporate climate change risk management  in their design and 
construction. These systems could serve as the groundwork for potential phased expansion of either the WEIDAP 
project or other investments as they will facilitate future connectivity investments.  
92. To determine the extent to which water resources can be extracted and uti lized in each project area, as well as the 
impacts of climate change on water sources and water use in rain- fed production areas, the availability of water 
resources for pond solutions and agricultural production was assessed. Gaps were determined as part of project 
preparation by modeling water balances for key crops, soils and climate conditions to 2050.  Please see Chapter 5 of 
the Sub- assessment Report on Water Storage and Irrigation attached to the Feasibility Study.  
93. The GCF and provincial governments will jointly finance on- farm water storage systems for collecting rainwater or 
surface water. These facilities or farm ponds will help farmers to store water in the wet season for use at critical times 
during the dry season and as much as possible during ex treme droughts. Support for resilient water storage systems 
will be combined with training on climate- resilient water resources management. MARD , in consultation with 
stakeholders, shall select pond locations based on the following criteria :  
(i) options for upland, midland or flatland area;  
(ii) in reach of the most vulnerable people in the Project Area based on the official Vietnamese poverty line;  
(iii) arranged in accordance with the overall layout of the existing water collection system of the Project Area ;  
(iv) ensuring maximum and sustainable water catchment within all climate scenarios;  
(v) increasing the ability of gravity irrigation; and  
(vi) not disrupting farming activities.  
MARD will finalize the  design of ponds  in accordance with the following eligibility  criteria50 are:  
(i) ensuring sufficient supply of water for crops in the dry season;   
(ii) Simple construction ( rectangular  designs)  with easy maintenance (doable by beneficiaries themselves with 
minimal additional costs and labour) as further described in the Feasibility Study submitted together with this 
Funding Proposal ;  
(iii) limited evaporation and permeability to avoid loss of stored water;  
(iv) include a water distribution system;  
(v) integration with existing surface water collection systems if possible;  
(vi) preventing sedimentation;  
(vii) adaptability to changing water and climate conditions;  
(viii) based on bioengineering principles; and  
(ix) suitability for ethnic minorities and women, for example not creating additional workload.  
 
50 Design details of the water harvesting including dimensions are available in Annex II of the feasibility study, and further details are 
available in Annex IIa - Sub- assessment on Water storage and irrigation.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 102 
 
 C 
94. An initial mapping applying these criteria have resulted in proposed locations in the target ed provinces in the Project 
Area as depicted in the FS in Figure 45  showing maps with the pond locations These include 1,159  climate resilient 
ponds  (upgrading 484 ponds, construction of 490 househo ld ponds and 185 shared ponds) .  
95. Initial w ater balance calculations will be confirmed in rainfed areas during project implementation to corroborate the 
most appropriate design and management for each pond and each location. The water balance modeling will use 
comprehensive mathematical tools and models and entail a detailed assessment of the available surface and 
rainwater sources, current status of existing ponds, soil conditions, local cropping systems and tree portfolio, climate 
risk and impact scenarios. It will ensure risk -informed, science- based and effective design for water resources 
sustainability under the different climate scenarios.51  
96. Base d on the water balance modeling results, the initial design of the rainwater harvesting ponds conducted for this 
study will be further detailed or streamlined and outline the following components: precise site selection; dimensions and storage; water collection system; treatment of pond bottom losses; treatment of pond surface losses; water 
distribution system and resilience assurances for different climate scenarios.  
97. External technical expertise is required for the co- design and landscaping of bioengineer ed climate- resilient ponds, 
including the training and mentoring of DARD Irrigation Department and other staff. These bioengineering techniques 
have been proven to maximize available natural water sources, significantly reduce evaporation rates and increas e 
pond resiliency through well planned use of protection measures such as the planting of locally suitable plants (vetiver grass, bamboo) and trees or the pre- treatment of ponds (such as clay pellets or a particular  clay e.g. bentonite). 
Pictorial and loca l language O&M guidance notes and manuals will be developed and disseminated alongside the 
technical support.  
98. O&M of the shared ponds will be assured through the establishment of farmer -led ‘pond management groups’, 
comprised of gender -balanced and inclusi ve representation of the households benefiting from the pond. The group 
will be assembled at the pond design stage so they can be involved throughout the entire design, construction (or 
rehabilitation), use and management process. This includes monitoring and evaluating the construction phase. Pond 
management groups will be based on existing farmer interest groups, cooperatives or other community sharing 
mechanisms, to attract active community members and build on existing farmer -to-farmer networks. Rules and 
regulations for the use, management and O&M of the pond will be proposed, adopted and enforced by the members themselves, through majority agreement and ensuring gender equality and inclusiveness. The establishment of the 
pond management groups will be facilitated by the commune PPC, with technical and mentoring support provided by 
the commune DARD technical staff  as Responsible Parties . Please see A nnex II(a) Sub -Assessment on Water 
Storage and Irrigation , linked  to the Feasibility Study.  
Key sub- activi ties include:   
1.3.1 Construct or upgrade 1,159 climate- resilient ponds (based on site- specific designs construct 675 new ponds 
and upgrade 484 existing ponds)  
1.3.2 Train over 16,000 poor and near -poor farmer beneficiaries in climate- resilient water resource management  to 
enhance supply  
1.3.3 Establish 185 pond- management groups for O&M, including structures and agreements on potential funding 
mechanisms    
Activity 1.4: Increase smallholder capacities to apply on -farm water efficient practices and technologies to 
maxim ize water productivity in coping with rainfall variability and drought  
99. To further enhance the productivity of water made available for climate- resilient agriculture from last -mile connection 
and supplementary storage and irrigation on rain fed lands, the project will apply a holistic approach to on- farm water 
management. As such, GCF financing will be applied to provide vulnerable poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and 
 
51 Building on accepted good practice, the following initial water balance modeling method was applied: i) water resources assessment 
under different climate change scenarios (until 2050) based on current and past water availability trends; ii) water demand assessment 
under climate change (until 2050) for different crops and groups of users; and iii) water balance assessment spatially and over time, 
including appropriate technical design of ponds and water management practices. The final modeling after project approval wil l engage 
international and national hydrological and water resources management s pecialists, but also be used as a capacity building exercise 
for local DARD irrigation staff. To build on local knowledge but also increase ownership, farmers will be involved in this as sessment 
as well as the pond design as much as possible, in line with participatory technology development good practice.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 102 
 
 C 
women farmers with affordable climate resilient on-farm water efficiency technologies . This  will lower net water 
demand, increase crop water productivity, and enable cropping systems to withstand drought and precipitation shocks 
and stresses. The project will target the most vulnerable farmers who unlike the better -off farmers cannot afford 
available technologies. Replicating proven good practice, a participatory technology development approach will be 
applied.  
100. This approach builds on farmers ’ knowledge of actual climate conditions, production systems and  household 
economies to adapt, build and operate water -saving irrigation systems to ensure effective agricultural production in 
the face of increasing rainfall variability and drought. This process is accompanied by  training, coaching and general 
troubleshooting sup port, as needed.  
101. The technology developed will be flexible and applicable to the crops grown by the poor and near -poor, cost -effective 
for one hectare or less of farm land, suitable for women and ethnic minorities to apply, not labor -intensive, use locally 
available materials and be easily maintained. It will increase water efficiency, reduce agricultural input costs and 
ensure resilience to the identified climate risks. The co- developed technology will likely not be as water -efficient as 
the more expensive technology but will meet a minimum efficiency standard and serve as a stepping stone for the 
poor and near -poor to incrementally increase water productivity and income, allowing them to afford the more 
efficient technology in t he medium or long term.  
102. In places such as Ninh Thuan where low -cost micro -irrigation technologies have already been developed through 
the above process (for example by the NGO International Development Enterprises, see section 3.1.4 of the 
Feasibility Stud y), the participatory technology process will be shortened and exclude the co- development 
component. Where these technologies are not yet available, the process will be conducted fully as described above 
and focus on adjusting existing technologies to adapt them for the most vulnerable farmers to be able to apply and 
afford.  
103. Criteria for selecting early adopters or farmer champions will be as follows: i) small -scale farmers, with one hectare 
or less of farm land; ii) representing most vulnerable groups (poor and near -poor, ethnic minorities and women); iii) 
benefiting from the project support for last -mile connectivity or on- farm water storage; iv) availability to be engaged 
in the co- development process and v) recognized leadership in the farming community in regard to innovation and 
communication.  Stakeholder consultations were carried out extensively during project preparation, and farmer 
champions have been identified preliminarily. Farmer champions will be carefully vetted for their credibility and commi tment to communicate and the abilities to involve their peers  by members of the community . Farmer 
champions, proposed by community members, will be first confirmed by the Project’s Responsible Parties -  provincial 
DARD staff -  as part of sub -activity 1.4.1  and 2.1.2 and subsequently confirmed by MARD . 
104. For the roll -out of the technology once developed, MARD based on the DARDs’ pre- selection,  will provide support 
through vouchers to individual poor and near -poor smallholders conditional on the following eligibility criteria :  
(i) farmers’ in- kind contribution in installing the system, for example through labor or minor materials  which shall 
be det ermined for each individual farmer based on their income and capacity to make the contribution ;  
(ii) commitment to maintaining the system; and  
(iii) participation in Farmer Field School (FFS) training courses on climate- resilient farming, including soil 
management to enhance moisture- holding capacity, potential groundwater recharge, and water productivity 
conducted in the commune – note that this activity is done in conjunction with activity 2. 1, below,  regarding 
training on climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems  through the Farmer Field School method 
(please see below for more detailed description) .  
This activity will support approximately 21,228 poor/near -poor households in target communes to apply water 
efficiency technologies and practices. This work will build on ADB -funded research and technical advice on 
systemic water balance measurement and planning under the WEIDAP project.  This activity will directly 
complement GoV/ADB investments under the WEIDAP project in water metering technology, which includes 
research on improving water management and flow for the target areas done by domestic research institutes 
and experts. Voucher support will be provided to 8,621 poor/ near-poor smallholder farmers through FFSs 
conducted under sub- activities 1.4.3 and 2.1.4 of this Project to beneficiaries selected based on eligibility criteria 
in paragraph 104 of the Funding Proposal  
105. Government provincial and district DARD agricultural extension staff servicing the Project Area will receive training 
to support farmers to acquire the skills needed for water efficient farming. Agricultural extension is carried out by 
DARD staff (from the Responsible Parties) located in each province. These  extension staff servicing the Project Area


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 102 
 
 C 
will be pre -selected by the DARDs and confirmed by MARD based on the coverage of communes and capacity 
needs.  Farmer Field Schools (see Output 2, below) are established by DARD officials and technically supported by 
them. Training of Trainers will be carried out under contract with experts in non- formal adult education with an 
emphasis on participatory learning- by-doing methodologies.   
106. The project will train agricultural extension staff  servicing the project area to provide technical expertise to help 
farmers’ groups with development, facilitation, and assistance in designing, installing, costing and ensuring the 
establishment of appropriate operation and maintenance systems. For f armers’  groups, where at least 7 0% of 
members are currently poor or near -poor, 20% of the costs of the technologies will be required to be financed by the 
farmers themselves  (agreed during stakeholder consultations) . This mixed socio- economic group model will enable 
the project to extend benefits to additional farming households, help leverage community ownership for the project, 
and encourage farmer -to-farmer learning.  
Key sub- activities  include:  
1.4.1 Train 30 DARD agricultural extensionists and champion farmers in 14 districts (one course in years 2, 4 and 
6) to support farmers’ groups in co- design, costing and O&M of climate- resilient, water efficient technologies  
1.4.2 Train over 21,200 farmers through 900 Farmer Field Schools on soil and biomass manage ment to enhance 
moisture- holding capacity, recharge of groundwater, and water productivity to cope with evolving climate risks on 
water security (in conjunction with Activity 2.1)  
1.4.3 Install on- farm water efficiency systems for 8,621 poor/near -poor smal lholders linked to performance- based 
vouchers  (linked to Activity 2.1)  
1.4.4 Train smallholder farmers in five provinces on climate- risk informed O&M of water efficiency technologies  
 
Output 2: Increased resilience of smallholder farmer livelihoods through climate -resilient agriculture and access 
to climate information, finance, and markets  
107. While the activities in Output 1 aim to increase availability of water, as well as improve water use efficiency, Output 
2 will enable poor/near -poor f armers to manage climate risk to their agro- ecosystems by applying climate- resilient 
soil and crop planning and management practices to reinforce the investments in water security (Output 1). The 
interventions in Output 2 are primarily oriented toward reducing the risk from drought because this is the most 
damaging climate change impact. Flood risk is considered to be fairly low: a) there is relatively little danger of prolonged residence of flood waters in the project areas with flood waters dispersing rel atively rapidly after extreme 
rainfall events, b) the selected agroforestry crops are relatively flood- resistant under these circumstances; and c) 
timelier and more detailed/downscaled climate and weather advisories will help smallholders plan and manage t heir 
crops and labor to avoid undue flood risk to annual crops (perennial tree crops are relatively unaffected by flooding).  
Flood risk, though relatively low, will be addressed in Farmer Field Schools as a standard part of learning to manage 
climate risk .    
108. The Output will enable poor/near -poor smallholder farmers across the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast 
regions to overcome information, skills, knowledge and financial barriers limiting their abilities to produce climate-resilient crops under conditions of increasing rainfall variability and drought. GCF resources will be combined with 
co-financing leveraged to help s mallholder farmers acquire the skills and knowledge needed 
to enhance the 
resiliency and productivity of their agro- ecosystems, a s well as to understand how to access credit and markets to 
ensure vital financial sustainability of the promoted shift to climate- resilient cropping systems.  
109. Through Farmer Field Schools implemented at scale across the two regions, this Output will facil itate widespread 
adoption/application by vulnerable smallholders of climate- resilient agricultural practices and technologies. 
Smallholders will build on traditional knowledge and contemporary science to adapt their cropping systems to 
climate -resiliency r equirements originating in localized analyses of rainfall variability, extreme weather events and 
agro- ecosystem vulnerability. Farmers will be trained in resilience- enhancing crop diversification, as a climate- risk 
reduction strategy, and soil management to build resilience to climate variability by enhancing soil fertility, organic 
matter, and biodiversity, improving soil structure, and limiting soil erosion. The project specifically aims to support 
crop diversification away from traditional crops such as  rice and coffee towards a more diversified mix of higher value 
crops that also require need less water.  Project design is in line with Government efforts to promote watershed-based water management approaches and to support sound water governance through a safe, clean and resilient 
water systems.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 102 
 
 C 
110. For farmers to successfully market their climate -resilient production and continue to adapt to changing climate risks, 
this Output will facilitate value- chain and market linkages through innovative, multi -stakeho lder Climate Innovation 
Platforms (CIPs). P rivate sector engagement in value chains is not presently  coordinated with producers, except in 
rare cases of spot sales contracts.  At the moment, input suppliers, buyers, processors and certain information and 
technical assistance providers all participate in value chains in an ad hoc manner. This lack of coor dination results 
in a great deal of uncertainty and contributes to a debilitating sense of risk.  CIPs will create space for relevant project 
and non- project partners to collaboratively discuss the challenges of climate change and its impact on water 
resources and agricultural productivity within their agro -ecological zone and to discuss and promote innovative 
solutions towards resilient agricultural systems. Each platform will develop a common vision of how to achieve agricultural resilience in the provinc e, integrating existing public and private plans and investments. The platform will 
identify, develop and promote straightforward and integrated strategies for developing climate- resilient and inclusive 
value chains, including equitable market access and c redit. It will be a platform to engage other programs and 
projects and therefore facilitate coordination and synergies, information exchange and scaling of good practice from the GCF -financed project. The platform will bring together partners who would otherwise have limited opportunities 
for exchange and collaboration. The CIPs will focus on improving the agricultural systems towards pro- poor, ethnic 
minority inclusion and gender -responsiveness.  CIPs are voluntary associations based on economic self -intere st with 
only the leadership of the state- run institutions directly sustained by GoV resources; farmers, private entities, NGOs 
and others will participate as long as the CIPs are useful to them. The participatory development of value chain 
strategies is th e primary mechanism for galvanizing and maintaining their inter est, ownership and commitment. As 
markets are accessed and revenues increase from sales, interest in CIP  participation is expected to be sustained.  
111. To ensure that smallholders are able to maint ain post project climate resiliency of their agro- ecosystems under 
conditions of evolving climate variability, the project will leverage government co- financing to build the capacities of 
smallholders to access credit for investments in climate- resilient a gricultural technologies and practices, operations 
and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and efficiency equipment, and acquisition of essential climate- resilient 
inputs for crop production. At the same time, the project will work with lenders to str eamline protocols and 
procedures, as well as to develop and apply appropriate instruments for lending to poor/near -poor smallholder 
farmers for their adaptation investments.  
112. To enable climate- risk informed agricultural planning, this Output will also enhance the capacities of extension staff 
and the farmers in generation and use of agro- climate advisories. Increasing the quality and accessibility of climate 
information will enable smallholders to use a key climate risk management tool to enhance the resilience of farming 
systems in the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions. With systematic reception and interpretation of 
climate and weather information, smallholders  will be able to plan for and manage the impacts of increased climate 
variability. As climate change increasingly challenges traditional local knowledge of key farming cycles (by, for example, raising the unpredictability of optimal planting dates) or incr eases the likelihood of unseasonable rain or 
droughts, farmers are increasingly in need of access to actionable weather and climate information that can help them cope with these changes.  
113. Under this Output,  GCF funding supports smallholders in the 45 WEID AP project  communes connected to the 
irrigation grid and an additiona l 15 communes (i.e. in total 60 for the overall Project Area ),  This project enhanc es 
the climate resilience of and complement s the WEIDAP project by promoting the adoption of climate- resilient 
agricultural practices (under activity 2.1) and co- development and use of agro- climate information for climate risk 
management by all beneficiaries in WEIDAP -served areas (under activity 2. 3), as well as multi -stakeholder 
coordination for climate- resilient value chain development through climate innovation platforms (under activity 2.2)  
Activity 2.1: Investments in inputs and capacities to scale up  climate- resilient cropping systems and practices 
(soil, crop, land management) among smallholders through Farmer Field Schools  
114. This activity will focus on empowering farmers with the skills and capacities, as well as continual access to 
information, to enable them to choose suitable options to incr ease the resilience of their farms and income streams. 
Analysis and identification of climate- resilient practices and technologies to be adopted and upscaled has been 
carried out as part of project preparation. By analyzing climate vulnerability, identifyi ng existing cropping patterns, 
mapping soil types, and grouping similar communes based on these factors, models of climate- resilient cropping 
systems were defined for each cluster of communes.  These models include shifting to more resilient crops or crop varieties, intercropping and crop diversification, and methods for improvement of water and soil management.  
115. The rate of adoption by each farmer of resilience- enhancing crops and varieties is driven by his or her perception of 
risk based on an appreciation of his/her own capacities; the degree of climate risk; the availability of technical and 
financial assistance and incentives, access to markets for production, and other factors. This project will assist


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 102 
 
 C 
farmers to build their technical and managerial ca pacities, including business planning; provide financial incentives 
through vouchers for production inputs and materials; provide climate risk advisories; build the capacities of relevant 
institutions to provide support and access to markets and credit. The rate of adoption will depend on individual 
farmers’ assessment of the risk of adoption –  project outputs are aimed precisely at lowering the risk to farmers of 
adopting unfamiliar climate- resilient production practices and systems. The percentage  of each farmer’s fields 
dedicated to high -value crops will depend again on each farmer’s perception of risk. It would not be unreasonable 
to expect farmers to gradually introduce unfamiliar high- value crops as they become accustomed to their 
management.   
116. To strengthen the resilience and productivity of cropping systems and increase access to information, technical support and other resources and services supporting climate resilient agriculture (CRA), the project will implement comprehensive Farmer Field S chool programs, with one program for each of 14 target districts  within the project 
area. Each program will consist of a number of FFS linked to a particular Climate Innovation Platform located at 
agro- ecosystem level. The Farmer Field School programs will  be demand- driven, practical and specific per agro-
climate zone. Specific attention will be paid to reach women farmers and ethnic minorities, for example by setting up 
women- only classes, engaging women lead farmers and trainers, using local languages, applying flexible time and 
location of trainings and using visual materials and interactive formats  
117. FFS will be undertaken in different locations in the 14 target districts encompassing the 60 participating communes 
depending on agroecological zone, agroforestry system to be established, and social and economic factors (e.g. 
local ethnic composition, gender, income). FFS are not actual physical installations but rather flexible arrangements 
whereby farmers meet at farmers’ fields, a government demonstration s ite, an input supplier, a market, or wherever 
the particular curriculum demands. By establishing these FFS, it is expected that all farmers will participate and no farmer will be more than a few hours at most from FFS meeting sites. The essential strategy is to provide an easily accessible FFS within easy transit distance of all participating farmers. Each FFS will train 25 farmers on average, 
drawn from the immediate area.  Farmers are expected to self -select, however, if the demand surpasses FFS 
capacities , preference will be given to women, youth and ethnic minority farmers selected by DARD staff. This will 
occur as part of  sub-activity 2.1.3.  The MARD, as the EE, monitors the selection process supervised by provincial 
DARDs (the RPs leading the FFS implementation)  
118. The FFS program will focus on the promotion of CRA packages of crops, practices, and inputs customized by each 
agro- ecological zone level CIP. These CRA packages have been developed during project preparation based on an 
in-depth analysis of curr ent and projected climate risks and impacts on water and agricultural productivity, baseline 
perennial and annual c rop or tree systems, soil types, whether agro- ecosystems are rainfed or irrigated , local 
Government priorities, existing farmer good practices and considering gender and ethnic minority considerations. 
The CRA packages have been presented to communities (men’s and women’s groups, ethnic minorities, poor, near -
poor and non- poor smallhold ers) and local authorities, discussed and refined, with cropping system priorities 
identified as a result (see the sub- assessment report on climate resilient agriculture for a table detailing the 
correspondence between communes, crops and climate- resilient  alternatives).  
119. At Farmer Field Schools, farmer champions selected from the different communes in the target regions will learn simple methods of analyzing local agro-
ecosystem vulnerability using traditional knowledge and scientific 
information, evaluate and confirm appropriate climate risk mitigation measures, refine and adapt the CRA models 
for local farm- level application, and learn methods and practices of managing soil, water and crop genetic resources 
to ensure ongoing, iterative adaptation to contin uing climate change. The selection of c hampion farmers is monitored 
and confirmed  by MARD, based on nomination by concerned communities and confirmation by the DARDs’, in 
accordance with the following eligibility criteria:   
(i) their local renown as innovators or first adopters;  
(ii) their recognized leadership in the commune of the Project Area ;  
(iii) willingness to engage and invest time in mentoring other farmers; and  
(iv) basic technical understanding of the proposed technologies and prac tices promoted by this project.  
The selection of the champion farmers will occur as part of sub- activity 2.1.2. After “graduating” from FFS, these 
farmers will upscale this approach across the two regions by returning to their communities and training nei ghboring 
farmers with supervision and support from government and NGOs. By utilizing existing farmer extension services 
but strengthening their outreach, materials and farmer -to-farmer learning systems, the project will reach 
approximately 55,603 small far mer households, at least 50% of whom will be poor/near -poor farmers.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 102 
 
 C 
120. The provincial DARD AEC (as Responsible Parties) will lead the implementation of the FFS for each province and 
the district DARD AEC the implementation in the respective sub- project. Technical support for the design, content, 
training and organization of the FFS will be provided by an external non- Government research institute or NGO, and 
private sector partners will be engaged as trainers where the expertise is not available within DARD. The Farmers’ 
Union and the VWU will provide organizational support to DARD, use their vast networks to ensure outreach, and ensure gender and inclusion mainstreaming.  
MARD (through the National project coordination office) will be 
monitoring and supervising the Provincial DARDs ( through the respective provincial PMUs).  
121. The FFS program will begin by sensitizing farmers and local authorities to the scope and purpose of the FFS, 
establish or re- activate FFS groups, and improve existing agricultural extension training materials and tools to 
incorporate climate risk and impact information, integrate technical details on CRA packages and ensure gender and inclusion mainstreami ng. The CRA packages identified and consulted during the Feasibility Study will be 
finalized in consultation workshops led by the Responsible Party -  DARD AEC  - and core facilitators and trainers of 
trainers will be engaged and trained. Finally, these trai ners will teach farmers in FFS about relevant topics within the 
CRA packages (see section 6.3 Recommendations to improve agricultural resilienc e in the Feasibility Study), who 
would then go back to their communities to train an additional number of their n eighbors. The FFS and CRA practices 
would receive participatory monitoring, and FFS results would be documented for discussion and scaling support through CIPs and other platforms.  
122. For poor and near -poor farmers, particularly ethnic minorities and women, t heir perception of the risk involved in 
borrowing money to implement a series of new CRA practices is expected to limit their interest in engaging with the project and participating in the FFS, affecting any subsequent adoption of the CRA practices and sys tems. To 
address this obstacle to full adoption and application of the CRA package, a conditional, performance- based voucher 
system
52 will be integrated within the FFS to motivate poor and near poor farmers with financial incentives to 
participate in and complete the FFS program and apply the CRA packages.  
123. Farmers will begin to receive vouchers as they complete different “courses” , conducted as part of the FFS . By the 
end of two years, those farmers who have completed all courses will have accumulated all the vouchers 
corresponding to the different courses. The vouchers will not be presented two years after FFS attendance but rather periodically during FFS atte ndance with completion of each module or course; the final voucher will be provided at 
the end of the last FFS course.  
124. The system will allow farmers to redeem vouchers for a wide range of resilience- enhancing agricultural inputs 
promoted by the FFS as per the proposed CRA packages and sold by registered local private sector suppliers. These suppliers are generally already established in district and provincial centers and would register their interest 
in supporting the voucher system with the DARDs as Responsible Parties. Vouchers would be valid for 2- 3 cropping 
seasons and only for those crops/seeds part of the CRA packages and specific agricultural technologies supported 
by this project. While some of these inputs may be available with suppliers, some may be obtained by suppliers 
when perceiving the demand from FFS participants. After one or two years of this kind of support tied to performance 
at the FFS and on- farm and the development of a simple business plan, a farmer’s participation in the voucher 
system will be phased out.  Compared to traditional input subsidies or in- kind support, the voucher system is more 
cost effective, easier to implement, more flexible and tailored to different farmer profiles, stimulates local markets and private sector growth,  limits the risk of crowding out private sector, and empowers farmers to make their own 
informed decisions on what they need in light of their specific household situations. Please refer to the schematic 
below illustrating  the functioning of performance based voucher system (Also refer to s ection 5.5. of the Feasibility 
studies for more details on the voucher system.  
 
52 The final performance criteria will be detailed and finalized in a participatory manner during project implementation (year -two 
tentatively). Indicative performance criteria would include i) Participat ion in the FFSs and adoption of water technology and CRA 
packages ; ii) Cash and in- kind contributions towards the establishment costs and maintenance costs, as described above; iii) 
Requirements for farmers to produce simple business plans as a performance milestone for receiving further vouchers to support 
implementation plans on- farm; and iv) Successful completion of the FFS coursework and an approved business plan


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
 
125. The voucher system will be developed by the Executing Entity, with support from experts who will be selected by 
the Executing Entity  (MAR D), and implemented in accordance with the following steps, replicating global good 
practice and experience from FAO Viet Nam53 during the recent drought recovery (see section 5.5 of the FS):  
i) Orientation of lead facilitators  on the objectives, process and components of the voucher program, with the 
facilitators selected from the group of FFS core facilitators and lead farmers (see above);  
ii) Consultations or sensitization with local authorities, agricultural suppliers and commu nities  to ensure buy -in. If 
required, implementation or operational regulations should be devised by the province and/or district PPC to 
ensure a smooth operation of the program;  
iii) Participatory market mapping and assessment , including a mapping and assessment of the local suppliers 
(number, profile, capacity, distance to farmers, interest), supply chain (quantity, quality, capacity trends), 
household financial analysis, and market prices and price trends, with involvement of the lead facilitators;  
iv) Select lis t of agricultural supplies eligible for vouchers , intersecting the requirements for implementation of the 
CRA packages with the results of the local market assessment. The list should be long and diverse enough to 
cater to all cropping systems, CRA packages, farmer preferences and intended target beneficiaries ; 
v) Participatory beneficiary selection , conducted by the lead facilitators through village meetings, and based on the 
following criteria: social vulnerability to climate change, interest in adopting the CRA packages, and commitment 
to participating in the complete FFS;  
vi) Selection and contracting of suppliers  ensuring a diverse number of small and medium size suppliers operating 
in proximity to the farmers. Suppliers should be selected through an open- bidding process managed by the district 
DARD AEC, with quality control from the external partner. Contracts between local authorities and suppliers should include some key voucher -specific aspects such as commodity specification, trader payment terms, 
quality inspection and acceptance;  
 
53 Forecast -based Financing for Drought Preparedness and Early Action of Women Farmers in Vi etnam  -2017 – 2018; FAO, UN 
Women and Save the Children in Gia Lai and Ca Mau, with US$ 950,000 from the European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid 
Operations program.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 102 
 
 C 
vii) Participatory design of vouchers  in terms of monetary value, serial numbers, colors, logos, date of validity etc. 
The value of the vouchers can be different per sub- project and should depend on the CRA clusters proposed and 
the c ost of the required agricultural inputs (per the results of the market assessment). Farmers should not receive 
the full value of the agricultural supplies and should be required to contribute their own financial resources, for 
example a minimum of twenty percent. The value should represent only a portion of the costs to offset the farmer’s perceived risk. The voucher design should also include measures to avoid corruption and should be designed to 
ensure appropriate use by ethnic groups, illiterate farmers and other marginalized groups. The design should be 
tested with different farmers and suppliers and refined if needed;  
viii) Set up of beneficiary accountability mechanism. The mechanism should be established to allow farmers and 
suppliers to provide positive or  negative feedback on the performance of the voucher system and to solve any 
issues that might arise;  
ix) Train facilitators, suppliers and farmers  on use of vouchers, distribution and redemption system. Simple, pictorial 
and local language handbooks, training materials and monitoring tools should be developed by the technical 
organizations assisting the DARD AEC and the lead facilitators;  
x) Voucher distribution, linked to participation in FFS and the development of a simple business plan, with one voucher receiv ed per FFS class attended. Farmers should be able to use each voucher separately or save them 
up and accumulate them to buy more expensive inputs. Farmer group members should also be allowed to pool 
all their vouchers to conduct a group investment;  
xi) Voucher  redemption, reconciliation and reimbursement , between farmers, agricultural input suppliers and district 
DARD AEC;  
xii) Monitoring of use of vouchers and market prices , by lead facilitators, based on information from the farmers as 
well as the suppliers. Progr ess on the use of the vouchers should be reported and discussed in the sub- project 
CIPs as part of the monitoring of the FFS program. Market prices should be monitored through regular simple 
market price surveys to ensure the voucher program has no negativ e impacts on local inflation or price trends, 
and to ensure the voucher value remains adequate for farmers to be able to afford the required inputs.  
126. The district DARD s AEC will be the R esponsible Parties for developing, implementing and monitoring the voucher 
system, with technical support from a research organization or NGO, and organizational support from the Farmers’ 
Union and the VWU. It will be implemented at sub- project CIP level and linked to the FFS program and the CRA 
packages.  Technical expertise and experience from UN organizations such as FAO and IFAD will also be drawn 
upon, particularly in the implementation of Farmer Field School support, as part of the coordinated One UN approach in Viet Nam.  
Key sub- activities  include: l 
2.1.1 Sensitize smallholders to establish/re- activate 900 Farmer Field Schools  
2.1.2 Train DARD personnel and lead (champion) farmers, as well as other interested parties (NGOs, Farmers and 
Women’s Unions, etc.) to build a cadre of farmer champions to gal vanize adoption and application of CRA 
packages (15 provincial level workshops for 30 DARD staff in years 2,4 and 6; 28 district and 120 commune level 
trainings for 30 lead farmers in years 2 and 6)  
2.1.3 Train over 21,200 farmers and value chain actors – particularly private sector input providers, buyers, 
processors, transporters -  through 900 FFS on scaling up of climate resilient cropping systems and practices. 
(Each FFS will conduct 1- day trainings twice per year)  
2.1.4 I nvestment support to 8,621 targeted poor/near poor smallholders to acquire inputs and technologies for 
implementation of the CRA packages through performance- based vouchers.  
2.1.5 Participatory auditing of implementation of voucher systems for climate resilient cropping systems and practices (One 1- day meeting for 100 participant s in each of the 60 communes in Y ears 2, 4 and 6)  
Activity 2.2 Technical assistance for enhancing access to markets and credit for sustained climate- resilient 
agricultural investments by smallholders and value chain actors   
127. To ensure the establishment of market and credit linkages aimed at scaling up climate- resilient agriculture, the 
project will pursue two approaches. F irst, the project will utilize GCF resources to establish multi -stake holder Climate 
Innovation Platforms (CIPs) bringing together all actors in a particular crop’s value chain.  Second, GoV co- financing 
will be leveraged to help smallholder s l build their capacities to access credit and markets for their climate- resilient 
crop production. This Activity will help  establish market and credit linkages including  the organization of trade fairs,


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 102 
 
 C 
CIP networking events and 57% of the credit management workshops for sm all holder farmers. GCF will cover  the 
costs of establishing the CIPs for crops where there are climate risks to value chains, planning for climate resilient 
agricultural production and commercialization, technical assistance and 43%  of the workshops for small holder s.   
128. The principal strate gy for enabling access to reli able markets on a sustained basis will be the establishment of 
Climate Innovation Platforms (CIPs) that bring together representatives of the key stakeholders in specific value 
chains: growers; mass organizations like the Women’s and Farmers’ Unions, as well as cooperatives and other 
associations; input providers; buyers; lending institutions; GoV and NGO technical assistance organizations; key 
climate, market and agricultural information providers; and others, as relevant. These multi -stakeholder platforms  
will enable relevant value chain stakeholders to collaboratively discuss the challenges of climate change and its impact on water resources and agricultural productivity in their locality and to discuss and promote innovative solutions towards resilient agricultural systems. Each CIP will develop a strategy for the climate- resilient production 
and commercialization of at least one particular value- chain; stakeholders, will commit to collaborating in the 
implementation of the strategy they develop.  
129. Establishment  of CIPs, along with technical assistance to enhance access to markets and finance, is intended to 
leverage and sustain community and private sector financing during and after project implementation. CIPs will ensure fluid development, communi cation and discussion of any new climate vulnerability assessments and agro-
climate advisories and market information, as well as agreements regarding production of climate- resilient crops. 
Private sector financing will be leveraged through agreements betw een poor/near -poor farmers and buyers who are 
participating in Climate Innovation Platforms. The proposed project will also enable smallholder producers’ groups to access credit by linking them directly to lenders on the multi -stakeholder CIPs.  
The CIPs w ill be created at two levels that will be linked to enhance information flow and coordination:  
 Five p rovincial CIPs: as policy dialogue, information sharing and scaling platforms ; 
 14 District CIPs: at climate- agro- ecological system level, as technical coll aboration, information sharing and 
monitoring platforms.  
130. The provincial CIPs meet biennially, are chaired by the provincial Responsible Parties ( DARD s) and bring together 
decision -makers, policy experts and technical advisors from different governmental organizations. A primary focus 
of these CIPs will be on improving the capacities of and support to poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women for 
their inclusion in climate resilient value chains.  Provincial CIPs will aim to improve understanding and collaboration 
among stakeholders across the various value chains within the agro- ecological zones in their provinces.  
131. The district  CIPs will comprise clusters of communes with similar climate risks and agricultural profiles (key annual 
and perennial cropping systems, soil types and rainfed/irrigated areas). This method results in 14 proposed district  
CIPs described in more detail in section 6.3 Recommendations t o improve agricultural resilience.  
132. The district  CIPs will meet on a six -monthly or annual basis and focus on the development of climate- resilient value 
chains, including productive and sustainable cropping systems, increased market access, and enabling far mers to 
obtain credit.  
The specific objectives of the district  CIPs are:  
 Implementation of solutions to challenges and bottlenecks for achieving climate resilient value chains, based on participatory analysis and mutual interests;  
 Establishment and nurturi ng of partnerships, including contractual relationships;  
 Coordination and synergy of various activities dealing with issues related to capacity building, access to input and services, local policies for promoting climate resilient agriculture options; link
ages to market and 
engagement of potential private sectors;  
 Periodic exchange of experiences and knowledge to promote learning and refine activities among the 
stakeholders;  
 Scaling up and out of best practices and lessons from the project’s sites through meetings, fairs and other networks.  
133. The district  CIPS will be chaired by the district DARD and involve similar organizations as at provincial level. The 
DARD chairpersons and a representative number of district  CIP members as required will also participate in the 
provincial CIP to ensure institutional linkage and two- way reporting and information exchange. At the project initiation 
stage, the district  CIPs will each develop a five- year action plan for achieving climate resilient value chains, in line 
with the vision of the provincial CIPs, and incorporating activities as planned through the GCF -financed project, 
WEIDAP project and from other GoV and non -GoV projects and programs. The work plan will be monitored a nd


---
*Page 42*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 102 
 
 C 
updated on an annual basis , and progress towards inclusive agricultural resilience will be reported upon, including 
in the provincial CIPs.  
134. To support this investment co- financing will be leveraged to enable market and credit.  To enable market linkages 
with input and technology suppliers and buyers for resilient agricultural products and to stimulate farmer -to-farmer 
and farmer -to-trader learning across scale, the project will organize district  CIP level farmer trade fairs. The fairs will 
be organized biennially and by the DARD AEC. Through the fairs, suppliers, traders and buyers will present resilient 
crop varieties, advances in irrigation or water -efficiency technologies, machinery, post -harvest and food processing 
techniques , etc. In addition, farmers will present their experience with successfully implemented CRA packages and 
encourage scaling by other farmers or private sector investment.  
135. Market information will be accessed from a variety of existing sources such as private sector and government 
agencies – who are participating in the provincial as well as the district  CIPs - and packaged to accompany the agro-
climate advisories produced under Activity 2.3, below. In this way, farmers have a complete menu of information 
available for better informed agricultural planning that is productive, sustainable and resilient to the identified climate 
risks. This activity will be linked to the CIP strategy and plans for development of resilient value chains and be 
integrated under the CIP work plans to ensure a systematic exchange of information and support for the 
establishment of long- term partnerships.  
136. In addition to the voucher system described under Activity 2.1, above, as an incubator for farmer investment in 
improved CRA practices and technologies, the project will further increase access to credit by organizing FFS farmer -
level agricultural credit information sessions. The key Government credit providers, the VBARD, VBSP and the VWU 
will be invited to participate in provincial and sub- project CIPs and w ill also be offered a platform for sharing updated 
information directly with farmers on credit products accessible to  the poor and near -poor. Farmers will thereby 
receive better information and have an opportunity to inquire about  information and discuss barriers to access directly 
with the credit providers. The project aims to provide credit providers with better information on farmer needs with 
the aim of having them develop tailored, pro- poor and improved credit products for CRA  investments. The project 
will also seek collaboration with LienVietPostBank and VWU to present their ‘ Vi Viet’ e-wallet services for improved 
access to small credit for poor and near -poor women in the target areas (see section 3.1.2 of the Feasibility Stu dy). 
137. Through leveraged GoV co -financing, the project will invest in building capacities of smallholder farmers with the 
skills and information they need to plan and manage their agricultural production as a small business, including 
learning to access mark ets for climate- resilient farm products in order to generate the revenue required to sustain 
ongoing climate resiliency of their agroecosystems. At the same time, smallholders will learn how to manage financial 
resources, particularly credit, to permit the m to purchase inputs, cover the costs of operations and maintenance of 
irrigation equipment and improve crop, soil and water management to enhance productivity and climate resiliency of their agroecosystems. Farmers will attend Farmer Field Schools to lear n the skills necessary for business planning, 
including analysis of market information, cost calculations, estimations of profit and loss, and investment planning. 
Farmers will learn operations and maintenance of key farm assets, as well as financial management to capitalize 
O&M funds and ensure financing is available for farm business operations.  
138. Information will be accessed from a variety of existing sources
54 such as SMS -based systems of NGOs, private 
sector and government projects and packaged to accompany the agro- climate advisories developed under Output 
2.3. 
Key sub- activities include:  
2.2.1 Establish and operationalize multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation Platforms (CIP) in each province and at 
the level of agro- ecological zones (Annual stakeholder meetings organized once every two years in each of the 5 
provinces)   
2.2.2 Provide technical assistance and training to enable market linkages with input, information and technology providers and buyers for climate- resilient agricultural production (two trainings, two networking workshops and 
three trade fairs in each of the 14 districts over four years)  
2.2.3 Provide technical assistance and train farmers to enable access to credit through financial intermediaries 
(One workshop in ea ch of the 60 communes in years 2 and 4 )  
 
54 For example, Viettel, AgriMedia through Vinaphone, VnSAT project by WB, Green Coffee project by the NGO ICCO


---
*Page 43*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 102 
 
 C 
Activity 2.3 Co -development and use of localized agro -climate advisories by smallholders to enhance climate-
resilient agricultural production  
139. Meeting a high demand for more localized and actionable agro- climate information so farmers – and agricultural 
planners – can better identify climate risks and potential impacts, plan their crop calendars and take timely measures 
to avoid damage and loss from extreme weather events, this project will improve the current GoV forecasting and 
advisory systems towards a more farmer needs -driven agro- climate information service. This activity will develop 
and disseminate climate informati on in the form of agricultural advisories tailored to local agricultural systems and 
socio -economic conditions. This will be done by replicating Participatory Scenario Planning, a proven multi -
stakeholder approach for enabling access to seasonal climate forecasts, understanding and interpretation of the 
forecasts and associated uncertainty into locally relevant information that is useful in decision making and planning 
for CRA and climate resilience (see section 5.4 of the Feasibility Study). Official and s cientific weather, climate and 
agricultural planning information will be combined with farmer knowledge and experience to jointly develop user -
friendly and farmer -relevant advisories per season and per cropping system.  
140. Linked to the development of the Climate Innovation Platforms, the project will assemble a technical group in charge of the co- development of seasonal and ten- to-fifteen -day agro- climate advisories, called the Agro- Climate 
Information Services (ACIS) technical group. The ACIS technical group will be led by the district DARD and be comprised of provincial hydro-
meteorological services staff, district agricultural staff, mass organizations and 
representatives of the FFS lead farmers. DARD will be trained and technically supported by an external research 
organization or NGO experienced in developing agro -climate advisories through Participatory Scenario Planning 
processes. Sub- groups will be formed as required to produce tailored advisories for different cropping systems within 
the sub- project.  
141. These groups will meet and discuss agricultural and climate information, trends and patterns at pre- season, post -
season and 10- day/15- day periods. The platforms will use data and information provided by the network of weather 
stations, farmer champions, and other sources to develop and package easily accessible agro- climate advisories. 
Agro -climate and weather advisories will be developed for all 14 districts in the project and will enhance models that 
can support further replication at low cost.  
142. The seasona l agro- climate advisories will be developed as follows , with steps repeated as needed to enhance 
iterative learning and adaptation feedback loops:  
i) Training of provincial hydro -meteorological staff on generating and interpreting downscaled weather forecasts 
and climate risk information for agricultural planning ; 
ii) Agro -ecological zoning to support improved downscaling and advisory development;  
iii) Formation of ACIS technical group at the sub- project CIP level ; 
iv) Training of ACIS technical group members  on participatory scenario planning for development of agro- climate 
advisories, community facilitation and engagement with women and ethnic minorities;  
v) Co-development of seasonal agro- climate advisories  through Participatory Scenario Planning workshops;  
vi) Adviso ry dissemination or communication, through paper bulletins, village notice boards, radio, television, SMS 
and the GoV loudspeaker system;  
vii) Farmer -to-farmer advisory interpretation and learning sessions , facilitated by the lead farmers with mentoring 
support  from the Farmers’ Union and the VWU;  
viii) Development of ten- to-fifteen days agro- climate advisories ; 
ix) Post-seasonal feedback and refinement of agro- advisories .  
 
143. Advisories produced by multi -stakeholder platforms will be disseminated through traditional local administrative 
systems via written notifications, loudspeakers, TV and radio; through farmer champions from each platform  
disseminating to neighboring farmers in their commune/village; and through a partnership with a private sector operator to communicate via SMS and mobile phone applications. Where appropriate, translation to ethnic minority 
languages will also be supported. To enhance replication, the project will ensure that local government officials are 
also trained in the system and will encourage information sharing by the government in other districts to promote 
potential replication through government systems.  
Key sub- activities include:  
2.3.1 Train 50 hydromet and DARD staff on generating and interpreting down- scaled forecasts f or use in 
agricultural planning (eight training over four years for 50 participants)


---
*Page 44*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 102 
 
 C 
2.3.2 Provide technical assistance for the formation ACIS technical groups and training of 420 participants at 
district level (1 -day workshops for 30 participants in each of the 14 districts)  
2.3.3 Co- develop, through Participatory, Scenario Planning (PSP) of seasonal and 10- day/15- day agro- climate 
advisories with smallholder farmers (20 provincial level trainings for 30 staff and 56 district level trainings for 60 participants over four years)  
2.3.4 Disseminate advisories to 139,416 households in the 60 communes   
C.4. Background Information on Project Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
144. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) is the project sponsor ; is called as Executing Entity  
(according to GCF terminology ) or as  Implementing Partner (UNDP terminology) .  
145. MARD is a governmental agency with mandated responsibility in the fields of agriculture, forestry, salt production, fishery, irrigation/water services and rural development nationwide, including state management functions with 
regard to delivery of public service in accordance with legal documents. MARD performs its tasks and authorities 
based on Decree No.178/2007/ND -CP dated 3 December 2007 issued by the government.  
146. Following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) guidelines  which is indicated in HPP MG document and UNDP 
POPP regulations (see details  here
), MARD is the entity responsible and accountable for managing project s, 
including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outputs, and for the effective use 
of project  resources.  
147. Under MARD, the Central Project Office for Water Resources  (CPO ) will be delegated to coordinate the project .  
148. CPO is a department  under MARD, serving as focal point with donors to implement irrigation development projects 
according to ODA international regulations, loan agreements and current applicable laws and regulations and to 
manage, monitor and consolidate information on  projects according to laws and other international ODA regulations. 
CPO is in charge of i mplementing the WEIDAP project and has a long track record of successful project 
implementation of donor -funded projects. CPO has wide experience managing foreign funded projects and has 
successfully completed five ADB projects, nine World Bank projects and two Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) projects in the irrigation sector. CPO is therefore very knowledgeable about  consultant recruitment 
and procurement of goods and services, funds disbursement and reporting, and other activities relating t o project 
implementation. CPO already works closely with  ministries including the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the 
Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Natural Resou rces and Environment as well as  with provinces including at 
the commune level, specifically through ADB WEIDA P project. MARD, through CPO, will also tap into on- going 
partnerships with development partners (e.g. GIZ, JICA, World Bank, ADB, etc.), CSO, INGOs and private sectors 
to mobilize and catalyze resources, maximizing the impact  of combined resources.  
149. UNDP provides the required financial resources to CPO  to carry out project activities during the annual cycle. These 
arrangements will be clearly stated in the annual work plan.  Cash transfer follows  the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfer (HACT), of which three cash transfer modalities are available: direct cash transfer, direct payment, and 
reimbursement.  Additional information about financial management is provided in section F.4. of the proposal .   
150. Five DARDs  as ‘Responsible Parties ’ are directly accountable to MARD . MARD  work s with Responsible Parties in 
order to take advantage of their specialized skills, to mitigate risk and to relieve administrative burdens.  
C.5. Market Overview  
151. The new Irrigation Law that  came into effect on  1 July 2018 is expected to crowd private investment in to secondary 
small -scale las t-mile connecti on systems  to ensure sustainability and efficiency, in tandem with government 
investment/financing in baseline  large -scale irrigation trunk system s. The re- application of irrigation pricing as 
regulated in Irrigation Law 2018 will ensure that  the users of irrigation services view  water as a measurable 
production input and payment for these service s as part of the c ost of production, thereby reinforcing demand- side 
efficiency of water use. From the supply side, the service orientation of responsible Irrigation Management 
Companies (IMCs) is expected to ensure not only the quantity but also the quality of water provision for the 
development of clean, organic agriculture oriented towards high- value crop export s, a policy  priority that Vietnam is 
pursuing . Domestic and export markets are reasonably well -developed, and i n the longer run, the gradual removal 
of subsi dies for irrigation servi ces will stimulate different market players to jump in.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 102 
 
 C 
152. This project will support vulnerable households to invest in climate resilient agricultural packages that are tailored to 
emerging local climate conditions  in 60 communes. Crops targeted include onion, garlic, bean, cassava, maize, 
banana, custard apple, avocado, and durian , which are more domestically consumed, while cashew  nut, mango, 
dragon fruit, coffee and pepper are more export -oriented. Households will be provided with climate- resilient/higher 
value varieties and the technical capacit ies to achieve  more value- added to their crops and meet higher demand of 
both local and export markets.  By bringing all value chain stakeholders together on Climate Innovation Platforms the 
project will support development of partnerships to execut e strategies for market access by smallholders .  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
Land contributions  
153. No prior permissions are required for land contributions for ponds. In the case of shared community ponds, public 
land contributed by the communes/district authorities are governed by the provincial level land use plan that has 
been approved by the National Assembly and land usage as per the plan is further delegated to the province,  and 
then to the district followed by the commune authority. Only in the case of conversion or change of purpose /land 
use, permission is required from provincial authorities.  In the case of individual ponds and shared household ponds, 
the contributing household would ret ain ownership of the land/ponds, and agreement shall be reached and signed 
among the households pertaining exclusively to usage of water  from the ponds.  In effect there is no transfer of 
ownership agreement, but there are agreements that pertain to terms and conditions on how households share the 
water in the shared ponds.  
VAT Management Under UN -supported Projects in Viet Nam  
154. There are no applicable licenses or permits for the implementation of the project. In addition, there are no tax 
implications or regulations applicable for water security  interventions i.e. the last-mile connectivity,  water storage 
systems and on- farm tech nologies as well as for the livelihood interventions , i.e. CRA packages and access to 
climate information, finance and markets proposed in the project . As the five provincial Departments of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (DARDs ) are the 'Responsible Par ties' supporting implementation, the planned interventions 
will comply with Government of Vietnam's (GoV) rules and regulations. Following Public Procurement Regulation of 
the GoV  Value Added Tax and Income Tax will be applicable for the government procured activities of the project. 
UNDP has VAT and Tax exemptions which will be applicable for the part of the procurement plan implemented by 
UNDP.  
Insurance  
155. There are no specific insurance policies relevant for the project activities, however, insurance shall be applicable for 
all major  or high -value  project assets including project vehicles, ICT equipment and staff recruited for the project in 
accordance with UNDP rules and procedures . 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
156. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implem entation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Basis Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Viet Nam, the One UN Strategic Plan (2017- 2021) in Viet Nam, and the policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP (see 
here). The 
national  executing entity - also referred to as the national  ‘Implementing Partner’  in UNDP terminol ogy - is required 
to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s signature of the UNDP  Standard Basic 
Assista nce Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document
55, which will be signed by the Implementing 
Partner to govern the use of the funds (once the funds are secured). The Standard Basic Assistance Agreement 
(SBAA) was signed with the GoV in 1978.  
157. The Implementing Partner  (IP) for this project is Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD). MARD is 
accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources. UNDP, in agreement with the Government 
of Vietnam, will provide implementation support (support to NIM) 
as agreed in the letter of agreement (LOA) signed 
between MARD (on behalf of the GoV) and the UNDP. UNDP will a lso provide oversight through UNDP Country 
 
55 An example of a signed project document (cover page) is provided at  
http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/document s/1/g4958/g2_19062/Prodoc Signature Page for PIMS 4958.pdf  
A sample letter of agreement between IP and Responsible Party is provided at 
http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g4710/g2_19222/2013- 12-04_MoU_LDCF2_Final_Signed.pdf


---
*Page 46*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 102 
 
 C 
Office in Vietnam, and BPPS/UNDP Global Environmental Finance Unit in Bangkok Regional Hub and Headquarters 
in New York.  Within MARD, the CPO is delegated to coordinate the project . 
158. UNDP provides a three- tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at 
regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports the Project Steering Committee by carrying 
out objective and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project 
management milestones are managed and completed. Project assurance must be independent of the Project 
Management function; the Project Steering Committee cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities 
to the Project Manager. The project assurance role is covered by the Accredited Entity fee provided by the GCF. As 
an Accredited Entity to the GCF, UNDP is required to deli ver GCF -specific oversight and quality assurance services 
including; (i) Day -to-day oversight supervision, (ii) Oversight of the project completion, (iii) Oversight of project 
reporting.  
159. The following parties will enter into agreements with MARD to assist in successfully delivering project outcomes and 
are directly accountable to MARD  as outlined in the terms of their agreement : Department of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (DARD) of Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa, Ninh Thuan and Binh Thuan provinces  will s erve as the 
‘Responsible Parties (RPs) ’ for the execution of the two outputs and activities in each of the five targeted provinces .  
 Name  Roles  
Accredited Entity  UNDP  Project oversight  
Implementing Partner  
(National Executing Entity)  Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development 
(MARD)  Overall lead in execution of the project; is 
accountable to UNDP for managing the project  
Responsible Parties  1. DARD in Dak Lak  
2. DARD in Dak Nong  
3. DARD in Khanh Hoa  
4. DARD in Ninh Thuan  
5. DARD in Binh Thuan  At the request of the IP, the RPs will be 
responsible for delivering specific outputs and 
activities as per the agreed work plan  
 
The pr oject organiz ation structure is as follows:  
This project is arranged as an Umbre lla project according to ODA management terminology of  the Vietnam ese 
government.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
160. Governance Arrangements: The project will be governed by a Project Steering Committee . The Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) is co- chaired by MARD and UNDP, and comprises the following agency members: CPO/MARD, 
and the five DARDs  (as Responsible Parties)  as well as PPCs of Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa, Ninh Thuan and 
Binh T huan province. The PSC  is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions. P SC decisions 
will ensure to deliver project objectives and results  as planned, best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency 
and effective international competition. In case cons ensus is not achieved within the PSC, final decision will be made 
by the UNDP Country Director. The Project Steering Committee will meet once a year.   
161. The PSC will be comprised of:  
- An Executive (role represented by National Implementing Partner) that holds the project ownership and co- chairs 
the PSC with UNDP. The Executive will be MARD, which will play the overall coordination functions and collaboration 
with the DARDs (in collaboration with PPCs) of the five provinces and UNDP to manage and implement the overall 
Umbrella Project (Vietnam ODA terminology) . 
- A Senior Supplier representative providing guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project, compliance 
with donor requirements, and rules pertaining to use of project resources. This role will be fulfilled by UNDP in its 
capacity as GCF AE ;  
- Senior Beneficiary representatives from five DARDs as RPs of Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa, Ninh Thuan and Binh Thuan province as the Responsible Parties who ensures the realization of project benefits from the perspective 
of project beneficiaries; PPCs will also be represented ; 
Implementation and Management Arrangements  
162. CPO will establish a Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) to support project implementation.  The CPMU  is 
responsible for overall planning and budgeting, collaborating with other ministries, sectors and government entities  
to implement the project performance management system; bidding for the provision of project consultancy services; 
coordinat ion with the responsible parties  in terms of bidding of goods and services; disbursement and 
implementation of project audits, operation of accounts, monitoring and preparation of overall project reports 
(annual), and safeguards policy monitoring reports. The CPMU coordinates and provides technical support to the 
Provincial Project M anagement Units (PPMUs) with quarterly and annual planning. CPMU is responsible for 
supervising and expediting the implementation progress of the RPs activities .


---
*Page 48*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 102 
 
 C 
163. Provincial project management units (PPMUs) housed in DARDs fulfill the responsibility for delivering activities under 
their component projects including procurement, account operations, preparation of progress reports and necessary 
implementation evaluati on reports. As per the umbrella arrange ment the PPCs role  is to sign off the Provincial Project 
Procurement Plan . 
164. The “project assurance” function of  UNDP is to support the Project Steering Committee by carrying out objective 
and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management 
milestones are managed and completed. Project assurance has to be independent of the Project Manager; therefore, 
the Proj ect Steering Committee cannot delegate any of its assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager. A 
UNDP Programme Officer, or M&E Officer, holds the Project Assurance role on behalf of UNDP.  
165. The project will also engage farmer groups and water user groups and other community groups to execute activities 
at the commune levels. The ethnic minority commission and ethnic minority group representatives will also be 
consulted both at local and national level . 
Fund flows  
166. Diagram indicating the contractual relationship of GCF, UNDP, IP/EE, Responsible Parties, Co- financiers (ADB and 
Gov/MARD, DARD), and the beneficiaries


---
*Page 49*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 102 
 
 C


---
*Page 50*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 102 
 
  
C.8. Timetable of Project  Implementation  
Please see the  project  implementation timetable in section I (Annexes) .


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 102 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
167. Vietnam is experiencing a crucial financing gap to cover the incremental costs of adapting to climate change. 
According to Vietnam’s NDC, the national budget will only be able to meet one- third of the financing required to 
implement adaptation measures in the 2021 –2030 period. Between 2017 and 2020, the government estimates that 
financing climate change adaptation activities will cost approximately US$4.7 billion annually. External funding 
support to meet the incremental costs of managing climate change ris ks and impacts is therefore critical, particularly 
in high priority sectors such as agriculture, where the majority of the poor and near -poor are employed.   
168. Between 2012- 2016, Vietnam’s  debt burden increased significantly as a percentage of GDP. In an effort to support 
long-term macro- economic stability, the Government has now imposed stricter loan guidelines and limits with loans 
now only approved for large infrastructure projects, many  of which have been in the pipeline for years. New projects, 
or those that focus on softer investments, must be funded through grants or local tax revenues. While Government is continuing to invest in baseline infrastructure like WEIDAP , required to bring water for irrigation to the affected 
areas in the five target provinces of the two regions, fiscal constraints impede investments in the additional costs 
of ensuring water security in a changing climate. For poor and near -poor smallholders in the two regio ns, investment 
in connectivity, storage and water efficient irrigation equipment is limited given their weak financial capacities, which 
are further undermined by climate change.  
169. 
GCF resources will be used to empower the poor and near -poor farmer population, which has experienced an 
increasing degree of vulnerability over recent years due to water insecurity from climate impacts. These farmers have limited access to market and lending institutions. Investing in the connectivity of poor and near -poor farms t o 
WEIDAP infrastructure will generate a number of other benefits impacting the current baseline of climate 
vulnerability by allowing for the production and sale of marketable climate- resilient crops as well as the increased 
participation of smallholders in development and decision making in their communes and districts. Investing in 
water storage on rain fed lands will enable poor farmers to produce climate- resilient crops using highly efficient 
irrigation technologies that maximize water productivity.  
170. In the absence of GCF support, the Government of Vietnam will be unable to invest sufficiently in building the 
capacities of poor and near -poor farmers to adapt and manage their rain- fed and irrigated farmlands in the face of 
growing climate hazards. By estab lishing irrigation connections from WEIDAP to farm plots for climate- resilient 
production, augmenting water storage for rain fed lands, providing climate information for more informed decision 
making, and ensuring the adoption and implementation of climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping 
systems, GCF investment will play a crucial role in helping the GoV to strengthen its adaptive capacities.  
171. As such, this project -  designed in close partnership with the Asian Development Bank –  provides GCF incremental 
finance in the form of grant resources to deliver direct resilience benefits to vulnerable poor/near -poor farmers, 
thereby increasing the effectiveness of the larger GoV/ADB WEIDAP loan investment, particularly in regard to 
benefits for women, the poor/near -poor and ethnic minorities. Even if these farmers fall within the service area of a 
larger irrigation investment programme, they may be unable to benefit from it as they lack the resources to fund the 
last-mile connection to their farms. Through the paradigm- shifting approach of integrating investments in water 
supply, resilient agricultural production, and access to actionable agro- climate and market information, the project 
will enhance the resilience of farmers’ production assets to rainfal l variability and droughts as well as build farmers’ 
capacities to invest in sustained maintenance of investments and continued climate- risk management over the 
longer term. GCF resources play a critical role in leveraging both loan and fiscal resources for further irrigation infrastructure development, operations and maintenance as well as investments in climate- resilient agriculture and 
climate information.  Provincial government and community resources will be crowded in to support specific activities 
of the project, particularly in regard to construction or rehabilitation of water storage facilities, Operations and 
Maintenance of irrigation technologies and systems, and enhancing access to credit and markets with increased 
technical assistance and information as well as providing support to Farmer Field Schools and farmer -to-farmer 
extension.  
172. This proje
ct will engage the private sector in partnerships with farmers to promote production and commercialization 
of priority, climate- resilient, high value crops. These partnerships will initiate with the formation of Climate Innovation 
Platforms that integrate farmers, buyers, DARD extensionists, and lending institutions. CIPs will ensure fluid 
development, communication and discussion of climate vulnerability assessments and agro -climate advisories, as


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 102 
 
 
 
 D 
well as agreements between growers and buyers regarding pro duction of climate -resilient crops. GCF resources 
will motivate government agencies to invest in enhanced technical assistance and coordination, mobilize farmers 
and communities to invest in and maintain irrigation infrastructure and soil and water managem ent, and galvanize 
private sector investments beyond the project lifetime.  
D.2. Exit Strategy   
173. The strategy towards long- term financial sustainability is phased into immediate, medium and long- term objectives 
for each of the project’s three components: investments in irrigation infrastructure incorporate water security for 
climate resilience; poor and near -poor farmers have the capacities to apply climate- enhancing agricultural practices 
and improved technologies; farmers utilize actionable c limate information to manage climate risk in agriculture. The 
phases show increasing project scope consistent with greater financing from both private and public sources, 
including government fiscal and multilateral finance institutions.  See table, below,  for a succinct overview of the 
phased strategy.  
Strategy towards financing of subsequent phases/ long -term financial sustainability of the project approach es 
 Immediate term  Medium term  Long term  
Investment in improved 
water infrastructure  WEIDAP/GCF in vestment 
reduces water waste and 
increases access  National adaptation plan 
and NDC review cite project as model for 
replication  
Approach included in GOV 
2030 investment plan and 
replicated to other areas  NDC targets become law, 
and all new investments 
required to meet improved 
climate resilience 
standards for 
water/agriculture 
infrastructure  
Lack of access to 
climate information, and 
capital to support uptake 
of improved 
technologies by 
poor/near poor farmers  GCF supported advisories 
and farmer field schools 
increase knowledge  
GCF investment enables 
poor/near poor apply 
improved practices  Next phase IFAD farmers 
group proposal scales up grant/loan packages and 
extends to new areas  
Previously ‘too -poor’ 
farmers able to access finance from IFA/Social 
bank if required  National scale up of 
approach through NDC/ NAP focus on agricultural 
transformation  
Lack of useable climate 
information for farmers 
and low technical 
capacity of farmers 
extension services  Improved GCF climate 
advisories make 
information accessible to 
farmers  
Farmer extension services 
gain capacity to train 
others  Public private c o-finance 
model viable at provincial 
scale  
Farmer extension services 
have capacity to replicate 
to other provinces  Public private co -finance 
model operating for climate info services  
National extension 
services able to replicate 
to other provinces  
 
Government commitment and institutional capacities  
174. This project has strong governmental commitment as it builds on the Vietnamese government’s long held policy of 
support to agricultural development and smallholder farmers through extension and technical assistance, 
infrastructure development, and provision of credit, inputs and other goods and services. The project will train a 
cadre of DARD agricultural extensionists to support farmers in agroecosystem vulnerability analysis, application of


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 102 
 
 
 
 D 
water efficien t technologies, climate -resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems, and small farm business 
planning. DARD extensionists and other provincial and district personnel will be trained in Farmer Field School 
methodologies, as well as in the co- devel opment of agro- climate advisories, supported by IMHEN and DONRE 
staff.  The project will build the capacities of key mass organizations –  the Farmers Union and the Women’s Union 
– to support FFS, particularly Farmer -to-Farmer extension of climate- resilient  agricultural practices.   
175. The project will also bring state banks –  the Agricultural Development Bank and the Social Policy Bank -  as well as 
other lenders, including the LienViet PostBank and the Women’s Union (microfinance), to FFS to engage directly 
with the poor/near -poor farmers to prepare them to manage credit as part of the implementation of their business 
plans. The project will work with lending institutions to develop protocols and financial instruments specific to the 
conditions and capacities of  poor/near -poor farmers, as well as train their staff in analysis and development of 
small -scale business plans.  
176. The government of Vietnam will be responsible for Operations and Management of the mainline irrigation 
infrastructure built by the WEIDAP proj ect. Irrigation systems will be sustained over the long- term with adequate 
maintenance of infrastructure and equipment. The WEIDAP mainline infrastructure will be managed by the GoV, 
and fiscal resources for operations and maintenance will be supplied through annual budgetary allocations. Water 
pricing is currently being studied as part of the WEIDAP project and is expected to result in a proposal for a system 
of water fees in the coming years. Connections from farmer plots to the WEIDAP systems will be mai ntained by the 
farmers themselves.  
177. Finally, lessons  learned from project experience will be identified and codified by DARD staff for publication and 
dissemination to policy makers, as well as other institutions and organizations, with the primary aim of developing 
the policy and programmatic frameworks for upscaling best practice more widely.  
Capacity building of farmers  to sustain climate resilient cropping systems  
178. Poor/ near-poor smallholders will contribute their labor, as well as materials and potentially cash, to the assembly, 
operations and maintenance of irrigation equipment and the relatively modest infrastructural elements connecting 
their farms to the government’s  large- scale WEIDAP irrigation investments. These contributions will generate 
ownership and commitment to the ongoing operations and maintenance of these connecting systems, as well as 
of the bioengineered storage ponds on rain fed lands and the water -efficient irrigation systems linked to them. Last -
mile connections and on- farm systems will be maintained by the farmers themselves either individually or, for larger 
communal systems, through established farmers’ groups who will be trained in system and equip ment operations 
and maintenance by the project. The selection of water efficient technologies to be applied will be based in part on 
the need for maintenance requirements to be kept relatively low, and that spare parts will be sourced locally at 
reasonable cost. To ensure sustainability of farmer connections, farmers will be trained in planning and 
implementation of effective Operations and Maintenance of equipment and infrastructure, and farmers’ groups will build their organizational capacities to program and manage irrigation, monitor usage, and develop O&M funding 
mechanisms for any community -held or shared 
equipment and infrastructure, including capitalization strategies.  
179. Ongoing smallholder application of climate- resilient p roduction practices and systems will be sustained with the 
support of DARD staff trained to provide technical assistance and training to farmers in FFS, as well as mentoring 
and coaching to champion farmers implementing Farmer -to-Farmer extension.  Fa rmer champions will be selected 
based on their successful experience with crop production and thoroughly trained by the project to extend their 
knowledge to other farmers through mentoring and training. DARD field staff will have the capacities to continue to 
work with lead farmers in analyzing traditional agro- ecosystems and their vulnerability to climate change using 
traditional and modern contemporary knowledge and identifying measures to ensure their productivity and climate resiliency, then training ot her smallholders in the technical aspects of climate -
resilient agriculture. Concerted 
farmer -to-farmer training and extension is expected to create greater trust and exchange of information among 
farmers, as well as help to stimulate partnerships and organ izational capacities.  
180. The partic ipatory approach to weather forecasting and agro- climate advisory development will involve local 
communities and link them to public institutions charged with compiling data for use in generating advisories. 
Farmer champions  will receive training to interpret and disseminate weather forecast information to their own 
farmer -to-farmer networks. For the private sector, by project end, based on current experiences, there will be 
potential to develop the SMS -based climate/weather information and advisories and market information into a paid


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 102 
 
 
 
 D 
service, a portion of whose revenue will be shared with farmer groups for operation and maintenance and for 
continuing participatory development.  
Access to credit and markets  
181. Effective value ch ains provide a fundamental incentive to drive and support the adoption of climate- resilient crops 
and practices. Smallholder participation in these value chains requires access to credit as well as markets. 
However, the credit worthiness of poor and near -poor smallholders is affected by climate change  impacts on their 
production with climate risks compounding credit risks.   
182. This project will suppor t smallholders to access credit and participate in markets with leveraged co- financing  from 
GoV to address structural factors , while GCF will finance the sub- activities and inputs focused on the development 
of climate- resilient cropping systems . GCF will also support the establishment of Climate Innovation Platforms 
bringing together value chain actors – producers, input providers, buyers, et al. - to coordinate their activities in 
support of climate- resilient value chain development.  
183. The project aims to galvanize a sustainable private sector dynamic among poor and near -poor farmers by affording 
them the knowledge, information, capacities and investments to reduce their climate risk and enable them to 
generate the revenues for re- investment in c limate resilient production systems to meet the ongoing demands of 
evolving climate change. As such, the project will enable farmers to plan and manage their production assets with 
a business approach to climate- resilient crop production and thus to build their capacities to access credit as well 
as markets.   
184. Agricultural inputs, soil and water management improvements, and O&M of irrigation systems and equipment all 
require continuous financing so that smallholders can enhance or maintain the climate- resiliency of their agro-
ecosystems as climate variability inevitably evolves; as such, this project will train smallholders to develop business 
plans for their small -scale production systems in order to access markets for their crops. Participating farmers wil l 
receive training on how to access and manage credit from existing lending institutions.  Farmers will also receive 
training and information on how to prepare straightforward business plans and how to access markets for their climate -resilient production.  Farmers will receive agro- climate advisories to permit them to manage climate risk to 
their crops and other assets, as well as market information and advisories to allow them to plan, store, transport and market crop surpluses more effectively and with le ss risk.  
Private sector engagement  and stakeholder platforms for sustained resilient investments  
185. Sustaining access by small farmers to markets is enabled or facilitated through partnerships with private sector entities.  These partnerships will be crop- specific and require coordination up and down the value chain to ensure 
quality and quantity of prod uction at the appropriate time.  Stakeholders in the value chain include producers, input 
suppliers, buyers, credit providers, and technical assistance purveyors, each with a vested interest in ensuring the successful development and ongoing function of the value chain. This project will bring value chain stakeholders 
together on Climate Innovation Platforms to develop commodity -specific strategies that encompass all aspects from 
production through commercialization.  The CIPs will socialize new knowledge, discuss and disseminate climate 
vulnerability assessments and agricultural and market information, and establish partnerships to facilitate 
production and marketing of climate- resilient crops. The CIP will include representatives of all important 
stakeholders in a particular value chain, including farmers, private sector buyers, government technical assistance 
agencies, lenders, commune and district authorities, representatives of the Farmers’ and/or Women’s Unions, 
research institutions and others, as necessary. CIPs will discuss climate -resilient agricultural production and 
marketing and find solutions to obstacles to sustainability. These CIPs will address the specific problems of climate-resilient production, communicate and exchange information, and dia logue with authorities and policy makers.  The 
partnerships generated around value chain development will be self -sustaining as they evolve towards more 
structured contractual relationships with successful marketing and revenue generation.  
186. The CIPs will be hosted and led by DARD district or provincial staff and linked directly to the Farmer Field Schools 
in order to coordinate training needs with value chain development objectives. DARDs will continue to host and 
facilitate CIPs after the formal project ends .


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 102 
 
 
 
 D 
Operations and Maintenance and post -project O&M  
187. O&M of project -established infrastructure and technologies will be carried out  through a community -centered 
system, with  support from GoV . O&M will be focused on the three primary aspects of Output 1: Enhanced water 
security for agricultural production for vulnerable smallholder farmers in the face of climate -induced 
rainfall variability and droughts: last -mile connections (sub- activity 1.2), rain water harvesting and storage 
facilities (sub- activity 1.3), and water -efficient irrigation systems (sub- activity 1.4).  O&M for each of these aspects 
comprises a series of relevant tasks, operations and technologies (please see Annex XIIIb  for detailed O&M 
activities).    
188. Project  beneficiaries will be fully responsible for maintaining tools and equipment provided by the project, with 
technical assistance and training from local DARD  staff. Smallholder investments in O&M will be  enabled  through 
enhanced income generation supported by the kills and other capacities provided by the project, as wel l as the 
support for access to credit and increased water security . For the rainwater harvesting and storage infrastructure, 
the project establishes a three- tiered O&M system (see Activity 1.3) supported by  periodic financial contributions  
and training for  stakeholders using shared ponds and equipment.   Farmers learn upkeep and maintenance of water 
harvesting and storage facilities, which is partially sustained by GoV  co-financing for both minor repairs through 
staffed DARD technicians in each district . Community and GoV  financing will be fully responsible for post -project 
O&M, as also indicated in the Commitment Letter issued by MARD (see Annex I V). This model of O&M and co-
ownership and manageme nt will maximize the likelihood of continued operational and financial viability of project 
investments beyond the project implementation period.  
189. O&M of last mile connections to the WEIDAP systems follow a similar pattern in that farmers will be primarily  
responsible for O&M of these connection and where connections are shared, farmers will organize upkeep and 
maintenance, including shared financing.  For water -efficient irrigation systems, farmers will learn to trouble- shoot 
and make straightforward repai rs on the irrigation equipment and related simple infrastructure.  All beneficiaries will 
be supported by DARD staff as part of their regular duties and responsibilities. Post project O&M is estimated at 
USD 5,372,659  for a period of 10 yeas after the 6- year project implementation period.  Of this amount, the provincial 
and district authorities will commit USD 1,294,906  while smallholder contributions are calculated at approximately 
USD 4,077,75 2. Of the total post proj ect O&M, USD 1,286,123  will be directed towards their respective irrigation 
connections to the WEIDAP infrastructure, USD 2,224,400 towards on- farm water storage facilities  including 
monitoring, minor repairs and maint enance costs of the water collection s ystem , and USD 1,862,136  towards 
maintenance of on- farm technologies.  Communities are familiar with the commitments in time and effort to maintain 
water storage and irrigation systems and, based on consultations and established practice, have agreed to support 
O&M of project -produced infrastructure and equipment.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project  to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
190. The project directly contributes to GCF Fund Level impact areas of (1.0) increased resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities, and regions and (2.0) increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security. The GCF Results Framework outcomes  that this project fits under are: 
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks of small -scale farmers in Central Highlands 
and South- Central Coast regions of Vietnam; s trengthened use of climate information; and s trengthened awareness 
of climate threats and risks.  
191. The project will reduce climate- change induced water stress through a two- pronged approach: (i) from the supply -
side with provision of water efficient irrigation infrastructure and increasing water storage capacity to address the risk of water scarcity; (ii) from the demand- side through introduction of climate-
resilient crop selection, land 
treatment and agronomic practices that reduce water input requirements for food / agricultural production.  
192. The project will promote peer -to-peer learning and capacity building for smallholder farmers to adopt climate-
resilient agriculture and climate- risk informed agricultural planning. By strengthening the capacity of farmers to use 
water efficient irrigation technologies, adopt climate s mart agricultural practices and cropping systems, and access 
credit and markets, as well as climate, weather and agricultural information for improved climate risk management, vulnerable poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers will not only increase their incomes but also enhance 
their food security.  
193. Overall, the project will benefit over 139,416 households  as direct and indirect beneficiaries in climate- vulnerable 
areas of Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Ninh Thuan, Binh Thuan and Khanh Hoa provinces of Central  Vietnam or 10.1 % of 
the total population of the five provinces
56. Over 55,603 smallholder households  benefit directly from project 
interventions in building resilience across cropping systems. The project will provide indirect benefits to over 83,813  
households in communities around the targeted districts and communes of the five provinces through improved 
institutional capacities for training and technical assistance, enhanced access to information for climate risk 
management, and widespread dissemination of lessons and best practices in climate- resilient agriculture.  See 
Beneficiary diagram below for det ails.  
 
56 The four criteria for beneficiary selection are not mutually exclusive but rather reflect a weighted selection process.  In t his 
context, small -scale farmers who are categorized as poor or near -poor, members of an ethnic minority and women are the 
primary  beneficiaries.  Since participation in the project is entirely voluntary, beneficiaries who fit all the criteria are especial ly 
encouraged.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
 
Specifically:  
• Over 21,228 poor/near -poor farmer  household s will have obtained direct access to water for irrigated 
agricultural production, reducing the impact of climate change- related rainfall variability and drought.  
• 55,603 small- scale farmer  households (with farms of less than one hectare) will have the cap acity to apply 
climate -resilient water management and agricultural practices to cope with rainfall variability and drought.  
• 139,416 households  in the 60 communes  will receive agro- climate information, market advisories and 
knowledge products as well as benefit from overall improved access to markets and credit.  
• 3,600 agricultural extension workers and staff of the Farmers’ and Women’s Unions will benefit from increased 
skills in training and technical assistance and improved capacities for climate- risk informed planning and 
implementation of resilient solutions  
• Increasing access of poor/near -poor farmers to irrigation and/or improved water storage options enables them 
to make the most productive use of climate resilient technologies and information. It also empowers them to 
replicate climate resilient agriculture practices currently available only to better -off farms.   
 
A table showing the defining characteristics  of different types of beneficiaries , based on the selection criteria, as 
well as the types of support they receive , is presented below.  
 
 Defining characteristics  # of 
HHs Project support  
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 2.1 2.2 2.3 
Direct  • Farming households that live within the command 
areas of the WEIDAP investment  
• Those are considered non- poor based on the 
Government statistics  34,375  X      X 
• Farming households that live within the command 
areas of the WEIDAP investment  
And meet one or more of the following characteristics  4,765   X  X X X X


---
*Page 58*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
• Small -scale farmers, with one hectare or less of 
farming land  
• Indigenous ethnic minorities  
• Poor and near -poor households  
• Most vulnerable women: women- headed 
households, poor women, ethnic minority women, 
and women in families with high dependency rates  
• Farming households that do NOT live within the 
command areas of the WEIDAP investment, but 
within the adjacent 14 communes  
And meet one or more of the following characteristics  
• Small- scale farmers, with one hectare or less of 
farming land  
• Indigenous ethnic minorities  
• Poor and near -poor households  
• Most vulnerable women: women- headed 
households, poor women, ethnic minority women, 
and women in families with high dependency rates  16,463    X X X X X 
Indirect  Farming households within the 60 communes that do 
not receive support through Activity 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 
1.4 83,813       X X 
194. The project’s support to poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers for climate res ilient agricultural 
production is estimated  to yield an incremental increase of 14% in income benefits. A potential  increase of even 
10% is expected to  enable the l transition of these households get out of their current poverty status  over the life of 
the project and further increase their participation in the formal economy .  
195. The projec t outcome will strengthen the adaptive capacity of vulnerable smallholder farmers, especially ethnic 
minorities and women, and reduce their exposure to climate change induced rainfall variability and drought by 
securing access to irrigation, improving water storage and water productivity, acquiring skills and knowledge to 
apply climate -resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems, and accessing agro- climate advisories and 
credit and market information for improved climate risk management. The proje ct will strengthen institutional 
capacities to provide technical assistance and training in climate resilient agriculture and efficient water and soil management, and information on access to credit and markets. The project directly benefits  55,603 (i.e. 222,412  
women and men) households  through training in gender -responsive agricultural practices and cropping systems as 
well as irrigation planning and management in response to rainfall variability and drought.  
196. The project has significant impact on t he vulnerable populations whose agricultural production has been affected 
by diminishing productivity due to increasing climate change- induced rainfall variability and drought. By galvanizing 
the adoption of climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems – including greater access to and more 
efficient use of water - and improving access to credit and markets, the project supports smallholders, especially 
ethnic minority and women -headed households, to continuously invest in assets and skills  development to meet 
the challenges of evolving climate change impacts. Through these investments smallholders will sustain robust adaptation benefits yielding enhanced incomes and resulting in reduced vulnerabilities to climate change.  
197. Community -based and multi -stakeholder interventions across climate- resilient value chains promote economies of 
scale and sustainability of project impacts. The project will catalyse  a sustainable private sector dynamic among 
poor and near -poor farmers by affording them the knowledge, information, capacities and investments to reduce 
their climate risk and enable them to generate the revenues for re- investment in climate resilient production systems 
to meet the ongoing demands of evolving climate change. As such, the project will enable poor/near -poor farmers 
to plan and manage their production assets with a business approach to climate- resilient crop production and thus 
to build their capacities to access credit as well as markets.   
198. The project also invests in risk reduction  strategies for the targeted communes through increasing productivity and 
stabilizing agricultural production of poor and near -poor farmers by mitigating the climate vulnerability of their 
production assets, primarily land, water and crops. Application of water efficient irrigation techniques and


---
*Page 59*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
technologies, together with innovative agricultural practices and cropping systems, will increase, stabilize and 
sustain yields while enhancing the climate- resilience of their agroecosystems. Surpluses will be mark eted, and with 
the profits, farmers will re- invest in reducing or managing their climate vulnerability by improving, maintaining and 
sustaining the climate resilience of their production assets. About 139,416 households in the 60 communes will 
benefit from timely, gender -responsive agro- climate and market and credit information.  
199. The project builds the technical capacities of MARD and DARDs to assess climate risks and vulnerabilities, identify 
adaptation options and innovations for climate- risk informed agri cultural planning and integrate gender, ethnic 
minority and climate change concerns across policies and programs for agricultural development. An estimated 
3,600 government staff will be trained to support climate risk management  
200. Impact potential beyond t he project is catalysed through investments in knowledge codification and dissemination; 
development and strengthening of FFS to build adaptive capacities; multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation Platforms 
to build value chain partnerships; and monitoring and evaluation to promote evidence- based planning and 
implementation of solutions poor/near -poor farmers in the face of a changing climate. The project benefits 3,600 
government staff (local, regional, and national) with capacities to implement gender -responsive, climate- resilient 
solutions for agricultural production of high value crops.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  n/a 
Lifetime  n/a 
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by 
gender  (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  Direct beneficiaries: 55,603 farm 
households ( 222,412 people) , of which 
approximately 111,206 are men and 
111,206 are women.  
Indirect beneficiaries: 83,813 farm 
households (335,252 people),  of which 
approximately 167,626 are men and 
167,626 are women  
Percentage 
(%) Total population of five provinces:  
1,379,450 households  (or 5,517,800 
people of which 2,758,900 are men and 
2,758,900 are women)   
Total beneficiaries ( 4 Individuals per  
Household) = 139,416  households (or 
557,664 people of which 278,822 are 
men and 278,822 are women)  within the 
60 target communes or 10.1% of total 
population of the five target  provinces  
Other 
relevant 
indicators   
201. Direct Beneficiaries:  The total number of direct beneficiaries for the project are the 55,603 small holder 
households (222,412 individuals) within the 60 communes  who benefit from access to climate resilient irrigation . 
The beneficiaries comprise of :


---
*Page 60*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
ii) 39,14057 irrigated smallholder farmer households (or 1 56,560 individuals)  within the 45 communes 
common to both the GCF and WEIDAP projects . Of these, the GCF project support s 4,765 poor or near 
poor smallholder households  (or 19,060 individuals) through last mile connections  to the irrigation 
mainline .  
iii) 16,463 poor or near poor rainfed smallholder households (or 65,852 individuals) with in the additional 15 
communes supported by the GCF , who will benefit from water storage and productivity activities on rain 
fed lands. The target population was calculated by first identifying communes with high climate and social 
vulnerability factors or density of at -risk populations, such as ethnic minority population, poor and near -
poor, and number of women- headed households;  second, enumerating the corresponding farmer 
households to participate in Farmer Field Schools  (FFSs).  
The direct beneficiaries who will receive support from the GCF as described above (i.e. 4,765 poor or near 
poor households and 16,463 poor or near poor rainfed farmer households) will also receive climate -resilient 
agricultural  training in FFSs . 
 
202. Indirect beneficiaries:  Indirect beneficiaries for this project are farming households within the 60 target 
communes who will benefit from c limate information and weather, market and agricultural advisories (Output 2) . 
There are 83,813 such households  (or 335,252 individuals ), excluding the direct beneficiaries .   
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project  investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication  
203. The Theory of Change for the project is provided above in section C.2. Project Objective against Baseline.  A 
paradigm shift in addressing adaptation needs among smallholder farmers in the Central Highlands and South -
Central  Coast regions lies in implementing an integrated, multi- stakeholder approach to empowering vulnerable 
smallholders – especially women and ethnic minority farmers –  with access to knowledge, resources, and markets  
to manage climate risks to both water availability  (supply side)  and agricultural production (demand side) . The 
adaptation solution proposed here focuses on the two mutually reinforc ing elements of this approach: (i) access to 
sufficient water for agricultural production including through both large- scale and supplementary irrigation and (ii) 
climate -resilient agricultural production that uses  water efficiently on both irrigated and rain fed lands . For 
smallholders in the Central Highlands and South -Central  Coast regions to build and sustain the resilience of their 
agroecosystems in the face of increasing rainfall variability and drought, they will need to access sufficient water 
for crop production through irrigation, where possible, and through improved soil and water management on rain 
fed lands; and smallholders will need to be able to plan and manage cropping systems that make efficient use of 
water. However, t o enable climate- risk informed planning and management for resilient agricultural production in 
light of water insecurity, the smallholders need access to climate information and agricultural adv ice so they can 
apply mitigation options  that will enhance both the resilience and productivity of their agro- ecosystems. With access 
to climate information, including co-development of agro- climate advisories  and training, smallholders can enhance 
their understanding of  climate risks to their a groecosystems, identify and implement mitigating crop, soil and water 
management measures, and carry out climate- informed planning and decision- making to sustain climate- resilient 
agricultural production over time. Access to markets and credit is fundament al to sustain transformational changes 
towards climate- resilient pr oduction by  enabling farmers to develop small farm enterprises and then re- invest the 
ensuing profits in inputs to maintain or improve the climate- resilience of their agro- ecosystems.  
204. An impo rtant element of this paradigm shift is the potential for increased climate adaptation benefits in the future 
through broad scale replication expedited by integration of this project’s GCF -funded activities with the WEIDAP 
investments . Climate risk management training and climate and market information will be readily available to 
benefit all farmers involved in WEIDAP  regardless of socio- economic status . This project is co-financ ed with 
WEIDAP large -scale infrastructure investment , which dovetails with  last-mile access by smallholders to the 
irrigation infrastructure while strengthening  their technical and financial capacities to build and maintain market -
oriented, climate -resilient agricultural systems. This, in turn, paves the way for future expansion  of water and 
 
57 Refer para 78, page 43  of the Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought -Affected Provinces (WEIDAP) Project: Proj ect Administration Manual. 
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/vie -49404 -002-pam


---
*Page 61*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
agricultural sector investments in the five provinces grounded in the improved capacities of these vulnerable 
farmers. While this project provides training, information, institutional support, and initial grant assistance to help 
smallholders  overcome barriers to adaptation, it also provides training and technical assistance to smallholders and 
linkages with lenders  to access finance for longer term sustainability and enables access to markets to generate 
the revenues to pay back loans. Locali zed agro- climate and market information, including weather forecasting, and 
its application in actionable advisories, will allow smallholders to manage climate risk sustainably and carry out 
effective planning and decision- making for resilient agricultural  production.  
205. The potential for replication at scale is high given the possibilities for expansion of the WEIDAP irrigation system, the lessons learned from this project , and increased i nstitutional capacities for project management. With an 
evaluation of project performance, the GoV may wish to expand the WEIDAP irrigation system using loan financing or fiscal resources. At the same time, on the demand side, the potential for replication is enhanced by stakeholder 
incentives such as increased and more stable yields and more diversified sources of income, resulting from the successful practice of diversified climate -resilie nt agriculture on irrigated and rain fed land. Project lessons and best 
practice may be adapted to similar socio-
economic and ecological conditions elsewhere in the country. The 
proposed project also creates pathways to scale through the establishment of F FS, strengthened capacities of 
extension services, improved climate information, and  - through multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation Platforms  - 
private sector engagement (including for access to credit and climate and market information) . Market access 
enabled through CIP value chain strategies and cooperation will provide ongoing incentives to smallholders for 
climate -resilient production and marketing in coordination with other private sector and government actors.   
206. Pathways for future replication and scale include the following:  
• Connecting poor and near -poor farms to large- scale irrigation infrastructure and ensuring their long- term 
sustainability  through increased farmer capacities for maintenance and use of water -efficient technologies can 
be readily replicated to an estimated one million hectares in other areas in Vietnam where similar conditions 
exist, including investment potential.  Lessons learned from the experience of establishing last-mile access  of 
poor and near -poor farms to WEIDAP systems  will be used to implement further replication more efficiently.  
• As a result of this project, increased institutional capacities to support small farmers, as well as for project management  in general,  will provide a foundation of experience and expertise for future programs wishing to 
replicat e the lessons of  this project.  The lessons from project implementation will be mainstreamed throughout 
the MARD and DARDs through standard in- house training and information dissemination channels. Knowledge 
generated through analyses of project experience will be codified in case studie
s and white papers for 
transmission to authorities at provincial and national  levels for potential policy discussions.  
• Rehabilitating, upgrading or constructing new climate- proofed water storage facilities is easily replicated almost 
anywhere in rural Vietnam. In the five provinces alone,  there is potential for an additional 8,683 household and 
communal ponds to be made resilient to climate change impacts.  In the traditional Vietnamese farm, ponds are 
a critical production component so farmers are well -acquainted with their value as an essential resource that 
requires climate- proofing to avoid degradation or loss of productivity.  
• The project proposed here will train 150 district /provincial  level DARD and Farmers Union  trainers. These 
facilitators will train 1,800 lead farmers in the five  target provinces. Two  lead farmers will, in turn, train 
approximately 25 farmers  in 900 FFS. It is anticipated that this methodology has a replication potential to reach 
an additional 194,317 poor and near poor households in the five  project provinces, and an additional 2,845,325 
poor and near poor households nationwide when mainstreaming of the contents and methodology is achieved.   
The FFS methodology  will be evaluated by MARD and mainstreamed for future use throughout Vietnam.  
• The climate, weather and agricultural advi sories produced by this project can be replicated in an other 32 
districts of the five provinces  through digital and print media as well as through mobile text messaging reaching 
a total of 46 districts (32 beyond the 14 target districts encompassing the 60 communes ); this will then have 
cover ed 100% of the total farm population of 1,379,450 households in the five  target provinces in central 
Vietnam.  The methodology of advisory production will be evaluated and lessons learned codified for analysis 
and mainstreaming into MARD and provincial rural development planning.  
• The Climate Innovation Platforms will continue to meet and coordinate beyond GCF financing as they will be 
led by DARD officials and will incorporate representative stakeholders of the respective value chains, including 
private sector actors. Value chain s takeholders, organized in CIP, will continue to assess strengths and


---
*Page 62*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
weaknesses, opportunities and threats to climate -resilient production and will coordinate to  ensure long -term 
sustainability and profitability of production systems.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 63*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
207. This project will systematize project experience at all levels to create knowledge from lessons learned during project 
implementation. The project will build the capacities of MARD and DARD staff to codify this knowledge and 
disseminate it widely to farmers , as well as other GoV institutions and NGOs  in the five target provinces in particular, 
as well as elsewhere in Vietnam.  The project will generate knowledge of water -efficient irrigation management , 
including the use of efficient technologies,  and climate -resilient agriculture with an emphasis on agroforestry 
systems, multi -cropping, crop diversification and the use of new cli mate- resilient crop varieti es. Local knowledge of 
weather trends and patterns and water resource management  will be analyzed and synthesized with conventional 
scientific knowledge  as part of  co-creation of technical advisories  to support farmer  adaptation to climate change. 
In particular, knowledge pertaining to participatory agro- ecosystem vulnerability assessments  will be generated and 
codified. Knowledge products will include manuals, case studies, and protocols for climate- resilient agricult ural 
production and water resource management. These products will complement smallholder training to evaluate and 
manage climate risks and permit smallholders to identify and revise locally suited adaptation measures on an 
ongoing basis. Knowledge generat ion and learning will also enhance the capacities of local communities and 
government agencies to operate and maintain irrigation technologies and sustain climate -resilient agricultural 
practices beyond the project lifetime.  
208. The Climate Innovation Platforms established under this project will be in close contact with Farmer Field Schools 
and supportive institutions and organizations throughout project duration and will work with them to identify lessons 
from project experience and develop case studies , policy analyses , podcasts  and other knowledge products.  DARD 
staff will apply  a gender sensitive analysis to  farmer and FFS experience with climate smart agricultural practices, 
water resource management  and use of climate information servic es. Products will be tailored to different audiences 
with language accessibility a key factor for ethnic minorities, as well as educational level overall. Dissemination of 
these products will be aimed at reaching women as at least 50% of the target audi ence. Knowledge products will 
be used to provide evidence for input s to policy making and to inform strategies to facilitate future expansion of this 
project’s successful activities and approaches to other geographic areas of Vietnam.  The project will collaborate 
closely with the Farmers Union and the Women’s Union to organize systematic widespread dissemination  of readily 
understandable knowledge products  to their constituents, and it will also make use of official communications 
channels and media at all levels.  CIPs, given their multi -stakeholder composition, will provide entry points for 
broader dissemination of knowledge products to private sector (input providers and buyers), NGOs, lending 
institutions, and others.  
209. The M&E plan (Section H.2) will inclu de provision for generation of lessons learned and best practices (reports, 
publications, and other communication and knowledge products for various media) to not only support adaptive 
project management but also to inform learning across national/sub- national/community levels within Vietnam.  
210. Knowledge products will be made available to smallholder farmers in a variety of ways. While print materials 
(posters, leaflets, manuals, etc.) will be produced and disseminated via conventional channels, including ext ension 
workers, commune and provincial authorities, etc.), the project will also take advantage of increasing connectivity and digital communications to produce podcasts, short videos, live radio broadcasts, and other innovative media to be accessed through inexpensive handheld devices. Conventional communications channels – 
TV, radio, 
loudspeakers, community bulletin boards, etc. –  will also be used in concert with newer forms of media to achieve 
relative saturation of the smallholder audience. Knowledge products will be used in FFS training, with many materials provided to participants to take back to their homes and villages.


---
*Page 64*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Enabling effective and sustained participation of private and public -sector actors:   
211. Private sector actors will sustain their effective participation in climate- resilient agricultural production beyond the 
life of the project if the financial risks associated with climate- resilient production continue to remain low and the 
benefits remain proportionally higher. The primary financial risk to farmers, particularly poor/near -poor, women and 
ethnic minority farmers, will have been mitigated first and foremost by a reliable supply of irrigation water, whether 
continuously available from mainline  infrastructure and last -mile connections or through improved capture/ storage 
of rainwater on rain- fed lands , coupled with water efficiency application technologies . Co-financing from WEIDAP 
will be used to assess the viability of water monitoring mechanisms and systems for potential use in demand side 
management , and GCF financing will support training and technology development for the use of water efficient 
technologies to maximize water productivity and climate- resilience.  
212. Financial r isks to farmers will have been further diminished by their increased capacities to manage climate risk, 
invest in enhancing and maintaining the climate- resilience of their production assets, and generate sufficient 
revenues from commercialization of climate- resilient agricultural products.  This will allow them to continue to invest 
in the necessary production and management i nnovations over time to continually enhance climate resilience and 
productivity of their agroecosystems. To strengthen their capacities, farmers will co- develop and use actionable 
agro- climate advisories; improve their abilities to assess their climate vul nerability and identify innovations; enhance 
their agro- ecosystem management skills, including soil, water and crop practices that augment the climate-
resilience of these production assets; improve their abilities to access and manage credit; and develop t heir access 
to reliable markets for climate- resilient products.   
213. Public sector engagement will be enhanced through training of DARD staff to train farmers in climate- resilient 
agricultural practices and cropping systems, including the use of water efficie nt technologies. Hydromet staff will 
also become more capable of generating and interpreting down- scaled forecasts for use in agricultural planning 
and in collaborating with lead farmers and DARD staff in producing actionable agro- climate advisories.  Co- financing 
crowded in from provincial public sector entities will also ensure public sector engagement in creating conditions for increased investment in water storage, technical assistance and information services.  
214. To ensure that farmers are able to continu ously invest in the climate resilience and productivity of their agro-
ecosystems, the project will build the capacities of enabling and support institutions. Since the cap abilities of farmers 
to continuously
 invest hinges on their abilities to generate rev enues from sales of their products, a primary enabling 
institution is the market and the incentives it provides for climate- resilient production. The pri ncipal  strategy for 
enabling access to reliable markets on a sustained basis will be the establishment of Climate Innovation Platforms  
(CIPs) that bring together representatives of multiple stakeholders in key value chains: growers; mass organizations 
like the Women’s and Farmers’ Unions, as w ell as cooperatives and other associations; input providers; buyers; 
lending institutions; GoV and NGO technical assistance organizations; key climate, market and agricultural 
information providers; and others, as relevant. Each CIP will develop a strategy  for the climate- resilient production 
and commercialization of at least one particular value- chain; stakeholders , out of self -interest,  can be expected to 
collaborate in the implementation of the strategy they develop.58  
Innovation, market development and transformation: 
215. Resilience enhancing technologies, such as water efficient irrigation and storage technologies, will be introduced and disseminated widely through an innovative participatory process of co- development. The technologies to be 
developed will be flexible and applicable to the crops grown by the poor and near -poor, cost -effective for one 
hectare or less of farming land, suitable for women and ethnic minorities to apply, not labor -intensive, use locally 
 
58 The most vulnerable smallholders in the five provinces are marginalized farmers, particularly poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women 
farmers, who receive specific attention in this project. These stakeholders are expected to participate in the project out of self -interest i.e. 
motivated by the prospect of increased and/or more stable yields leading to greater food security and increased income. Stake holders in the 
project areas have been extensively consulted, and commune leaders and representatives of ethnic minority and women’s groups are committed 
to ensuring that their constituents are fully enabled to participate in the FFS and other project activities.  Monitoring of FFS preparation and other 
activities by project M&E will note the demographic comp osition of the participants and make any necessary adjustments.


---
*Page 65*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
available materials and be easily maintained. They will increase water efficiency, reduce farming input costs and 
ensure resilience to identified climate risks. While t he co- developed technology will likely not be as water -efficient 
as the more expensive technology , it will meet a minimum efficiency rate and serve as a stepping stone for the 
poor/near-poor to incrementally increase water productivity and income, allowing them to afford the more efficient 
technology over time. Bioengineering of ponds will ensure low -cost, easy to maintain, and efficient pond design and 
operations.  
216. Farm er Field School methodologies will build a multi -tier training system that builds on farmer experience and 
institutional agronomic science to ensure adoption of climate- resilient agricultural practice.  T raining of trainers and 
farmer to farmer training will ensure peer support, exchange of experiences based on on- farm practice and 
experience and increased institutional capacities for agricultural extension. New agroforestry systems adapted to 
specific agronomic and other conditions and tested by the International Agroforestry Center (ICRAF) will be adopted 
by participating poor/near -poor farmers who will receive initial input support  through an innovative voucher system 
(see section 6.3 of the Feasibility Study for details). Farmers will co- develop agro- climate advisories with institutional 
partners combining traditional knowledge with contemporary scientific assessments.  
217. Climat e Innovation Platforms comprised of producers, buyers, input provide rs, market managers, exporters, 
technical assistance providers, lenders and others will develop strategies for climate- resilient value chain 
development, focusing on specific crops.  The purpose of these strategies will be to strengthen key value chain 
stakeholders (e.g. producers, buyers) and the links between them with the aim of developing and accessing 
sustainable markets for climate -resilient crops. With stronger stakeholder cooperation and coordination in 
developing agricultural products , exporters and internal marketers can be assured of the quality and volume needed 
to meet and grow market demand.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 66*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
218. This project is aligned with national climate, agricultural and development policies as well as Vietnam’s Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution. It aims to enhance the implementation of existing government plans and 
programs. GCF funding will ensure that smallholders have access to sufficient, reliable water supply to overcome rainfall variability and drought by connecting them to eight large- scale irrigation systems to be built through the 
Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected Areas (WEIDA P) project financed by GoV with an ADB loan 
(USD 124.26 million).   
219. The project will directly contribute to the Agriculture Restructuring Plan (ARP) which aims to shift the agricultural 
sector away from central planning to market -led and consumer -driven, w ith the government’s role changing from 
being the primary investor and service provider to being the facilitator of investments and services provided by 
others. The ARP calls for equal partnerships among government agencies, the private sector, farmer or c ommunity 
organizations, and the scientific community —the so -called ‘four houses’ –  in advancing the transformation. 
Ensuring food security remains a key objective. Linked to the ARP, MARD also implements the Scheme of 
Restructuring of the Irrigation Sector  (2014) with the aim to upgrade infrastructure, strengthen management, 
modernize and improve safety of irrigation systems while protecting against natural disasters. In 2015, MARD also promulgated the Action Plan for the Development of Advanced and Water S aving Irrigation for Upland Crops to 
Assist Water Resources Sector Restructuring.  
220. The project will contribute to the National Water Resources Strategy (NWRS) developed by the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Environment (MoNRE). The NWRS’ main objective i s to strengthen the protection, exploitation, use 
and development of water resources, as well as the prevention and mitigation of adverse impacts caused by water. 
Priorities under the NWRS are: river basin planning and management, water storage and transfer, surface-  and 
groundwater protection and sustainable exploitation, pollution control, reservoir upgrading with priority to 
multipurpose use infrastructure, modernization of weather and hazard monitoring, warning and forecasting system, 
hazard risk mappin g, scientific research and technology development, and consolidation of the legislative and 
institutional framework.  
221. The project will also contribute to key provisions of the Law on Gender Equality regarding livelihoods aimed at equality between men and w omen in setting up, carrying out and managing a business and production activities, 
and equality in accessing information, capital, markets and labor sources. As well, the project will support the National Strategy on Gender Equality 2011- 2020 was approved in 2011, with the main aim to achieve substantive 
equality between men and women in terms of opportunities, participation and benefits in political, economic, cultural 
and social domains. Among other things, it aims to increase women’s political participation and leadership and 
increase access to labor markets and economic resources for rural poor and ethnic minority women. It calls for 
women’s full and equal access to productive resources such as land for cultivation, credit, insurance, markets and 
other information. It also identifies the need for services such as agricultural extension, vocational training, health 
and education to be tailored for women from diverse socio- economic backgrounds.  
222. The project contributes to the Government’s framework for meet ing its Paris Agreement targets and will complement 
other potential GCF -funded pipeline projects such as the forestry mitigation concept under development “Achieving 
emission reductions in the Central Highlands of Viet Nam to support National REDD+ Action Programme 
goals.”   That project is led by FAO and planned to be implemented through the current UN -REDD partnerships 
involving UNEP and UNDP.    
  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Environmental co-benefits  
223. The project target areas  – particularly rain fed lands -  are subject to significant land degradation processes that are 
exacerbated by  climate variability and extreme events. Incidents of extreme rainfall have resulted in accelerated 
erosion as intense rain overwhelms the ability of the soil to absorb it, causing s oil to be carried rapidly to rivers and 
streams  in runoff . As organic matter and mineral soils are lost to erosion, land quickly loses its fertility and beneficial 
structural properties. To reduce  land degradation processes, a  key strategy of this project will be to control the


---
*Page 67*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
movement of water as much as possible onto soil and across farm field s, managing  it to maximize soil infiltration 
as much as possible with the corresponding benefits to soil moisture and groundwater .  
224. Reducing direct impact of rainfall on soils will be managed through cropping systems that maintain soil cover for 
extended periods . Cropping systems will include agroforestry, multi -cropping, and other cover crops  that provide a 
barrier to raindrop impact and slow the arrival of the rainfall to the soil surface. These will include the use of climate 
adapted crop varieties as part of agroforestry systems where biomass from trees/shrubs can be used to add 
nutrients to the soil or as mulch to prevent soil moisture loss.  
225. At the same time, the use of crop residues on farm fields  will reduce raindrop impact and velocity. Once on the soil 
surface, the flow of water across rain fed lands will be slowed through adoption of  practices such as contour farming, 
conservation tillage, rainwater harvesting and storage, grass -lined bunds, gabions, gulley plugs, etc.  Farmers in 
the target areas will receive t raining on these practices in Farmer Field Schools. With this ki nd of control of water 
movement, soil fertility and structure may be allowed to recover with appropriate cropping and livestock systems.  
226. Environmental benefits will also accrue from diversification of production and irrigation. Smallholder farmers will 
diversify their production as a climate risk management measure, includi ng through agroforestry systems  and other 
forms of mixed cropping, which will improve soil cover, strengthen nutrient cycling, enhance rainfall infiltration and improve aquifer recharge.  Diversified cropping systems also produce ancillary benefits in regard to the prevalence 
and diversity of insect populations, including pollinators. With irrigation, soil can remain covered longer, thereby 
avoiding soil loss from wind erosion or from abru
pt massive soil loss due to extreme rainfall events. As a 
consequence of adopting more climate- resilient agricultural practices, soil organic matter will increase, resulting in 
greater water holding capacity, increased carbon storage and improved soil biodiversity.  The land degradation 
processes affecting the target areas will be reduced, which will enhance agro- ecological and landscape resilience 
to rainfall  variability and drought .   
Social benefits  
227. Project interventions are explicitly designed to contribute to a paradigm shift that will enable poor/near -poor farmers, 
particularly  women and ethnic minority farmers, to benefit from proven progress in the development of climate 
resilient agriculture in Vietnam.  This project will enable participating poor/near -poor farmers to apply appropriate 
participatory methodologies to assess the climate vulnerability of their agro- ecosystems and identify adaptive 
strategies and measures to manage climate risk. By implementing Farmer Field Schools with mixed socio- economic 
groups, poor/near -poor farmers , particularly ethnic minority and women farmers , will be able to develop mentoring 
relationships and partnerships with more successful farmers and strengthen cooperatives or oth er forms of 
collective effort. By supplying poor/near -poor farmers with the necessary means to access water for irrigation, the 
resulting increases in income will help to mitigate socio -economic inequality in climate- vulnerable communes. 
Enhancement of water productivity will result in labor and monetary savings, thereby increasing net income.     
228. Improving poor f armers’ and especially ethnic minority and women farmers’ access to climate information as well 
as the skills needed to act on that information can have a transformative impact on their livelihoods, currently 
declining from the impacts of increasing climate variability on rain- fed agriculture. Ensuring that climate products 
are tailored to specific aud iences, including those with less formal education or limited Vietnamese language skills 
(as for ethnic minorities), can remove a key barrier to empowering a highly sensitive group. Linking these outputs to improvements in market access for a more diversif ied basket of crops, further buffers the poorest households 
when climate extremes occur.  
229. Over 50% of poor and near -poor farmers in the project’s target areas are women. The project aims to address all 
dimensions of women’s empowerment: agency (her own aspi rations and capabilities); relations (the power relations 
through which she negotiations her socio- economic development); and structure (the environment that surrounds 
and conditions her choices through deep- routed norms and practices).  
230. Agency will be addr essed by: 1/ providing practical and user -friendly information to women and men equally on 
climate and disaster risks (exposure and impact), adaptation good practice and availability of resources to support 
taking adaptation measures; 2/ through the women- only FFS and the ACIS technical groups, providing a safe and 
trusted platform or environment for group membership, social learning, building confidence, self -image and self -
esteem, and community activism; 3/ providing better access for women to material as sets to increase their 
resilience, for example water, resilient seeds etc.


---
*Page 68*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
231. Relations  will be addressed by: 1/ promoting women’s representation and voice in agricultural extension services; 
2/ promoting women farmer champions as lead farmers in the communit y; 3/ building women’s negotiation skills for 
a stronger and more confident engagement with Government and private sector service and technology providers.  
232. Structure will be addressed by: 1/ improving women’s access to training, extension, market, microfinance and other 
Government and private sector services, 2/ transforming improved access into a demand for different services 
better tailored to women hereby structurally changing the way services are currently provided; 3/ ensuring equal 
men- women ownership and management of shared water management facilities (i.e. ponds, irrigation schemes). 
Please see Annex VIII -c, Gender Action Plan, attached to this docume nt. 
233. The project  proposed here will strive for equal gender participation in all activities as well as promoting increased 
opportunities for women through specific activities. Increased incomes from climate- resilient  agricultural production 
along with potential  partnerships  for market linkages, will empower women farmers to participate more fully in 
decision making and economic activity. With increases  in income, women farmers  may allocate a larger portion of 
househol d resources to the education and health of their households. By demonstrating an increase in autonomous 
decision making, participating women farmers will provide a positive role model for adolescent girls. At the same 
time,  as women and girls become more empowered members of their communities, they may more effectively 
advocate community improvements to better serve their needs, which can increase the adaptive capacity of their 
communities.  
234. 10% of the population in the target areas are from ethnic minoriti es, of which more than two thirds are among the 
poorest of the poor. A majority farm in the upland areas, relying on rain and rainfed irrigation systems. With increases in income, ethnic minority farmers will be able to raise their quality of life through increased purchase and 
consumption of nutrition and health products. Participation in farmer groups will assist in building and maintaining 
social cohesion through shared ponds, better cooperative linkages to market, peer -to-peer learning and knowledge 
sharing.  
Economic benefits  
235. The Government  of Vietnam is investing in irrigation and water schemes to support diversified climate- appropriate 
cash crop production. Such investments are critical as, according to recent climate change scenarios, by 2050, 
yields from key staple crops will be declining, with expected decreases of 16% for maize, 2.6% for cassava and 
6.6% for rice. This project will implement cost -effective ways of scaling up and replicating policy priorities that 
currently suffer from weak field- based implementation systems. At the same time, by t aking an integrated approach 
the project will provide evidence for development of future policy directions in line with Vietnam’s commitments 
under the Paris Agreement. Focusing on some of the highest risk provinces - both in terms of poverty rates and 
climate risk -  this project will support GoV to increase effectiveness of planned government investments in irrigation 
and water supply by specifically increasing the access of the poorest households to these systems.  
236. Benefits expect ed from strengthening the climate resilience of small -scale farmers in Highland and South- Central 
Viet Nam (SACCR) under the project include:  
(i) Enhanced crop yields and income due to increased and more reliable water during the dry season. With this project, loss of income from drought will be avoided. Climate change projection for the project sites indicates that droughts 
with 40% less rainfall than normal like the 2014/16 ENSO will increasingly occur and categorized as a 1 in 25 -year 
event. The benefit from increased availability of water is assumed to be 4% per annum based on avoiding a 100% loss of income to these households at the probability of 1/25 per annum.  
(ii) With the project, households will benefit from application of Climate Resilient Agriculture (CRA) packages. The Farmer F ield School program will focus on the promotion of CRA packages customized per location and for the 
target beneficiaries. Based on the CRA activities presented CRA investments combined with other interventions 
through the FFS are expected to lead to about 25 -40% increase in agricultural yields. FFSs were shown (Davis et 
al, 2012) to have positive impact on production and income among women, low -literacy, and medium land size 
farmers with the middle land area terciles showing significant increase in agricult ural income. We assume a 10% 
increase in income of the households to be conservative.  
(iii) Activities 1.1 and 1.2 are excluded from this economic analysis as these two activities are already captured in the 
Asian Development Bank’s Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought Affected Provinces (WEIDAP) that is used as 
co-financing.  The net present value of net economic benefits of overall WEIDAP project is estimated to be VND 
2,793.2 billion.


---
*Page 69*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
237. Climate change is resulting in increasing deficits in surface and ground water availability in Vietnam for agricultural 
production with longer periods of severe water scarcity during the dry season and increased intensity of droughts. 
Agricultural producti vity is falling as a result, with corresponding declines in yields and incomes intensely  harmful 
to small -scale farmers vulnerable to reduced water availability on rain fed lands ; within this group, poor and near -
poor farmers, especially women and ethnic m inority farmers , are particularly at risk . Yield reductions in crops, 
particularly cash crops, will significantly reduce household and national level revenues, incomes and employment. 
The financial losses incurred from cash crop yield reductions will subst antially undermine rural livelihoods, as 
there will be a significant loss of farm jobs, wages, and net farm incomes, which finance various social needs (e.g. health, education etc.).  
238. Two of the regions most vulnerable to climate risks are the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast.   For both 
regions, climate change is expected to severely impact agricultural productivity, primarily through reduced water availability resulting from increasing rainfall variability and the occurrence of 
extreme droughts. The most 
vulnerable population is comprised of poor/near -poor farmers , particularly women and ethnic minority farmers,  
growing one or two rain- fed crops on upland farms with a second particularly vulnerable group comprising 
smallholders c ultivating one or two crops in lowlands but with limited access to irrigation and dependent on 
streams or wells. For both of these groups, there is a strong positive correlation between vulnerability, poverty, ethnic minority  membership , and gender inequal ity, so their prioritization for adaptation support is urgent . As stated 
in the GoV -UNDP Viet Nam Special Report on Managing the Risks of Extreme Weather Events and Disasters to 
Advance Climate Change Adaptation, inequalities influence local coping and ada
ptive capacity, and pose 
challenges to disaster risk management and climate change adaptation from the local to the national level. Socio-economic inequalities and differences in access to livelihoods or land, and other factors determine vulnerabilities 
of households and communities in Viet Nam.
59  
239. A World Bank study identifies the main social vulnerabilities for both regions. For the Central Highlands, these 
include high numbers of ethnic minorities, migrants  to the region, and farmers depending on rain- fed and 
subsistence agriculture as well as high rates of poverty. For the South -Central  Coast, social vulnerability is largely 
determined by high poverty, particularly among ethnic minority groups, and a dependency on rain- fed agriculture 
in many areas. 60 Ethnic minority populations have lower average literacy rates and lag behind national averages 
in key socio -economic development indicators. Ethnic minority women are less likely to be represented in 
community leadership and decision- making processes. The population of ethnic minorities is unevenly distributed 
across the five provinces of the Central Highlands and South- Central Coast regions with the majority in the Central 
Highland provinces of Dak Lak and Dak Nong (20% -  30% of the population) and of Ninh Thuan with similar levels, 
and a smaller number in the South- Central Coast provinces of Khanh Hoa and Binh Thuan (5.7% and 7.4% of the 
total population, respectively). Indigenous ethnic minorities in South- Central Coastal provinces are mainly Cham, 
Raglei , and Chau Ro, while those in the Central Highlands include E De, Gia Lai and Mo Nong (M’Nong). 
Immigrant ethnic minorities to the target areas  are mainly Tay, Nung Thai, Muong, H’Mong, K’Ho, and Chu Ru. 61 
240. The GoV’s key laws, strategies  and action plans on climate change and disaster risk reduction also recognize the 
socio -economic groups most vulnerable to climate change impacts: pregnant and nursing women, children, the 
poor, elderly, people with disabilities, and ethnic minorities, especially in upland ar eas. GoV statistics confirm the 
higher than average vulnerabilities of these groups in the target provinces.  
241. This project is focused precisely on assisting the most vulnerable farmers – the poor/near -poor, particularly women 
and ethnic minority farmers - in the two target regions to build the climate resilience of their primary agricultural 
 
59 GoV’s Institute of Meteorology, Hydrology and Climate Change, United National Development Program (January 2015). Viet 
Nam Special Report on Managing the Risks of Extreme Weather Events and  Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation  
60 Pamela McElwee (December 2010). The Social Dimensions of Adaptation to Climate Change in Vietnam. World Bank Discussion 
Paper Number 17.  
61 Poverty Situation Analysis of Ethnic Minorities in Vietnam 2007 -1012. Irish Aid, CEMA, UNDP. Hanoi, 2013.


---
*Page 70*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
production assets: water, land and crops. These farmers will receive direct support to guarantee their access to 
water provided by an ADB -financed irrigation infrastruct ure program, as well as through improved water storage 
on rain fed lands, coupled with water efficient irrigation equipment to maximize water productivity. At the same 
time, while all farmers , regardless of socio- economic status , will receive training in Farmer Field Schools in 
climate -resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems, only the most vulnerable farmers will receiv e initial 
input support through a voucher system to lower the financial risks of adopting unfamiliar climate- resilient practices 
and systems. Farmers will also participate in analysis of agroecosystem vulnerability through co- development of  
localized agro- climate advisories that will be disseminated through farmer networks throughout the five target 
provinces. To ensure that poor/near -poor farmers can generate sufficient capital to continue to invest in the 
climate -resilience of their production assets, they will receive specific training in small business planning, including 
assistance in accessing credit and linking to markets.  
242. The project will invest in adaptive capacities of farmers in five provinces of southern Vietnam, focusing on equal access to  adaptation resources and options regardless of ethnic background or gender. Through investments in 
asset s, skills, knowledge, and capacities for adaptive agricultural planning and implementation, the project will 
enhance the climate resilience and productivity of the production assets of the most vulnerable households , 
strengthen market linkages for their climate- resilient products, and enhance their incomes so that they can 
continue to invest in the climate- resilience of their agro- ecosystems.   
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
243. Institutional needs: The impacts of climate variability on the targeted provinces are aggravated by insufficient 
institutional capacities for extension of climate- resiliency knowledge and technical skills, and provincial and local 
authorities are thus unable to fully support poor/near -poor smallholders in adapting to climate variability. National 
budget allocations to the relevant Ministries and other institutions responsible for climate change adaptation coordination, disaster risk management, climate/weat her, agricultural and market information services, and water 
management and irrigation development are inadequate given the emerging and projected costs of meeting climate change adaptation needs. As a result, while upgrading their technical and implementa tion capacities to 
meet the challenges of climate change is required, resources have been insufficient to meet this need. This project will build the capacities of MARD and other institutions to provide agro-
climate and market information to 
smallholder entrepreneurs and train trainers in climate- resilient water management and agricultural practices and 
systems and subsequently train farmers across the five target provinces.  
244. Economic needs:  The effects of rainfall variability and drought on agricultural production are particularly 
egregious  for household economies of the poor/near poor ethnic minority and women farmers, especially those 
farming rain fed lands.  Low or unstable yields result ing from lack of a reliable water supply and compounded by 
outmoded coping strategies have resulted in a poverty trap for those without access to water, who lack the skills or knowledge to adopt climate- resilient agricultural practices, or do not receive actionable agro- climate information 
for climate risk management.  
245. The project will stimulate the priv ate sector initiative of poor and near -poor farmers by providing them with the 
knowledge, information, capacities and investments they need to reduce their climate risk and allow them to produce the required revenues for re- investment in climate resilient production systems to meet the ongoing 
demands of evolving climate change. As such, the project will build the capacities of farmers to plan and manage 
their production assets with a business approach to climate- resilient crop production and thus to build their 
capacities to access credit as well as markets.   
246. The project will increase productivity and stabilize agricultural production of poor and near -poor f armers by 
mitigating the climate vulnerability of their production assets, primarily land, water and crops. Application of water 
efficient irrigation techniques and technologies, together with innovative agricultural practices and cropping 
systems, will in crease, stabilize and sustain yields while enhancing the climate- resilience of their agroecosystems. 
Surpluses will be marketed, and with the profits, farmers will re- invest in reducing or managing their climate 
vulnerability by improving, maintaining and sustaining the climate resilience of their production assets.     
247. Financial  needs:  Vietnam is affected yearly by a wide variety  of hydro- meteorological and climatological hazards  
that are increasing in scope and impact : droughts and forest fires; tropical,  hail and wind storms; coastal, riverine,


---
*Page 71*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
and flash floods; heavy rainfall and landslides and extreme temperatures (cold and heat waves).62 Increased 
exposure of people and economic assets has been the major cause of long- term increases  in economic losses 
from weather - and climate- related disasters.63,64  The year 2016 was particularly severe, with an acute El Niño-
induced drought and saline intrusion affecting a third of the country, followed by a sequence of typhoons, tropical 
depressions and heavy r ainfall events causing flooding in the North and South- Central Coast and Central 
Highlands regions. In 2016 alone, more than 2.2 million people were affected, 230 people lost their lives, and an estimated US$ 1.7 billion of damage and loss occurred, or approximately 0.83 percent of the country’s Gross 
Domestic Product.  
248. According to Vietnam’s NDC, the national budget will only be able to cover one- third of the financing that will be 
required between 2021 and 2030 to implement crucial adaptation measures. Jus t between 2017 and 2020, the 
government estimates that approximately US$ 4.7 billion will be needed annually to finance climate change 
adaptation activities. Between 2012- 2016, Vietnam’s debt burden increased significantly as a percentage of GDP, 
and as a result, the Government has imposed stricter loan limits only approving those for large infrastructure 
projects. While Government is continuing to invest in crucial basic infrastructure like WEIDAP, required to bring 
water for irrigation to affected areas i n the five target provinces, fiscal limitations hinder further investments 
required to ensure water security for smallholders, who are thus required to obtain their own financing. For poor 
and near -poor smallholders, investment in connectivity, storage and water efficient irrigation equipment is 
prohibitive given farmers’ tenuous financial capacities, further weakened by climate change.  
249. Private sector actors will sustain their effective participation in climate- resilient agricultural production if the 
finan cial risks associated with climate -resilient production remain low and the benefits remain proportionally 
higher. The primary  financial risk to farmers, particularly poor/near -poor, women and ethnic minority farmers, will 
have been mitigated by a reliable supply of irrigation water, whether continuously available from mainline 
infrastructure and last -mile connections or through improved capture/storage of rainwater on rain- fed lands, 
coupled with water efficiency application technologies. Co- financing from WEIDAP will be used to assess the 
viability of water monitoring mechanisms and systems for potential use in demand side management, and GCF 
financing will support training and technology development for the use of water efficient technologies to maximize 
water productivity and climate- resilience. Financial risks to farmers will have been further diminished by their 
increased capacities to manage climate risk, invest in enhancing and maintaining the climate- resilience of their 
production assets, and generate sufficient revenues from commercialization of climate- resilient agricultural 
products.  
250. Social  needs:  With its focus on miti gating the vulnerability of poor/near -poor, ethnic minority and women farmers, 
this project will help address income inequality, social marginalization, and disempowerment of women and ethnic 
minorities. The project will produce information and advisories in ethnic minority languages, as well as empower 
minority farmer champions to train their neighbors in climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems. 
Women will receive specific assistance and training to build their capacities as farmers and small business owners.  
The multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation Platforms will each have representatives of ethnic minority and women 
farmers.  
 
 
62 Classification by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters’ Emergency Events Database, 
http://www.emdat.be/classification.  
63 Institute of Meteorology, Hydrology and Climate Change (IMHEN) and UNDP (February 2015). Viet Nam Special Report on 
Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. Summary for Policymakers.  
64 Accord ing to MONRE, 2016 was particularly severe, with an acute El Niño -induced drought and saline intrusion affecting a third 
of the country, followed by a sequence of typhoons, tropical depressions and heavy rainfall  events causing flooding in the North 
and South- Central Coas t and Central Highlands regions. In 2016 alone, more than 2.2 million people were affected, 230 people 
lost their lives, and an estimated US$1.7 billion of damage and loss occurred, or approximately 0.83 percent of the country’s  
Gross Domestic Product.64 In 2017, Viet Nam was affected by a number of tropical storms, floods (riverine and flash), heavy 
rainfall, landslides, and a heatwave, resulting in more thanfive million people affected, 400 deaths and 650 people injured, 
558,000 houses damaged, flooded or destroyed and 350,000ha of crops affected. Typhoon Damrey in November 2017 caused 
the most damage, with 4.3 million people in 15 provinces in Central Viet Nam estimated as being affected, 123 people who lost  
their lives, and 305,254 houses damaged, flooded or destroyed.64


---
*Page 72*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
251. The proposed project is aligned with current Vietnamese Government policies and programmes to foster adaptive 
capacity and climate resilience including: Vietnam’s priority actions under its Nationally Determined Contribution to Paris Agreement 2015; Action Plan Framework for Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in the agriculture 
and rural development sector for the period 2008- 2020; Action Plan on Response to Climate Change in the 
agriculture and rural development sector period 2011 -  2015 and vision t o 2050 (MAPCC); Directive on Integrating 
Climate Change into the development, and implementation of strategies, planning, plans, programs, and projects 
of the agriculture and rural development sector, period 2011- 2015; Program of GHG emissions reduction in the 
agriculture and rural development sector by 2020; MARD’s Plans to implement the National Action Plan on climate 
change period 2012 – 2020 and visioning 2030; and the MARD Agricultural Restructuring Plan; Green Growth 
Action Plan in Agriculture and Rur al Development to 2020 focusing on promoting water efficiency use and improve 
sustainable farming techniques; the Agricultural Restructuring Program focusing on shifting to more sustainable and climate- resilient crops and practices; the Irrigation Law (whi ch was issued in June 2017) which aims to 
modernize government investments in irrigation, and creates a framework for the implementation of water pricing, PPP in irrigation and promoting water efficiency technology.  
252. National Strategy on Natural Disaster Pr evention, Response and Mitigation: In 2007, the Prime Minister issued 
the main disaster risk management strategy , developed by MARD as the coordinating ministry for disaster 
prevention and control. The strategy to 2020 aims to mobilize all resources to eff ectively implement disaster 
prevention, response and mitigation in order to minimize the losses of human life and properties, the damage of natural resources and cultural heritages, and the degradation of environment, contributing significantly to ensure 
the country sustainable development, national defense and security. It contains key priorities such as:   
 Develop hazard risk maps as a decision- support tool to inform planning on flood protection and control 
systems, agriculture, forestry and land use, inf rastructure, river basins, coastal zones etc.  
 Modernize early warning and forecasting capacities and systems for all regions in Viet Nam.  
 Strengthen river and sea dyke and reservoir system, for flood, drought and salinity intrusion control. Integrate 
solut ions to increase run- off and underground water in dry season.  
 Transform crop and livestock systems to withstand disaster impacts and make full use of the local natural resources for socio- economic development.  
 Community awareness raising and capacity building.  
253. National Target Program to Respond to Climate Change issued in 2008 stressed the need for mainstreaming 
climate change responses into social and economic development, while pursuing broader sustainable 
development and considering gender equality and p overty reduction. The first phase of the NTP RCC (2009–
2010) focused on scientific analysis and initial planning and resulted in the first version of the Vietnam Climate 
Change and Sea Level Rise Scenarios. The second phase (2011– 2015) focused on further analysis, detailed 
planning, capacity building and development of sector and provincial action plans. Once the National Climate 
Change Strategy was approved in 2012, the NTP RCC concluded and morphed into the National Action Plan to Respond to Climate Chang e 2011- 2020.  
254. National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan: As the current most important strategy, the National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS) for 2011- 2020 recognizes Viet Nam as one of the worst affected countries by climate 
change bringing signific ant risks to food security and agricultural development, human health, natural resources 
and ecosystems, and overall sustainable development. The strategy links the response to climate change to greenhouse gas emission reduction and a shift towards a low -carbon economy but prioritizes adaptation in the 
early stage due to Viet Nam’s current socio- economic conditions and development.  
255. The NCCS and National  Action Plan on Climate Change 2011- 2020 outline a large number of priority actions, 
including among other : 
 Upgrading of the hydro -meteorological forecasting and early warning system;


---
*Page 73*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
 Restructuring of the agricultural systems towards more climate resilient crops and husbandry, guaranteeing 
food and income security;  
 Modernize farming practices applying more water - and energy -efficient techniques and integrated farming 
systems;  
 Sustainable exploitation and management of water resources, with repair and improvement of dam, reservoir 
and irrigation systems, fit for multipurpose use (water supply, disaster mitigation, energy provision);  
 Investment in afforestation and reforestation, to increase forest coverage.  
256. National Action Program on Reduced Deforestation and Forest Degradation: The National Action Program on 
Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Effor ts to Reduce Deforestation and Forest Degradation, 
Sustainable Management of Forest Resources, and Conservation and Enhancement of Forest Carbon Stocks 
(REDD+) for 2011 -2020 or REDD+ Action Program was approved in 2012 and is coordinated by MARD. Phase I 
(2011- 2015) focused on the establishment of policies and systems for REDD+ roll -out, awareness raising and 
capacity building, as well as piloting of specific REDD+ mechanisms such as on benefit -sharing, payment for 
forest ecosystem services etc. Phase II (2016- 2020) focuses on the actual implementation at scale of various 
REDD+ projects and activities.  
257. Action Plan in Response to Climate Change in Agriculture and Rural Development: In 2016, MARD issued an updated action plan on addressing climate change in the agricultural sector for the period 2016- 2020 and with a 
vision to 2050. The plan has three major sections on: strengthening the policy and institutional framework and capacities; adaptation and mitigation actions within the agricultural sector; and prevention and mitigation of disasters within the agricultural sector.  
258. Communist Party Resolution on climate change and environmental management: The 2013 Party Resolution 24-
NQ/TW ‘Active Response to climate change, improvement of natural resources management and environment protection’ elevates the response to climate change to a key national priori ty issue, with responsibilities shared by 
the Government, organizations, private sector and citizens, and with the state under the leadership of the Party playing a key role. The Resolution calls for increased efforts on adaptation and disaster risk reduct ion, a more 
rapid transition towards a green growth model, improved climate risk informed socio- economic development 
planning, and integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems.  
259. Vietnam Green Growth Strategy and Action Plan: The Vietnam Green Growth Strategy (VGGS), approved in 2012 
and coordinated by the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), aims to accelerate the process of economic 
restructuring in order to use natural resources efficiently, reduce greenhouse gas emissions through research and 
application of modern technologies, develop infrastructure to improve the entire efficiency of the economy, cope with climate change, contribute to poverty reduction, and drive economic growth in a sustainable manner. Through 
the Nat ional Green Growth Strategy 2011- 2020, Viet Nam seeks to achieve a low carbon economy and to enrich 
natural capital.  Green Growth is the guiding principal direction towards sustainable economic development, and 
the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions an d increased capability to absorb greenhouse gas are gradually 
becoming compulsory and important indicators in socio -economic development.  
260. The Green Growth Action Plan was issued in 2014 and provides more detail for the three VGGS’ strategic tasks. 
While t here is no specific program or action plan on Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) in Viet Nam 
yet, there are various projects or subprograms implemented in a number of key sectors, notably agriculture, the cement sector, the building sector, w aste management and renewable energy.  
261. The Sustainable Development Strategy 2012- 2020 states as its general objective that sustainable and effective 
growth must come along with social progress and equality, national resources and environment protection, sociopolitical stability, firm protection of independence- sovereignty -
unification and territorial integrity of the 
country.  Specifically , the strategy seeks to reduce the harmful effects of natural disasters, and to actively and 
effectively respond to climate change. This includes the prioritization of resources for poverty reduction and improvement of living conditions of people in most disadvantaged areas, as well as support to poor people and 
households to build houses.  
262. The National Strategy on Climate C hange 2011- 2020 seeks to proactively cope with natural disasters and monitor 
climate.  The strategy further details within its mission, mitigating damages caused by natural disasters by: -  
reviewing and designing development planning schemes and standards of construction in the regions regularly 
suffering natural disasters in response to the increase of natural disasters due to climate change - improving the


---
*Page 74*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
quality of forests and afforestation, including to turn bare lands and hills green, to effectively e xploit different kinds 
of forest to secure and improve resistance against natural disasters, preventing desertification, land erosion and 
degradation, to enhance protection, management and development of mangrove forests and flooded ecosystems, and to rais e the forest coverage to 45% by 2020.   
263. The National Strategy on Environment Protection to 2020 with Vision to 2030 details solutions to recover and 
regenerate natural ecosystems , especially mangroves, as well as solutions to increase forest coverage and 
improve forest quality. These include: -  to survey and evaluate deterioration and degradation of specific or 
representative natural ecosystems, especially mangroves, then design the planning schemes for their recovery -  
to conduct programmes on investing an d mobilizing official development assistance (ODA) sources and other 
resources from economic sectors and organizations at home and abroad for recovering natural ecosystems, 
increasing their resistance against climate change, founding mechanisms for payment s of ecosystem services 
towards boosting recovery, regeneration and protection of natural ecosystems - to localize and protect natural 
forests, especially mangroves, forests for special use, protective forests, and watershed forests, and at the same time p reventing deforestation and illegal exploitation -  to continue afforestation and forest protection while securing 
a sustainable forestry; to closely manage the renting of forest land, especially protective and watershed forests.   
264. Plan for Implementation of the Paris Agreement: To advance Viet Nam’s commitments towards the 2015 Paris 
Climate Agreement and the country’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC)
65, the GoV has 
approved a specific implementation plan in October 2016. The plan includes priority activities for the period until 2020 (‘readiness’ phase) and 2021- 2030 (‘implementation’ phase) on five components: mitigation; adaptation; 
human, technological and financial resources for implementation; measurement, reporting and verification 
systems; and the institutional and policy framework.  
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
265. Since it began operations in Viet Nam in 1977, UNDP has contributed significantly to environmental protection and climate change responses, especially in facilitating formulation of policies, strategies, laws, coordination, and 
information sharing. UNDP possesses a qualified team of experts including international and national experts, 
helping UNDP to deliver a comprehensive approach in the area of climate change.  
266. UNDP is a long -term partner of the Viet Nam Government. UNDP has supported various related po licy formulation 
processes in Viet Nam, including:  
• National Target Programme to Respond to Climate Change (NTP -RCC 2008)  
• Climate Change Scenarios (2009, 2011, 2016)  
• Climate Change Strategy (2012) and Green Growth Action Plans (2014)  
• National Strategy for DRM (2007) and its Action Plan (2009)  
267. UNDP has built strong relationships with decision- makers and proven its strengths as an impartial provider of 
technical advice and support. Priority development areas for Viet Nam serve as the foundation f or UNDP action 
on policy support. UNDP also plays an advisory role in the process of preparation and approval of regulations and 
relevant codes and laws in Viet Nam. UNDP is recognized as an experienced agency in institutional development 
and capacity buil ding, bringing a long- term and institutional and people- centred focus to capacity development.  
268. With its
 central role in the UN system, UNDP facilitates a multi -sectoral approach to help the government respond 
to complex issues such as climate change and green growth. UNDP has been instrumental in providing technical 
support and inputs to the preparation and consultations for a number of key legal frameworks, including 
Biodiversity Law 2008, Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation Law 2010, Law on Natural  Disaster Prevention 
and Control 2012, Law on Environmental Protection 2014 which includes a chapter on climate change and green 
growth, and implementation of Law on Environmental Protection Tax, the Royalties Law concerning natural resources management.  
269. With the characteristics of multilateral organization, UNDP can promote the dissemination of international norms and standards, bring technical assistance, experience and good practices to bear in Viet Nam. UNDP has 
demonstrated its long -term commitment to  the provision of technical assistance to affect and sustain the 
 
65 http://www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/PublishedDocuments/Viet%20Nam%20First/VIETNAM%27S%20INDC.pdf


---
*Page 75*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
institutional changes required in realizing tangible improvements in institutional capacity. UNDP has a portfolio of 
technical assistance projects on climate change with key ministries such as MPI, MARD, MONRE, MOC and 
MOIT. UNDP also works closely on energy efficiency with MOST and MOT, linking policy makers to a global 
community of practice in key policy issues and providing a platform for sharing lessons and experiences 
internationally.  
270. By supporting Ministries active in disaster risk management, climate change and green growth issues, UNDP is 
already in position to help improve capacity in organizational and interdisciplinary coordination, and to encourage 
harmonious approaches toward climate change issues of the government, private sector, donors and other 
organizations.  
271. UNDP exercises  results -based activities and ensures  the Executing Entit y (Implementing Partner ) are adequately 
equipped with knowledge and skills to achieve expected project activities and outputs. Strengthening and 
expanding analytical work in key sectors and advancing the knowledge- base on disaster risk management and 
climate change within the broader context of sustainable development, UNDP supports networks and research 
institutions that are crucial for prompt advice and technical expert support to the Government of Viet Nam.  
272. The project will also benefit from the expertise and resources of the o n-going UNDP projects with MPI, MARD, 
MONRE and MOC including:  
• The MPI Project on “Strengthening Capacity and Institutional Reform for Green Growth and Sustainable 
Development in Viet Nam” (CIGG)  
• The MONRE -MARD project “Capacity Building for Implementati on of the National Climate Change Strategy” 
(CBICS Project);  
• The MARD Project on “Integrating Agriculture into National Adaptation Plans.”  
• The ongoing GCF -supported Project on “Improving the Resilience of Vulnerable Coastal Communities to 
Climate Change I mpacts in Viet Nam”  
 
Experience and track record of the  ‘Executing Entity  (Implementing Partner )’ and ‘Responsible Parties’  
273. MARD is the executing entity for the project. MARD is in charge of coordinating a variety of national policy and 
institutional framework s for the agriculture and rural development sector s, namely: the National Targeted Program 
on New Rural Development (NTP NRD) 2016- 2020, Agriculture Restructuring Plan (ARP) for the period 2013-
2020 , which aim s to shift the government’s role from being the primary investor and service provider to being the 
facilitator of investments and services provided by others, as well as a number of schemes/strategies/plans of sub-sectors (irrigation, crops, livestock, land). In 2008, the Action Plan Framework for Adaptation and Mitigation 
of Climate Change of the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector for 2008- 2020 was issued. 
Given its cross-
cutting mandate, MARD collaborated close ly with the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONDRE) 
to develop the National Water Resources Strategy, and with the Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs 
(MOLISA) to formulate the National Targeted Program on Sustainable Poverty Reduction (NTP SPR) 2016- 2020.  
274. MARD has significant knowledge and capacity in implementing development programmes for the poor and marginalized groups. The current annua l budget allocated to MARD for 2018 is roughly USD 908 million, placing 
it among the top five ministries in terms of budget allocation . Given its cross- cutting mandate related to disaster 
risk management and climate change adaptation, MARD  is the appropriate Ministry to lead this project. MARD 
has also undergone the capacity assessment required under UNDP’s N ational Implementation Modality (NIM) for 
the on- going GCF -funded project  on coastal resilience.  
The assessment considers managerial, technical, 
administrative and financial management capacit ies. In each category MARD met UNDP requirements. UNDP 
and MARD also have a history of successful collaboration, including the first on- going GCF on ‘Enhancing C oastal 
Resilience project ’ as well as  ‘UN-REDD  – phase II’ . Also , a very r elevant and project  recently closed in 2017 on  
“Promoting Climate Resilient Infrastructure in Northern Mountain Provinces of Vietnam” (in coll aboration with ADB 
for the first phase) showed positive results for continued cooperation in the future.  
275. MARD is the executing agency at central level and will delegate responsibility to CPO  to coordinate the project . 
CPO has also undergone the micro -assessment of financial management and procurement capacity as part of


---
*Page 76*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
the requirements under the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) Framework and GCF requ irements, 
as well as as financial management, procurement and overall risk assessment under WEIDAP project.   
276. The five DARDs as ‘Responsible Parties’ for the proposed project also underwent capacity assessment s the 
micro -assessment of financial management and procurement capacity as part of the requirements under the 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) Framework and GCF requirements, as well as as financial 
management, procurement and overall risk assessment under WEIDAP project . It shou ld be noted that the 
capacity assessment indicated regular high delivery performance.  
277. DARDs have worked and consulted with PPCs and relevant departments at local level during  this project 
formulation. All DARDs are familiar with development  projects funded by NGOs and other international agencies 
(World Bank, ADB, GIZ, Jica etc) since the 19 80s as they are located among the poor and disadvantaged areas. 
Among them, only DARD of Ninh Thuan province has experience with UN agencies (UNICEF, FAO)  while the 
remaining DARDs  have not. However , all DARDs commit to following UNDP pr ocedures and guidelines. DARDs 
have set up their offices and project management staff  for the WEIDAP project and have commit ted to allocate 
resources for the GCF project , as needed,  to maximise impacts from the two interrelated projects . This proposed 
project will build strong capacities to strengthen DARDs and relevant stakeholders in addressing climate change-
induced water insec urity of vulnerable smallholder farmers in the five provinces of the South Central Coastal and 
Central Highland region.  
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
278. The project responds to an initial written request from Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) to 
UNDP to work with ADB to develop stronger coordinated support to build the resilience of farmers in areas covered 
by the WEIDAP project. MPI as the NDA provided full support from the start of project preparation phase. UNDP 
worked closely with CPO (WEIDAP PMU) and ADB to analyze field conditions, consult locally and prepare the 
Concept Note. The Concept Note was shared with ADB and CPO to ensure c omplementarity of the two projects. 
MPI as NDA for GCF proposal, was also routinely briefed on the progress of the proposal development. Multi -
stakeholder consultations have been on-going in the design of the project and have included consultations with 
senior government, key multi -lateral and UN partners, particularly the Asian Development Bank, civil society 
organizations and vulnerable groups of poor/near poor, ethnic and women- headed households  (please see Annex 
XIIId-1 documenting stakeholder consultations) . Key consultation meetings include:  
• Scoping mis sion to Central Highland region: August 2017 and to South Central Coastal region: September 
2017  
• Consultation meeting with MARD departments and ADB on 19 October 2017  
• 14 consultations with NGOs and international donors, two with private sector entities, 15 with DARDs, districts 
and communes, and 10 with farmer groups in Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan, and Khanh Hoa, 
to collect information on vulnerability to climate change; priorities and needs; current projects and programs 
on climate change adaptation; poverty reduction; ethnic minorities’ support; s ustainable agriculture 
development; and gaps and recommendations.  
• Field consultation mission to Dak Lak, Dak Nong and Ninh Thuan for  feedback on the Concept Note and to 
collect further information on gender equality, ethnic minority engagement, irrigation technologies and access 
to information (16- 20 January 2018)  
• Field consultation mission on Economic and Social & Environmental Safeguards with participation of BRH 
expert s to collect further information on ethnic issues and engage ment, traditional political/leadership 
structures, land ownership, etc . The mission took place in Ninh Thuan from 3- 4 April 2018 as part of BRH 
mission to Viet Nam to meet/consult with different s takeholders (MPI, MARD, ADB, CERDA –  GCF observer 
organisation)  
• Final consultation mission to the five target provinces to consult with local authorities and households on 
proposed CRA packages and pond O&M plan (3- 10 May 2018).


---
*Page 77*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
• Final technical meeting wit h CPO and five  DARD representatives to update/consult final project design , clarify 
co-financing requirements and next steps  
• Valid ation workshop in September  2018 with participation of all stak eholders (relevant ministries, five DARDs, 
CSOs, research institutes , development partners, ADB, UN agencies)  
279. GoV, with support from UNDP , is also actively consulting with NGO networks, including the Climate Change 
Working Group , and has initiated dialogue with key mass organizations in Vie tnam, including the Vietnam 
Women’s Union and other stakeholders to ensure effective engagement in design and participation in 
implementation. The International Cooperation Department of MARD organized a meeting of relevant MARD 
departments to discuss the Concept Note, and MARD expressed its full support for the project. A consultation 
workshop was also conducted in February 2018 to collect multi -stakeholder feedback to the concept note and 
ways forward. UNDP also has reached out to IFAD and FAO explore pos sible collaboration and synergies across 
UN agencies. A final validation workshop was  co-chaired by MARD and UNDP in September 2018 with 
participation of all relevant stakeholders (ministries, DARDs, ADB, NGOs, UN agencies and representatives of  
five provinces). Most of the key partners and donors have expressed interest in cooperating with UNDP to develop 
this project proposal and to mainstream and upscale their initiatives to fill in the current gaps.  
280. The proposed GCF project  will build on existing initiatives which already engage multiple partner including NGOs 
and INGOs, such as Viet Nam Women’s Union, CARE, SNV, Oxfam. To ensure the views of women and ethnic 
people were captured, specific efforts were made to consult with w omen and different ethnic groups, and to collect 
information regarding the impacts of climate change on them, in the design of this project proposal. The Viet Nam 
Women’s Union was specifically consulted at both the national and local level, and field miss ions took care to 
consult with both women and men regarding lessons learned to date. Ethnic Affairs Committee at provincial level 
was also consulted to understand the key challenges to di fferent groups that need to be addressed in this 
proposal. The projec t also benefits from important lessons learned in previous pilot projects that have specifically 
aimed to increase the participation of women, the poor/near poor, ethnic people, as well as facili tate non- poor to 
support peer -to-peer learning. Feedback and lessons learned from previous project reviews and policy reviews 
have been applied in the design of activities. The application of community -based approaches during 
implementation will also ensure that regular communication is maintained throughout impleme ntation with 
commune level representatives, at least 30% of which will be women.    
281. The project will also draw on the skills and expertise of the academic community. Technical bodies and academic 
institutions including IMHEN (official technical focal point for climate projections) and Viet Nam Institute of Water 
Resources Planning have been involved at the beginning of the project design. Private sector actor, particularly 
Agrimedia as climate information company as well as a number of local traders have been consulted with regards  
to the CRA input availability and market linkages.   
Stakeholder engagement plan  
282. A stakeholder engagement plan has been developed for the project to demonstrate how stakeholder engagement 
will continue to be an inclusive and continuous process throughout the life of a project and what level of corporate 
responsibility and transparency will occur as part of the ongoing process during construction and operation (please 
see Annex X IIId-2 – Stakeholder Engagement for details per Activity ). The plan will outline how it will encourage 
local stakeholders including women and ethnic households to participate in the project, and to empower them to act concretely  to address issues that affect their lives.    
283. The projec t board further provides a f ormal structure for MPI, MARD and provincial focal points and beneficiaries 
to guide implementation towards a collaborative achievement of the project objective.  
 
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency


---
*Page 78*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
Adequacy of the financial structure  
284. The government of Vietnam is unable to meet the additional costs of adaptation to evolving climate change, as 
according to Vietnam’s NDC, the national budget can only meet one- third of the financing required to implement 
adaptation measures in the 2021 –2030 period. Between 2017 and 20 20, the government estimates that financing 
climate change adaptation activities will cost approximately US$4.7 billion annually. External funding support to 
meet the incremental costs of managing climate change risks and impacts is therefore critical, par ticularly in high 
priority sectors such as agriculture, where the majority of poor people are employed.66 While extensive mainline 
irrigation infrastructure will be financed by the Government of Vietnam across the five provinces with a US$100 million loan f rom the ADB, the GoV is unable to meet the incremental costs of connecting poor/ near-poor, ethnic 
minority and women farmers to this infrastructure.   
285. GCF grant resources are required to overcome a set of financial, technical, institutional and market barriers that , 
acting in synergy , prevent climate- vulnerable farmers from effectively strengthening and maintaining the resilience 
of their agro- ecosystems to increasing climate risk.  These include the inability of smallholder farmers to access 
sufficient irrigation water as a crucial adaptation measure to mitigate climate -driven rainfall variability; increasing 
risks face d by farmers to the productivity and yield stability of rain fed agro- ecosystems; the incapacity of farmers 
to access and use loc alized, actionable agro- climate advisories to inform climate- resilient water resource 
management and agricultural planning; and the inability of farmers to sustain continued investment in the climate-
resilience of their production assets due to lack of fin ancial capital.  
286. Revenues generated by farmers empowered as a result of this project will improve agricultural incomes, as well as finance the purchase of vital inputs, material and equipment to sustain climate- resilient agricultural production 
and operatio ns and maintenance of their irrigation systems. Given the nature of these interventions and their 
results, reflows back to the government or the GCF would be extremely challenging; therefore, maximum 
concessionality in grant financing is requested.  
287. The project targets poor/near -poor farmers, particularly women and ethnic minority farmers who possess limited 
ability to pay for connections to the WEIDAP infrastructure or for construction or rehabilitation of farm ponds; 
nevertheless, through their participati on in the training and other activities of this project, they will build their 
organizational and management capacities to cover ongoing operation and maintenance costs and reinvest in 
inputs, equipment and materials required for climate- resilient agricult ural production. There is very little likelihood 
of private sector investment in poor/near -poor farmers’ irrigation infrastructure without the risk reductions to be 
achieved with this project. The additional investment required to build the resilience to c limate change of 
vulnerable farmers  and their agro- ecosystems in the target areas is beyond the scope of the government with its 
debt burden and increasing adaptation requirements.  
Cost -effectiveness  
288. The anticipated stability and increase in production from farmers’ small irrigated plots during droughts and dry 
spells has been analyzed and documented in the Feasibility Study, as have been the corresponding effects of 
crop diversification. The resulting  production of a surplus will allow smallholders to generate the revenue needed 
to purchase the goods and services essential to enhanc ing and maintain ing the climate resiliency and productivity 
of their agroecosystems beyond the project’s lifetime. It is expected that increased production of climate- resilient 
crops will provide greater opportunities for hired farm labor. This project will be implemented in five provinces 
complementing and building on WEIDAP investments in irrigation systems. This integratio n with the WEIDAP 
 
66 Between 2012 -2016, Vietnam’s debt burden increased significantly as a percentage of GDP. In an effort to support long -term 
macro -economic stability, the Government has now imposed far stricter loan guidelines and limits. Loans will now only be 
approved fo r large infrastructure projects, many of which have been in the pipeline for years. New projects, or those that focus 
on softer investments, must be funded through grants or local tax revenues. While Government is continuing to invest in basel ine 
infrastru cture required to bring water for irrigation to the affected areas, fiscal constraints impede investments in additional costs  
of ensuring water security in light of the changing climate. For poor and near -poor smallholders in the two regions, investment 
in connectivity, storage and efficient irrigation equipment is limited given their weak financial capacities further undermined by 
climate change.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
project will ensure efficiency and effectiveness of implementation given common implementation arrangements, 
which will result in more pronounced and sustainable impacts. The integrated approach proposed by this project 
will ensure that project outputs are mutually reinforcing with improved water access and agro- climate and market 
information supporting climate- resilient agricultural production; the production surplus , if marketed fairly, will 
provide the financial resources to maintain and enhance climate- resiliency of agroecosystems beyond project 
duration. This project will improve farmers’ soil, water and crop management skills through participation in Farmer 
Field Schools, training of trainers, and wider dissemination of agro- climate a dvisories, which will improve the 
efficiency of irrigation and water productivity in the face of ongoing climate variability.  
289. Design of project investments was based on lessons learned from multiple sources and experiences in Vietnam 
and elsewhere. The sol utions identified during the Feasibility  Study and process of analysis and design render a 
high degree of confidence that their predicted impacts will be achieved cost -effectively. The project has been 
designed with an analysis of best practices detailed in Chapter 5 of the Feasibility Study, which are also described 
in section E.6.4, below.   
290. The selection of project activities was done after detailed consultations and assessments with a multitude of  
stakeh olders  regarding agro -ecological conditions and constraints; climate change trends, patter ns and expected 
impacts; poverty and vulnerability of rural communities; agricultural potential, including existing and promising 
climate -resilient crops; market linkages; and potential for public -private partnerships to enable access to inputs, 
finance, t echnical assistance, markets, research and other critical factors in value chain function. Adapting to 
climate change by adopting climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems transforms not only 
individual smallholder households but also t he broader farming community and, through this project, strengthens 
the social capital of the target provinces and thus their overall ability to face increasing climate hazards 
sustainably. Region- wide resilience is particularly strengthened with the project’s attention to women and ethnic 
minority farmers and increased and more effective partnerships for market access and support to value chain integration, as well as increased economic benefits to sustain them.   
291. The nineteen lessons listed in section 5.3 of the Feasibility Study are a mix of design considerations, best 
pedagogical practices and training recommendations. These lessons have formed the basis for the selection of FFS as the vehicle for smallholder training and capacity building. The F FS are designed as the most appropriate, 
and cost -effective way of building on farmers’ experiential knowledge to ensure uptake and ownership, as well as 
farmer -to-farmer exchange to strengthen knowledge sharing and social cohesion and resilience. The primar y 
constituency for this project is the population of marginalized poor and near poor smallholders, with particular attention to women and ethnic minority farmers. The project will train FFS facilitators (men and women) in the 
participatory, experiential approach, who are sensitive to gender and ethnic minority concerns, and possess the 
leadership, language, maturity and experience with farming under local conditions.  The FFS will be organized 
around cropping cycles and in convenient locations and at times 
that are not expensive or disruptive to 
smallholders’ labor or cash economies. FFS were first initiated over 25 years ago in Southeast Asia, and over the years there has been an ongoing accumulation of knowledge and best practice in their design, implement ation, 
monitoring and evaluation, which will help guide execution of this project component.  
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments (mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
E.6.3. Financial viability


---
*Page 80*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
292. In all, there are two outputs and six activities that constitute this proposed project. As can be seen from Table 1 
in Annex III a, both Output 1 and Output 2 qualify as a project investment  that derive direct and quantifiable benefits 
to the project beneficiaries. Hence Financi al Analysis based on Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) 
computation is carried out for the entire project. It can be seen from the analysis above that with the participation 
of GCF in the form of Grants, the project achieves financial viability with an acceptable FIRR. In this case, the 
project inv estment results in a NPV of $ 21,991,900 and the FIRR of 8.82% is higher than the Weighted Averag e 
Cost of Capital (WACC) of 0.51%. It can also be seen from the sensitivity analysis produced in Annex III a that an 
unexpected increase in the budget or a decrease in the expected savings does not significantly impact the FIRR 
to an extent that it makes the project unviable. So, the GCF grant contribution will be supported by sufficient 
project return to safeguard the investments from unexpected costing and benefit estimation errors.  To summarize, 
the financial analysis clearly demonstrates that the GCF funding in the form of grant is much needed to achieve 
the financial viability of activities.  
E.6.4. Applicatio n of best practices  
293. Analysis of p ast and on- going programs and projects, as described in chapter 3 of the Feasibility Study , as well 
as initiatives from other regions  or outside Viet Nam , produced a number of good practices and learning that has 
helped the project to design adequate and well -informed responses to the key gaps and barriers as described in 
section C.2., above. This section  provides a brief  overview of those good practices and lessons learned with more 
detail found in the Feasibility Study on the issues of water security in the context of climate change, strengthening 
agricultural resilience, and agro- climate information services. It also analyzes good practice and learning 
regarding engagement with small -scale farmers, mechanisms to support them and how to address  gender within 
climate change programming.  
Strengthening agricultural resilience  
294. Various climate- resilient  good agricultural practices  or cropping systems  have been promoted and documented 
by MARD, research organizations, NGOs and private sector. These include, among others: 67 Rice: Alternate 
Wetting and Drying, System of Rice Intensification, 1 -must -5-reductions (1P5G) ; Efficient water management: 
water and input saving, moisture- preserving practices, mulching; Improved crop varieties, i.e. drought, flood, salt 
and disease tolerant ; Inter-cropping models or rotational cropping; Agro -forestry  and Sloping Agricultural Land 
Technology ; Other crops:  organic vegetables  that meet standards of safety and hygiene and green vegetables, 
integrated food- energy systems ; Integrated farming models: rice- fish, rice -shrimp, rice- duck, vermiculture, 
Garden- Pond- Shed ; Livestock: feed and fodder management, manure management, bio- bedding, biogas ; and 
Closed loop agriculture: agricultural waste management, bio- char, bio- fertilizer. 68 
295. Recognizing that each context and specific practice are different, ICRAF World Agroforestry Centre developed 
eight st eps towards implementing and sc aling climate smart agriculture that rely on local participation to 
adequately contextualize climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems. 69 A similar process has 
been promoted by MARD with technical support f rom a number of NGOs .70 In addition, CARE in support of 
MoNRE has developed a user -friendly tool to assess and rank livelihood options for various categories of 
 
67 See for example: MARD Action Plan in Response to Climate Change in Agriculture and Rural Development; MARD E xtension 
Services Department (December 2015). Tài liệu hướng dẫn lựa chọn và triển khai sinh kế thích ứng với biến đổi khí hậu (only 
available in Vietnamese); IPSARD, FAO, GACSA (July 2016) (Ibid.); UTZ (January 2016). Climate  Change and Vietnamese Coffee 
Production. Manual on Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in the Coffee Sector for Local Trainers and Coffee Farmers; 
CCWG (November 2015). Community- based Climate Change Initiatives in Vietnam.  
68 Good practices on climate resilient agriculture specif ic for the different agro -climatic zones in the target provinces needs 
further detailed assessment, preferably with farmers’ involvement.  
69 Elisabeth Simelton, Tam Thi Le, Bac Viet Dam, Tuan Minh Duong, Hoa Dinh Le (in preparation). 8 features towards scal ing 
Climate -Smart Agriculture. Manual for scaling out climate -smart agriculture on the ground, with experiences from My Loi climate -
smart village, Vietnam.  
70 MARD Extension Services Department (December 2015) (Ibid.).


---
*Page 81*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
resilience: climate change adaptation, climate change mitigation, economic feasibility, institut ional feasibility, 
social and cultural feasibility, environmental sustainability and replication potential.71  
296. Lessons from successful and sustainable agricultural models in ethnic minority areas show that these models 
work for the poor and marginalized when they are: easy to do, use less labor and investment, are suitable to local 
soil conditions and irrigation, produce products that are easy to sell, receive continuous support over the years, 
receive close monitoring, and promote farmer -to-farmer cooperation in the community. In contrast, models that 
are difficult to sustain or replicate normally require intensive investment that is unaffordable to ethnic minority households, are not suitable to local soil and irrigation conditions, do not l ink to markets and receive one- time 
support without close monitoring and evaluation.
72 
297. In response to the severe drought of 2015- 2016, the CGIAR research consortium recommended the replication 
of a series of  good practice s to improve the resilience of crop systems in the Central Highlands and the South-
Central Coast.73 These are detailed in Chapter 5 Good Practice and Lessons Learned of the Feasibility Study.  
These include the use of appropriate varieties, practices, technologies and land use systems.  
Water security in the context of climate variability and change  
298. In addition to household rainwater harvesting tanks, water storage tanks and wells, a number of bioengineered 
options for improved water storage have been successfully tested  across Viet Nam including c ompacted clay -
bottom ponds, integrating shade trees , 74 temporary ponds in flood plains or riverbeds ,75 small-scale mobile ponds 
made of bamboo and plastic sheeting ,76 and v etiver grass application to combat bank erosion.77 Small -size, 
mostly concrete, weirs, trenches and dams have also been installed on small to medium size streams and rivers 
to temporarily increase water availability, particularly at the end of the wet season or beginning of the dry season. 
These are combined with trees or plants to fence the contour trenched area and reduce soil evaporation.78 
299. Water -efficiency technologies, for example drip irrigation, micro- sprinklers, overhead sprinklers or precision 
irrigation,  have also been promoted by local authorities and the  private sector, but with a very high investment 
cost and therefore low uptake, particularly among the poor. An exception to this is an initiative by the NGO 
International Development Enterprises, that promoted a low -cost technology option affordable for t he poor and 
near-poor, and that was co- designed between farmers, local suppliers and technical facilitators (see Chapter 5 of 
the Feasibility Study ). To ensure uptake and benefit among the poorest, it is crucial to engage them throughout 
the entire process  of market and needs assessment, product design, market development and replication, as 
potential buyers as well as sellers.79   
Agro -climate information services  
300. CGIAR has formulated eight key lessons learned in scaling up climate services for farmers, based on 18 case 
studies in Asia and South Africa: 80 
 Rural climate services are enabled and sustained by institutional arrangements, and investment in capacity 
at multiple levels, that support sustained interaction between climate and agricultural  organizations and 
farmers.  
 Climate services must be delivered at a local scale to be relevant to farm decision- making.  
 A seamless suite of forecast, advisory and early warning products, with a range of lead times, enables farmers 
to manage evolving risks through the season.  
 
71 CARE International in Vietnam (January 2016). Climate Resilient Livelihood Assessment Matrix.  
72 Oxfam (December 2014) (Ibid.)  
73 CGIAR Research Centers in Southeast Asia (April 2016) (Ibid.)  
74 MARD Institute of Water Resources Planning (June 2017). Promoting the Application of Green Water Management in Rain- fed 
Agriculture in Vietnam. Progress Report.  
75 Farmer consultations conducted in Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan and Khanh Hoa (11- 19 September 2017).  
76 Expert consultation with ICRAF, 5th September 2017.  
77 Paul Truong, Tran Tan Van and Elise Pinners. Vetiver System Applications. Technical Reference Manual.  
78 Partners Voor Water (December 2009). Re- hydrating the earth by sustainable, small -scale sub -surface water retention techniques, 
Vietnam. Final Report, Executive Summary.  
79 Expert consultation with iDE, 6th September 2017.  
80 Tall A, Hansen J, Jay A, Campbell B, Kinyangi J, Aggarwal PK and Zougmoré R. (2014). Scaling up climate services for farmers:  
Mission Possible. Learning from good practice in Africa and South Asia. CCAFS Report No. 13. CGIAR Research Program on Climat e 
Change, Agriculture and Food Security.


---
*Page 82*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
 Giving farmers an effective voice in the design, production and evaluation of climate services increases 
uptake, legitimacy, and sustainability.  
 Integration of meteorological information with local indigenous knowledge may foster trust , local relevance 
and use.  
 Face- to-face dialogue between farmers and service providers is an effective way to communicate historic and 
predicted seasonal climate information.  
 Information and Communication Technologies, in combination with other communication channels, offer 
expanding opportunities to reach farmers with relevant information, at scale.  
 Proactive targeting of women and other socially marginalized groups can help ensure inclusiveness in the 
design and delivery of climate information services for rural communities.  
301. In Viet Nam, aside from television, short term weather forecasts are also available for free via smartphone 
applications or the internet, often with animated maps. With smartphone usage increasing, including among youth from poor communities (see under section 5.4 of the F easibi lity Study ), promotion of these free forecasts and 
weather apps as integral part of pro- poor agro- climate information services are a must. Experience from North-
Central Viet Nam learns that with proper mentoring support these can be a valuable addition for  farmers next to 
investing in improving the GoV’s forecasting system.
81 
302. In addition, farmers and local authorities  have also been successfully engaged in managing village- level low -cost 
automatic weather stations. The village meteorological stations record temperature, rainfall, humidity, air pressure, 
wind speed and direction at the same intervals as official observations. They help farmers see the difference 
between the weather forecast, observations from the nearest official weather station and the actual  temperature 
in the village.82 
Engagement with small holder  farmers  
303. There have been different ways in Viet Nam of engaging farmers in project activities on agriculture, rural 
development and climate resilience, with the most successful approach being a group- based learning process 
called Farmer Field Schools (FFS). FFS are implemented differently in each context, but overall they consist of 
the following process: a combination of training- of-trainers (usually of the agricultural extension department, by 
external technical experts from MARD, research organizations or NGOs), followed by a training- of-farmers 
targeting ‘farmer champions’, ‘lead farmers’ or leaders of farmer groups, farmer -led on- site demonstration, testing 
and learning based on crop cycles, and on- going mentoring support to continue the farmer peer -to-peer lear ning 
and sharing. Although FFS have clearly demonstrated their effectiveness and influenced GoV extension services 
and mass organizations, these latter services still operate based on a traditional top- down farmer education model 
of lectures, technical training materials, demonstration farms at better -off farms or on public land, and limited to 
no follow -up at the farmer level.83 
Mechanisms for financial support to farmers  
304. A variety of options have been used in Viet Nam to deliver financial support to farmer s to strengthen agricultural 
production and climate resilience: these are often combined with technical information and training and have 
specif ic conditions per their purpose, ranging from in -kind support to preferential pricing schemes.84,85,86,87  These 
 
81 Roy A, Simelton E, Quinn C. (2017). Which forecast represents the local weather best? Preliminary case study findings from My  
Loi village, northcentral Vietnam. CCAFS Info Note. CGIAR Research Program on Climate Chang e, Agriculture and Food Security.  
82 blog.worldagroforestry.org/index.php/2016/03/09/better -weather -information -helps -save -animals -during -cold -spells/  
83 Elske van de Fliert, Ngo Tien Dung, Ole Henrikse, Jens Peter Tang Dalsgaard (June 2007). From Collectiv es to Collective Decision -
making and Action: Farmer Field Schools in Vietnam; Oxfam (December 2014) (Ibid.); and expert consultation with ICRAF, 5th 
September 2017.  
84 See section 3.3.3 for FAO’s experience with a voucher -for-drought recovery program in in Gia Lai, Dak Lak and Dak Nong. 
Expert consultation with FAO, 21st August 2017.  
85 Expert consultation with Oxfam, 25th August 2017.  
86 IFAD has extensive experience in promoting this kind of grants, including in Ninh Thuan and Dak Nong. Expert consultation 
with IFAD, 28th August 2017.  
87 Applied by the NGO GreenID in their Local Energy Planning project in Thai Binh. See: CCWG (November 2015) (Ibid.), p.78.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 102 
 
 
 E 
are described in Chapter 5, section 5.5 Mechanisms for initial financial support to farmers in adopting new 
practices, of the Feasibility Study.  
305. All the above options have advantages and disadvantages, depending on the purpose of the support and enab ling 
conditions. Mechanisms where farmers have a range of options to choose from or where they can propose 
themselves what to do with the financial support, are most empowering. Mechanisms for farmer support through 
engagement with the private sector are m ore difficult or time consuming to set -up but can potentially reach much 
more farmers.  
306. Voucher systems have been tested in Vietnam under the FAO -UN Women- Action Aid project referred to in Section 
F.2 and in section 3.2.2 of the Feasibility Study.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)


---
*Page 84*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Financial analysis  
307. The financial analysis has been carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Financial Analysis of Projects 
of the United Nations Development Programme . These guidelines clearly mandate that a financial analysis of 
project cash flows be computed and FIRR calculated only for those proposed project activities or outputs that can reliably result in direct and quantifiable financial revenue generation (incremental earnings from baseline) or a direct and quantifiable financial savings potential to the project owners or to the project beneficiaries. These guidelines stand to ensure that GCF’s minimum concession policy is always protected in the proposal.  
308. In all, there are two  outputs and six  activities that constit ute the proposed project. As can be seen from Table 1 of 
the Financial Analysis (see Annex IIIa ) both Output 1 and Output 2 qualif y as project investment s that derive direct 
and quantifiable benefits to the project beneficiaries. Hence, Financial Analysis based on Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) computation is carried out for the entire project. It can be seen from the analysis above that with the participation of GCF in the form of Grants, the project achieves financial viability with an acceptable FIRR. In 
this case, the project investment results in an NPV of $ 21, 991,900  and the FIRR of 8.82% is higher than the 
Weighted Average Cost of Capital ( WACC) of 0. 51%. It can also be seen from the above sensitivity analysis that 
an unexpected increase in the budget or a decrease in the expected savings does not significantly impact the FIRR to an extent that it makes the project unviable. So, the GCF grant contribution will be supported by sufficient 
project return to safeguard the investments from unexpected costing and benefit estimation errors.  To summarize, 
the financial analysis clearly demonstrates that the GCF funding in the form of grant is much needed to achieve 
the financial viability of activities.  
Economic analysis
88 
309. The economic analysis was carried out for the project as a whole by comparing with-  and without -project scenarios, 
following the guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program (UNDP 
2015). The interventions are considered integrated and benefits should not be isolated given that they all contribute to the resilience of the communities to climate change. “Without” the project scenari o assumes the status quo 
which is an underestimation of the impact of climate change on productivity in the regions. Given that the financial 
cost of the project are largely non- traded goods and services, a standard conversion factor of 0.9 was used.
89 The 
discount rate ( economic opportunity cost of the capital ) of 10% was assumed. Discounted fund flows period varies 
by intervention between 15 and 25 years. It was assumed  that after the useful life of each intervention, benefits 
become zero.  
310. The economic benefits were derived based on avoided damages from drought and the incremental outputs 
generated through the CRA and FFS. The economic life of the on- farm bio- engineered water storage systems for 
collecting rainwater or surface water is assumed to be 25 year s with appropriate O&M cost factored in to ensure 
sustainability while the CRA and FFS are expected to have stream of benefits for 15 years. The ENPV and economic internal rate of return (EIRR) were computed based on those benefits. The project is expected  to 
generate a total ENPV of 34.9 million USD assessed at 10%.  
311. The financial cost of the project investment for this economic analysis is $24.8 million which is $22.4 million in 
economic terms.
90 Costs include construction, detailed design and supervision of the ponds, CRA packages and 
farmer field school with setting up of access to markets and credit. Operation and maintenance (O&M) during the 
implementation period and during the lifespan of the pond is included in the economic analysis.  
 
88 Please note that as a result of the Secretariat review process, we are increasing the project budget by  $500,000 as of 2 
December 2019 to allow for an impact assessment. This has not been factored into the revised economic analysis, but the overa ll 
EIRR and ENPV remain unaffected.   
89 Transfer payments such as taxes, duties and subsidies are typically excluded in calculating economic values. In the case of 
major tradable goods, economic values are based on border parity prices.  
90 Economic values for project costs are derived by adjusting local costs by an SCF of 0.9


---
*Page 85*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
312. The net present value of net economic benefits of overal l project is estimated to be $18.70 million with EIRR of 
32%.  
313. Project beneficiary households’ number of about 55,603 are all poor and near poor households. The average 
income per household is about $1, 577 of which 72% of the income is assumed to be from farm income. The 
benefits of this project are an incremental increase in income for these households of about 14% (10% from CRA 
and FFS and 4% from access to water/irrigation pond). A conservative 10% increase in farm income by $113 
through the CRA for example will potentially help the households adapt to climate change impact and reduce 
climate change shock on income.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
314. Identification and selection of technical solutions to mitigate climate change risks to smallholder agriculture in the 
five target provinces of Central Vietnam began with consultations with a variety of stakeholders (see section E.5.3, 
above, and the St akeholder Consultations Annex  XIIId-1), including farmers, provincial and district authorities, 
MARD, DARDs, NGOs and others.   
315. An Environ mental and Social Safeguards (ESS) assessment (see Section F.3) has been rigorously carried out to 
confirm best design and implementation practices to promote climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping 
systems, climate information systems and agro -climate advisories, and climate- resilient irrigation  development . 
316. Irrigation: the technologies to be applied to bring water from the WEIDAP main infrastructure to farmers’ plots 
has been vetted by engineering consultants from the ADB during preparation of the WEIDAP project.  These assessments were confirmed during preparation of t his project by the expert consultant for irrigation and water 
management who drafted the corresponding sub- assessment of the Feasibility Study. Water storage options 
center exclusively around the construction, maintenance or refurbishment of farm ponds. Technical options for pond construction and renovation are well known and tested, including bioengineering of surrounding landscape and feeder catchments.  High- efficiency irrigation technologies are focused primarily on drip irrigation, micro-
sprinklers, an d other systems, none of which present particular technical difficulties in  maintenance or use after 
the requisite training. Training will provide farmers with the capacities to innovate their irrigation systems in response to changing weather and climate conditions.  
317. Climate -resilient agriculture: as climate continues to evolve, farmers will need to be able to make required 
adaptations on an ongoing basis, based on their knowledge of and training in agro- ecology (including agro-
ecosystem vulnerability) and climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems, together with use of 
improved agro- climate and market information. F armers will receive training in climate vulnerability assessment 
and methodologies for identification or adaptation of potential solutions , as well as in the application of solutions  
already identified during project preparation including agroforestry systems (pepper -coffee; etc.)  and other multi -
cropping systems , use of drought tolerant varieties ; etc. The se solutions , identified during the corresponding sub -
assessment of the Feasibility Study , have been studied , tested, and out -grown in demonstration plots on farmers’ 
fields  in the five provinces but have not been disseminated nor have farmers received traini ng in their application 
at scale. Farmers will be trained in Farmer Field Schools by peer “farmer champions” who will mentor and provide 
technical assistance with project support.  Given the targeting of the project to the most vulnerable farmers 
(poor/near -poor, particularly ethnic minority and women- headed households), farmers will be provided inputs for 
specific solutions identified during FFS training through a voucher system based on the successful FAO and Action 
Aid experience in 2016 that delivered vo uchers and unconditional cash transfers to more than 6,000 farmers in 
Gia Lai, Dak Lak and Dak Nong.  
318. Climate Information: t he need for localized agro- climate information is essential to enable farmers to effectively  
utilize newly acquired agricultural practices and cropping systems in adapting to climate change. L ocalizing agro-
climate information in the target provinces consist s of combining farmers’ traditional knowledge with GoV climate 
information to synthesize lo cal forecasts and agro- climate advisories on an ongoing basis.  This system –  based 
on the PICSA model - has been tested in Zimbabwe, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Malawi and 
Tanzania by the Walker Institute with funding by the CGIAR researc h programme on Climate Change, Agriculture 
and Food Security (CCAFS), International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Rockefeller 
Foundation. It has been determined to be a viable and effective alternative to non-participatory, weather and


---
*Page 86*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
climate advisory systems that provide information that is too general and insufficiently localized to be trusted and 
useful.91   
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
319. A Social and Environment al Screening assessment was undertaken to identify and address any potential social 
and environmental risks that could arise from project activities.  Based on the findings of this assessment, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework was developed for the project (see Annex VI).  
320. The overall social and environmental risk category for this project is moderate.  Specific project risks are listed in Section G below, together with appropriate mitigation measures.  
321. The envisaged project has two inter -related Outputs:  
• Output 1:  Enhanced water security for agricultural production for vulnerable smallholder farmers in the face 
of climate- induced rainfall variability and droughts  
• Output 2: Increased resilience of smallholder farmer livelihoods t hrough climate- resilient agriculture and 
access to climate information, finance, and markets . 
322. Through delivery of the outputs, communities in Central Vietnam will be better equipped to adapt to climate impacts, particularly drought.  Improved adaptation capacity and the ability to better utilise resources will result in 
less demands on the natural environment.  
323. Benefits will include increased food security, improved weather information, improved management of water resources, more efficient irrigation and fa
rming practices, improved agricultural outputs through better crop 
selection and management, improved access to markets.   
324. Environmental impacts associated with the project are considered acceptable due to the nature of the 
interventions, while  social benefits are significant and can provide long- term improvements to the lives of 
communities in the target areas.  The project will also promote inclusion, particularly of women and vulnerable groups.  
325. Key considerations in minimising environmental a nd social impacts during the project are outlined in the ESMF, 
but include social inclusion and consultation, sediment and erosion control, and health and safety for workers and community.  
Environment 
326. The project target areas, particularly rain fed lands, are subject to significant land degradation as a result of erosion 
due to intense rainfall events that are being exacerbated by climate change.  Reducing direct impact of rainfall on 
soils will be managed through cropping systems that maintain soil cover f or extended periods. Cropping systems 
will include agroforestry, multi -cropping, cover crops, and crop residues of farm fields that help to reduce raindrop 
impact and runoff velocities on the soil surface.   Once on the soil surface, the flow of water acros s rain fed lands 
will be slowed through adoption of practices such as contour farming, conservation tillage, rainwater harvesting and storage, grass -lined bunds, gabions, gulley plugs, etc.  
327. Controlled runoff and increased groundcover will reduce  erosion, both wind and water, which will benefit waterways 
through reduced turbidity and sedimentation.  As a consequence of adopting more climate- resilient agricultural 
practices, soil organic matter will increase, resulting in greater water holding capacity, incr eased carbon storage 
and improved soil biodiversity.  
328. Environmental benefits will also accrue from diversification of production and irrigation: diversified farming systems will improve soil cover, strengthen nutrient cycling, enhance rainfall infiltration and improve aquifer recharge. 
Diversified cropping systems also produce ancillary benefits such as increased diversity and abundance of insect populations, including pollinators.  
 
91 http://www.walker.ac.uk/p rojects/participatory -integrated -climate -services- for-agriculture- picsa/


---
*Page 87*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
329. Through the connection to the WEIDAP scheme and/or the construction of surface water harvesting infrastructure, 
such as ponds, the demand on groundwater resources will be reduced and the risk of salinisation also reduced.  
330. The land degradation processes affecting the target areas will be reduced, which will enhance agro- ecological and 
landscape resilience to rainfall variability and drought.   
331. The project is likely to have some short -term, small -scale environmental impacts during implementation, but will 
ultimately have considerable, long- term environmental benefits (See Section E.3.1).   
332. Physical impacts will be primarily associated with construction and installation of equipment, such as pipelines, 
ponds, pumps, tanks, and the farming areas themselves.  Construction impacts will be  temporary in nature.  
Permanant infrastructure will be designed to minimise long- term impacts e. g. pumps will be placed out of river 
beds above flood levels, ponds will be designed to withstand and capture flood flows etc.  The implementation of the ESMF will ensure that these impacts are satisfactorily managed.  
Social  
333. Project interventions will be undertaken in areas of Central Viet nam where communities are particularly vulnerable 
to the impacts of climate change.  These communities are largely rural and often have constrained or marginal 
livelihood opportunities.  The project targets the poor and near -poor; in the target areas, 10% of the population are 
from ethnic minorities, of which more than two thirds are among the poorest of the poor.   
334. Socio -economic inequality in climate- vulnerable communes will be reduced through poor/near -poor farmers 
gaining access to water for irrigation and enhanced water productivity with resultant labour and monetary savings 
and income increases.  With increases in income, poor/near poor farmers will be able to raise their quality of life 
through increased purchase and consumption of nutrition and health products.  
335. Participation in farmer groups will assist in building and maintaining social cohesion through shared ponds, better 
cooperative linkages to market, peer -to-peer learning and knowledge sharing.  By implementing Farmer Field 
Schools with mixed socio -economic groups, poor/near -poor farmers, particularly ethnic minority and women 
farmers, will be able to develop mentoring relationships and partnerships with more successful farmers and 
strengthen cooperatives or other forms of collective effort.  
336. Financial risks to farmers will be reduced by their increased capacities to manage climate risk, invest in enhancing 
and maintaining the climate- resilience of their production assets, and generate sufficient revenues from 
commercialization of climate- resilien t agricultural products.  Access to markets and credit will be enhanced to 
enabling farmers to develop small farm enterprises and then re- invest the ensuing profits in inputs to maintain or 
improve the climate- resilience of their agro- ecosystems.  
337. The project will also improve the capacity of government and communities to plan, design and manage rural 
infrastructure that is climate resilient.  Guiding documents such as manuals, checklists, and standards will be 
prepared/reviewed and updated to support improv ed planning and implementation.  
338. Furthermore, the project makes provision for a complaint’s register along with a two- tiered Grievance Redress 
Mechanism consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: Overview and Guidance (2014) and 
World Bank G roup Safeguards Policies.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism established goals and objectives 
along with eligibility requirements to make a complaint and/or grievance.  It has been designed that all parties will 
act in good faith throughout the process and more importantly, that is will be arbitrary in nature in trying to achieve 
mutually acceptable resolutions for all parties.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism also provides for the covering 
of costs for legitimate complaints or grievances so as individuals and/or groups are not disadvantaged by bring 
complaints to the attention of MARD and UNDP.  Finally, the Grievance Redress Mechanism allows individuals and/or groups to also file a complaint with the Social and Environmental Compliance Unit within the Office of 
Anticorruption and Integrity within the UNDP should they have any concerns as to corruption, unethical behaviour or where they believe their complaint or grievance has not been adequately addressed.  
Gender  
339. 
Viet Nam is still a predominantly rural societ y, where women are concentrated in agriculture and/or are self -
employed, and participate in most production activities. At the same time, compared to men, women have less


---
*Page 88*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
access to, and control over the resources that they depend upon for food and income. considerations.  Over 50% 
of poor and near -poor farmers in the project’s target areas are women.   
340. The project  has been designed with attention paid to gender and social inclusion.  The gender analysis undertaken 
at the project design phase, acts as an entry point for gender mainstreaming throughout implementation, and 
builds on stakeholder consultation, existing analytical documentation and data from projects currently being 
implemented, and national statistics where available. The project design takes into consideration a number of key gender implications, including (among other things), women’s critical role in agriculture and food security; analysis 
of the gendered division of labour; women’s access to and control over environmental resources; and identification 
of gender equality gaps.  
341. Based on the Gender Assessment, the project implementation proposes a numbe r of actions to strengthen gender 
equality from the outset.  These include to:  
- Ensure women are adequately represented on decision making boards and committees, including the PMU.  
This will also provide positive role models for young women.  
- Develop speci fic strategies to include and target female and ethnic minority farmers for interventions to ensure 
gender equal participation.  
- Enhance capacities of both male and female farmers to understand climate change information and use this 
to inform farming prac tices and crop choices  
- Build capacities of both male and female farmers in climate resilient agriculture production, taking into account 
women’s daily routines and promoting both genders participation in agricultural decision making  
- Build capacity of male and females farmers in farming as a business and value addition for irrigation schemes 
as well as rain- fed farming. Develop strategies to build capacities of female farmers in particular in leadership 
and marketing skills e. g. ensure that at least 25%  of FFS facilitators are women and that at least 20% are 
ethnic minorities.  
- Advocacy and awareness should be adjusted to most effectively reflect gender -specific differences. As women 
and girls become more empowered members of their communities, they may more effectively advocate 
community improvements to better serve their needs, which can increase the adaptive capacity of their 
communities.  
- Address the fact that women often have major roles in producing food, and will therefore be key partners in 
the co- development of climate and farm practices information messaging so that they are also reached 
effectively;  
- Inclusion of all stakeholders involved in the project to develop awareness raising/training aimed at drawing 
attention to the implication of access to climate information, improved irrigation and farming practices and 
gender equality.  
342. During project imple mentation qualitative assessments will be conducted on the gender -specific benefits that can 
be directly associated with the project.  This will be incorporated into the annual Project Implementation Report, 
Mid-term Report, and Terminal Evaluation.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
343. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP 
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures available  here. UNDP has comprehensive procurement 
policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each 
phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP.  
(see here: 
https://po pp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=211&Menu=BusinessUnit )


---
*Page 89*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
344. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available here. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the I mplementing Partner and Responsible Parties 
by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partner  to 
these partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers -  HACT ). All projects will be audited following 
the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and policies.  
345. The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures , as set out in the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by 
UNDP and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations.  
346. As the Natio nal Executing Entity  (Implementing Partner ), MARD  is in charge of implementing the project in 
compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures, including the NIM Guidelines. These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, 
environmental and social safeguards, and other 
performance standards. This is ensured through the SBAA which was signed by Government of Viet Nam and 
UNDP in 1978, together with a UNDP project document before implementation Prior to signature of the projec t 
document, the National Implementing Partner . 
347. As delegated by MARD to coordinate the project,  CPO needs  to have undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP as well as GCF requirements . During implementation, UNDP will provide 
oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requi rements in 
the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA)  already signed between UNDP and GCF,  and project confirmation to 
be agreed with the GCF. This may include, but is not limited to monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and participation in Project  Steering Committee meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and 
audits at project level or at implementing partner level on the resources received from UNDP.  
348. The Harmonize d Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of fou r processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. 
Assurance activities include planning, periodic on- site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled 
audits and spec ial audits. During micro- assessment, there can be weaknesses identified for which actions are 
required to address the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will mean that the level of assurance activities will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have to be reviewed if necessary. All details are available 
here.  
349. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing 
the auditors. UNDP scheduled audits are performed during th e programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit 
plans, on the basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to 
determine whether the funds transferred to the partner s were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance 
with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit or an internal control audit.  
350. All GCF resources  will be provided to the I mplementing Partner  (with CPO  as designated coordinating department 
at central level ) and Responsible Parties , less any agreed cost recovery amount. Under UNDP’s national 
implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the I mplementing Partner and 
Responsible Parties  for the implementation of agreed and approved project activities, in accordance with UNDP 
standard policies and the NIM Guidelines. The Implementing Partner and Responsible Parties report back 
expenditure via a financial report on quarterly basis to UNDP.  Any additional requirements will be as in accordance 
with the AMA as and when it is agreed.   
351. A draft procurement  plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document signature) 
is provided in Annex XIII a.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAG EMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 102 
 
 
 G 
 
 
 G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
352. Effective project implementation faces technical, operational, financial,  social and environmental risks (please 
see section F.3 for ESS assessment). M anageable r isks exist in relation to design, construction and  operation of 
irrigation  systems. Construction of irrigation ponds and operation of water efficient irrigation techno logies will take 
place in rural areas that may be difficult to access. Effective and efficient operation of new irrigation equipment 
and storage infrastructure requires appropriate levels of technical and operational capaciti es for smallholders who 
may experience communication difficulties in Vietnamese or suffer critical deficits in formal education. Institutional 
limitations  may obstruct  timely termination of infrastructure construction or the procurement  of efficient irrigation 
equipment. At the same time, inadequate coordination among project stakeholders may cause  interruptions  in 
project implementation and inefficiencies throughout the project cycle.    
353. Incomplete preparation by communities to integrat e into the project can hamper  effective participation in project 
undertakings as well as subsequent adoption of the technologies, practices, cropping systems, and information 
promoted by the project. Motivating f armers to join  in training and planning meet ings may be difficult  and 
jeopardize the pace of project implementation. Private sector entrepreneurs may be reluctant at first to participate 
in multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation P latforms, thereby threatening  the development of market linkages for 
climate- resilient value chain development .  
354. Extreme c limate events  – extended droughts, severe  heatwaves or widespread flooding – may harm project 
investments, impacting project implementation and affecting  production of project results . Finally, there are risks 
associated with financial management, access to credit and markets, etc., which could affect smallholder 
communities in the project area. These are detailed in Section F.3, as well as add ressed in the table below.  
355. This project proposes a number of measures to mitigate these risks. The project will invest in local level 
awareness raising and technical and organizational capacity building for farmers, organizations and commune, 
district and provincial government authorities to ensure suitable  design and operation of irrigation infrastructure, 
water -efficient irrigation technologies,  and co-development of agro- climate advisories . Farmers  will receive 
intensive training in Farmer Field Schools to plan and manage irrigation, cultivatio n and commercialization  of 
climate -resilient crops , as well as technical assistance from champion farmers, NGOs and government extension 
services. The project will work closely with farmers to build technical and financial capacities for Operations and Maintenance of irrigation systems, water storage systems and water efficient technologies
, including the 
development of protocols and systems for individual and community irrigation and water management with clear 
definitions  of tasks and responsibilities . The multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation P latforms , comprising 
producers, buyers, creditors, NGOs, technical institutions, and others, aim at leveraging practical coordination of 
production and commercialization of climate -resilient crops motivated by the pr ospect of mutual economic 
benefit s. The communication and strategic thinking afforded by these platforms will improve collaboration, 
partnership development, and potential contractual relations between the different platform constituents.    
356. Any risk of insufficient  commitment to adopting climate- resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems is 
lessened by the use of participatory methodologies in Farmer Field School s. These methodologies ( e.g. 
participatory vulnerability assessment , participatory finalization of climate- resilient agricultural packages ) prepare 
farmers to recognize and understand  climate risks and identify climate- resilient solutions , while building  
ownership and commitment to these solutions.  The potential for damaging climate shocks is also allayed by the 
participatory development of agro- climate advisories based on farmer experience together with data and 
information from the GOV’s hydrometeorological service. This information,  used in conjunction with the 
vulnerability assessments, together provide a strong foundation for sound climate- risk management.  Finally, a 
detailed ESMP plan (See Annex  VI) has been formulated to address any environmental and social risks arising 
from the project .


---
*Page 91*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAG EMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 102 
 
 
 G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
 
Farmers may be reluctant to adopt climate- smart 
agricultural practices and cropping systems due to 
perceived risk associated with application of new techniques, technologies, inputs.  
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
357. Participatory vulnerability assessment and prioritization methodologies used in Farmer Field Schools will 
highlight farmer -identified needs and priorities, as well as traditional knowledge of their agro- ecosystems. 
Champion farmers – the most progressive and respected farmer s in a commune – will be identified for FFS 
training -of-trainers to take place over the course of at least two years.  Champion farmers will teach and mentor 
their peers regarding use of water efficient technologies, new agricultural practices, and climate- resilient 
cropping systems.  The participatory development of agro- climate advisories will ensure that information vital to 
crop production reflects local knowledge, as well as information from the GOV’s  hydro- meteorological service  
and DARDs, and is disseminated through farmer -driven  networks.  Farmers will receive training and support for 
the development of business plans and will have access for two years to the inputs and materials they need for 
clima te-resilient production through vouchers they receive up on satisfactory completion of training.  Farmers will 
also receive training and mentoring on access to markets for surplus production. DARD extensionists will be 
trained to support poor and near -poor farmers in all aspects of climate- resilient production and 
commercialization.  These measures maintain this risk at Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Champion farmers could capture the benefits of 
partnerships with the private sector or otherwise 
neglect mentoring and capacity building of neighboring 
farmers.  
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
358. Champion farmers will be selected by their peers from among the most respected and successful farmers in 
each participating commune at project initiation workshops in each province.  Training and mentoring by 
champi on farmers will be supervised/ monitored by PMU and DARD staff, and commune farmers will be 
encouraged to provide feedback on what they are learning and doing.   M&E visits by project and institutional 
staff will also provide a source of information on the success of the champion farmer model.  With this 
framework, this risk remains at Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Poor and near -poor farmers may perceive credit as too 
risky, thus reducing the likelihood of their possessing Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium


---
*Page 92*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAG EMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 102 
 
 
 G 
sufficient financial resources  to sustain re -investment 
in the climate resilience of their production assets  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
359. Poor/near -poor farmers may be more risk averse than their more well -off counterparts given uncertainty 
regarding production methods, markets, weather and other factors.  This project will teach farmers to identify and 
understand the climate vulnerability of  their agro- ecosystems and to co -develop potential solutions that increase 
both productivity and climate resilience.  Farmers will build their capacities in Farmer Field Schools to apply 
agricultural practices and cropping systems that are both productive and climate- resilient; as part of FFS, 
champion farmers will continue their mentoring relationships with farmers participating in the project while 
receiving institutional and NGO support. Through their participation in FFS and multi -stakeholder platforms,  
farmers will be able to analyze market trends, demand for specific products, obstacles to production and 
marketing of climate- resilient commodities, and other factors, together with buyers, creditors, institutional and 
NGO representatives and other stakeh olders; cooperation between farmers and other actors will reduce 
marketing risk.  The participatory production of agro- climate advisories will deliver a high degree of confidence in 
the information provided, helping to reduce the perception of risk by poor /near -poor farmers.  By ensuring water 
accessibility through irrigation and storage, the project will reduce the risk to farmers  of increasing rainfall 
variability and extreme events. Given this overall strategy of reducing risk, this risk is considered as  Medium.    
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Private sector entrepreneurs perceive risks to 
participating on multi -stakeholder Climate Innovation 
platforms in terms of potential insufficient or negative cost-benefit  and cooperation is low.  
 Financial  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
360. Private sector entrepreneurs are expected to look favorably on participation on multi- stakeholder platforms  
given their  economic interests tied to commodit y production and commercialization processes.  It is expected 
that the private sector will be interested in increased production of climate- resilient agricultural products for the 
potential profits it could bring them.  As no single private sector player controls the entire process of production 
and commercialization, cooperation among entrepreneurs is critical.  At the same time, by reducing the risks to 
production through the capac ity building and investment in irrigation that this project provides, entrepreneurs can 
be relatively certain of sufficient volumes and quality of production, which will strengthen their interest in 
providing inputs, credit, marketing and other services.  By working closely with farmers on multi -stakeholder 
platforms, private sector entrepreneurs can enter into direct partnerships or contractual relationships with 
producers and producers’ organizations.  The project will invite a wide variety of private sector entities to each 
provincial project initiation workshop to confirm their interest in participating on the platforms.  With engagement 
of the private sector at an early stage of project preparation and implementation, this risk is Medium.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
WEIDAP operations are poorly run resulting in 
insufficient water at critical times  of the production 
cycle.  Technical and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low


---
*Page 93*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAG EMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 102 
 
 
 G 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
361. As WEIDAP will provide access to farmers of a fundamental resource vital to one of the country’s most 
significant economic sectors, the Government of Vietnam will prioritize the fully effective operations and 
maintenance of irrigation infrastructure.  The ADB loan to build and operate WEIDAP will finance extensive 
capacity dev elopment of the institutions responsible for WEIDAP operations and maintenance.  Given the 
importance of WEIDAP to the national economy, the risk to poor/near -poor farmers is negligible of poor 
performance by institutions charged with WEIDAP infrastructure operations and maintenance.  As such, this risk 
is considered to be Low.  
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Poor/near -poor farmers may assess the time needed 
to establish fully productive agroforestry systems (3- 4 
years) to be too long and therefore unfavorable 
economically given alternative subsistence land uses 
with annual crops (e.g. maize, rice).  
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
362. In establishing plantation agroforestry  systems, there is ample space between tree seedlings to grow annual 
subsistence crops.  Project staff , champion farmers  and cooperating institutions and organizations will assist 
farmers to plan and manage their production plots through training and input support. As part of input support, 
farmers successfully completing specific training on agricultural production and wat er efficient technologies will 
receive vouchers for inputs to their production system, thereby reducing their costs and financial risk over the 
first two years of their participation.  By assisting poor/near -poor farmers to plan and manage the establishment 
of agroforestry systems with annual crop varieties, as well as providing input support, it is expected that farmers 
will be willing to establish  agroforestry systems  on their plots . This risk is considered to be low.  
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Ethnic minority and women farmers may feel that 
project implementing parties are insufficiently sensitive 
to their specific needs in terms of language, cultural 
factors and gender norms, thus affecting their 
participation.  
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
363. Project implementing parties will receive training and awareness raising regarding ethnic minority and women farmers’ potential sensitivities and cultural requirements and how to involve them fully and respectfully.  Participation by these farm populations  will be closely monitored, and grievance recourse mechanism to receive 
and address complaints will be established.  Given existing awar eness  of potential conflicts and insensitivities, 
as well as pro- active measures to avoid them in this project, this ris k is rated at Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 8


---
*Page 94*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAG EMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 102 
 
 
 G 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Delays in co- financing fund flows under the WEIDAP 
project resulting in slow progress that may  impact  the 
GCF project .  
 Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
364. Given the importance of WEIDAP to the national economy , the Government of Vietnam will prioritize the 
execution of the modernization of irrigation infrastructure to b e fully effective , including operations and 
maintenance.  Further, the legally binding ADB concessional loan agreements have been fully negotiated and 
signed, after extensive vetting and due diligence, with the GoV and the PPCs  responsible for implementation.   
UNDP  will, in compliance with the GCF reporting requirements , continue to monitor and report on co- financing 
realized during project implementation. As such, this risk is considered to be Low . 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
365. Over the long -term, climate change is expected to continue to evolve with increasing climate variability and 
extreme events as likely periodic outcomes.  This project is aimed at adapting farmers’ agro- ecosystems to 
climate change and building their capacities to assess their vulnerability on an on- going basis and define adaptive 
measures. By empowering poor/near -poor farmers with the required knowledge, information and methodologies, 
they will be able to pro- actively address emerging climate risks and hazards.     
366. Markets for agroforestry commodities are reasonably  stable, but given the time required for establishment and 
initiation of production, rapid response to sudden changes in the market for a specific commodity are difficult. 
Market trends are monitored by a number of institutions, including MARD, and strategic guidance will be provided 
to project implementing parties, as well as others, to avoid market risk and take advantage of economic 
opportunities.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.    
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level  
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased 
climate -
resilient 
sustainable 
development  The project will catalyze a paradigm shift in the way smallholder agricultural development is 
envisioned and supported through an integrated approach to agricultural resilience starting with 
planning for climate risk based on identification and analysis of agroecosystem vulnerabilities; 
enhancing water security and guaranteeing access; scaled up adoption and application of climate-
resilient agricultural practices and cropping systems; and creating partnerships among value chain 
stakeholders to ensure access to market and credit.  
Expected 
Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
 
 
 
 Number of 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries  
 Independent 
monitoring and 
evaluation reports; Progress / completion reports submitted by contractors for irrigation connectivity (both WEIDAP and 
last-mile connection); 
voucher distribution 
reports produced by DARDs; reports submitted by media and mobile operators 
who disseminate 
climate advisory 
services.  
District and Provincial 
census and survey reports independent 
of the project.  Direct  
0 males  
0 females  
0 total 
beneficiari
es 
 
 
Indirect  
0 males  
0 females  
0 total beneficiari
es Direct  
42,456 
males  
42,456 
Females  
84,912 total 
beneficiaries  
 
Indirect  
69,076 
males  
69,076 
females  
138,152 total 
beneficiaries  Direct  
111,206 
males  
111,206 
Females  
222,412 total 
beneficiaries  
 
Indirect  
167,626 
males  
167,626 
females  
335,252 total 
beneficiaries  WEIDAP investments 
takes place without 
delay and change in 
scope; the 
demographic 
composition and socioeconomic 
conditions remain 
largely consistent 
throughout the course of the project; the 
demand for freshwater 
and assistance for 
climate re silient 
agricultural practices 
remain more or less the 
same throughout the 
course of the project
 Number of 
beneficiaries relative to total 
population  
 0% of total 
population 
for 5 
provinces  4.0% of total 
population 
for 5 
provinces  10.1% of 
total 
population of 
5 provinces  
 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of 
the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities 
and regions  A1.2 Number 
of males and females 
benefiting from 
the adoption of 
diversified, climate - 
resilient 
livelihood options (including 
fisheries, 
agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  Independent 
monitoring and 
evaluation reports; 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports.  
 
District and Provincial 
census and survey 
reports.  Female: 0  
 Male: 0  
Total: 0  Female: 
10,186  
Male: 10,186  
Total: 20,372  Female: 
25,473  
Male: 25,473  
Total: 50,946  60% of farmer 
households who have 
been exposed to FFS 
take up the new 
practices by the end of 
the project; One farmer in a household taking 
up the new practices 
benefits all other family members; after the voucher system stops, 
other enabling 
conditions, such as 
access to agricultural 
credits, will keep the 
adoption rate


---
*Page 96*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 
 
 adequately high; 
market incentives to 
grow high-value, climate -resilient crops 
will be strong enough to 
motivate farmers to 
plant them; application 
of climate -resilient 
agricultural practices/ cropping systems by 
farmers will result in 
increased yields after 
year two.
 
A2.0 Increased 
resilience of 
health and well -
being, and food and water 
security  A2.3 Number 
of males and 
females with 
year-round 
access to 
reliable and 
safe water 
supply despite 
climate shocks 
and stresses  
 DARD statistics on 
crop production, 
irrigation access and 
water availability92 
Survey administered 
to beneficiary farmers  Female: 0  
 Male: 0  
Total: 0  
 Female: 
42,456  
 
Male: 42,456  
Total: 84,912  
 Female: 
111,206  
Male: 
111,206  
Total: 
222,412  
 Construction of 
modernized and 
supplementary irrigation  
would lead to availability 
of reliable and safe 
water supply  
WEIDAP investments 
takes place without 
delay and change in 
scope;  
Access to modernized and supplementary 
irrigation  by a farming 
household benefits all 
other family members.  
  
 
92 The specific sources/document(s) for data/information collected by DARD will be determined through stakeholder consultations at inception and 
reported in the inception report.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project level  
Expected 
Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term (if 
applicable)   Mid-term (if 
applicable)   
Project  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A6.0 Increased 
generation and 
use of climate 
information in 
decision-
making  6.2 Use of 
climate 
information 
products/servi
ces in 
decision-
making in 
climate -
sensitive sectors  Scorecard 
assessment 
administered on capacity of ACIS technical groups to develop inclusive 
climate advisories 
with the following 
criteria
93: 
1. Formation of the 
group (Yes/No)  
2. Average ACIS member participation in training event s 
organized
94 (>80% 
participation of members is considered satisfactory)  
3. Use of downscaled 
forecasts for climate 
advisories (Yes/No)  
4. Co -development of 
seasonal agro-climate advisories through PSP workshops (number and participation)
95 
5. Dissemination of 
advisories in an 
inclusive and gender 
responsive manner  0 All ACIS 
technical 
working groups meet 
criteria 1  
10 ACIS 
technical working groups meet criteria 2 for all training 
events 
organized  
 All ACIS 
technical 
working groups meet 
criteria 3  
Members of 
ACIS technical working groups score 80% for 
criteria 4  
Members of 
ACIS technical 
working 
groups score 80% for 
criteria 5  
 
 
 Downscaled forecasts 
are available at the 
provincial or district level  
External research 
organizations/NGOs with adequate technical 
capacities available at 
the district level.  
By the mid -term, all ACIS 
groups have been 
formed.  
A7.0 
Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable households, 
communities, Impact assessment 
conducted by the 
project96 TBD98 
 On average, 
at least 6% 
increase On average, 
at least 20% increase The beneficiaries include 
21,228 farming households that are 
 
93 The criteria and methodology will be reviewed at inception, and reported /agreed to the satisfaction of the GCF in the project inception report  or 
in APRs depending on the criteria .  
94 The number of training organized can vary at a given point in time due t o staggered organization of training events; however, by the end of the 
project, all ACIS groups will be subject to the same number of training events.    
95 At the time of the formation of the ACIS, the intended number of PSP workshops and target number of farmer participants will be set. This 
criterion will assess the extent to which the ACIS group has been able to adhere to the proposed number of workshops and mobilize the proposed 
number of farmers in PSP workshop.   
96 The Impact assessment (IA) involves data collection of approx. 3,000 farming households. The surveyed households will include both the project 
target beneficiaries and farmers not targeted in the project, who serve as a controlled comparison group. One of the outcomes  of interest of  the IA 
includes measuring changes in productivity. Refer para 374 for further details.  
98 Baseline to be established during inception through baseline survey (sampling) and reported/agreed to the satisfaction of the GCF in the project 
inception report.


---
*Page 98*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks  business and 
public -sector 
services of Fund 
supported 
tools, 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to 
climate 
change and 
variability
 DARD statistics on 
crop production97 from the 
baseline in 
crop 
productivity 
for both 
WEIDAP and GCF beneficiary farmers trained through the 
FFSs  
  from the 
baseline in 
crop 
productivity 
for both 
WEIDAP and GCF beneficiary farmers trained through the 
FFSs   
 targeted in intensive 
FFSs that will provide 
training on water efficient 
measures and on- farm 
resilient techniques; 
farmers see values of climate resilient techniques;
 applicat ion of 
climate -resilient 
agricultural 
practices/cropping 
systems by farmers will 
result in increased yields 
after year 2  
A8.0 
Strengthened 
awareness of climate threats 
and risk -
reduction 
processes  8.1 Number of 
males and females made aware of 
climate t hreats 
and related 
appropriate 
responses  End of FFS surveys 
administered to 
participants; independent 
monitoring and 
evaluation reports.  
District and Provincial 
census and survey 
reports independent 
of the project.  Female : 
0 
Male: 0 
Total: 0  Female: 
2,547  
Male: 2,547  
Total: 5,094  Female: 
8,490  
Male: 8,490   
Total: 16,980  Completion of the FFS 
translates into 
heightened awareness; the FFS program attracts 
21,228 households as 
originally intended.
 
 
 
97 The specific sources/document(s) for data/information collected by DARD will be determined through stakeholder consultations at inception and 
reported in the inception report.  Project 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1.  Enhanced 
water security 
for agricultural production for vulnerable smallholder farmers in the face of climate-induced rainfall variability and droughts  Number of 
irrigated 
hectares of 
farmland 
served by 
modernized irrigation 
systems    Independent 
monitoring and 
evaluation reports; 
completion reports 
submitted by 
contractors for irrigation connectivity
 0 ha 4,800 ha  19,200 ha  Farmers are able to 
organize and apply in -kind 
contributions of labour to 
climate -proofed irrigation 
activities, including 
connectivity and 
operations and 
maintenance of storage 
systems.  
Farmers have established 
and codified Operations 
and Maintenance Funds 
with capitalization plans.   
60% of farmer households 
who have been exposed 
to FFS take up the new 
water efficiency practices;  Number of 
hectares of farmland climate -
proofed 
through last 
mile connections 
 0 ha 
 572 ha   1,430 ha  
 
Number of 
rain-fed 
hectares exhibiting water 
harvesting and 0 ha 1,975 ha  4,938 ha


---
*Page 99*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 
99 Water efficiency techniques mainly include: micro irrigation including drip irrigation and sprinkler systems for last -mile connection beneficiaries; 
and scheduling, cover crops and mulches for rain- fed farmer beneficiaries.   
100 The number of farmers for each of the options (micro- irrigation techniques and rain- fed smallholder farmers) will be reported in the project 
inception report to understand the percentages to compare absolute change from 0 baseline established during inception.  conservation 
measures  
Application of 
water efficient 
techniques 
and 
practices99 by 
farmers  Survey administered 
to Output 1 
beneficiaries  
  0%100 
 25% of 
smallholder 
farmers 
trained 
through 
FFSs report 
switching to 
Micro -
irrigation 
techniques 
(Drip or 
sprinkler 
systems)  
25% of rain-
fed 
smallholder 
farmers 
trained 
through 
FFSs report 
switching to  
scheduling 
technique, 
cover crops  
and 
mulches .  60% of 
smallholde
r farmers 
trained 
through 
FFSs 
report 
switchi ng 
to Micro -
irrigation 
techniques 
(Drip or 
sprinkler 
systems)  
60% of 
rain-fed 
smallholde
r farmers 
trained 
through 
FFSs 
report 
switching 
to 
scheduling 
technique, 
cover 
crops  and 
mulches.  
2. Increased 
resilience of 
smallholder 
farmer 
livelihoods 
through 
climate-
resilient 
agriculture and 
access to 
climate 
information, finance, and 
markets  
 % smallholder 
farmers 
adjusting their 
planting times 
based on 
climate 
advisories  Provincial level data; 
Independent 
monitoring and 
evaluation reports;  
Survey   
DARD statistics  
 
 0% 
smallhold
er 
farmers 
adjusting 
their 
planting 
times 
based on 
climate 
advisorie
s  25% 
smallholder 
farmers 
adjusting 
their planting 
times based 
on climate 
advisories   60% 
smallholde
r farmers 
adjusting 
their 
planting 
times 
based on 
climate 
advisories  
 Application of climate -
resilient agricultural 
practices/cropping 
systems by farmers wi ll 
result in increased yields 
after year 2; women 
smallholder farmers will be 
motivated to participate in 
FFS; market incentives to 
grow high-value crops will 
be strong enough to 
motivate farmers to plant 
them; construction of 
supplementary irrigation 
comp letes on time and 
scale as per the plan; 
telecom networks maintain 
coverage and quality, % smallholder 
farmers 
switching to 
climate 
resilient crop 
varieties 
and/or 0 
smallhold
er 
farmers 
switching 
to climate 
resilient 25% 
smallholder 
farmers 
switching to 
climate 
resilient crop 60% 
smallholde
r farmers 
switching 
to climate 
resilient 
crop


---
*Page 100*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 
101 Survey would b e designed to include information on i) participation; and ii) additional information on extent of participation of women in CIP 
decision making.     diversifying 
crop portfolio 
based on climate 
advisories  crop 
varieties 
and/or 
diversifyi
ng crop 
portfolio 
based on 
climate 
advisorie
s varieties 
and/or 
diversifying 
crop portfolio 
based on 
climate 
advisories  varieties 
and/or 
diversifying 
crop 
portfolio 
based on 
climate 
advisories  accessible to 
smallholders; smallholders 
will possess the means to 
receive advisories in forms 
they can readily 
understand; 60% of farmer 
households who have 
been exposed to FFS take 
up the new water 
efficiency practices . 
% Women 
participation 
and decision-
making in 
CIPs   CIP meeting 
participation log;  
Survey101 
administered to 
participants in the CIP  0 20%  50% 
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1.  Establish 
large -scale 
irrigation 
infrastructure to 
bring irrigation water to eight 
farming areas 
across the target regions  
 This activity will modernize eight irrigation sub -
projects (areas) in the five provinces to provide water on -demand to farmers cultivating high 
value crops (HVC) and reduce vulnerability to climate change. The activity will be implemented under the WEIDAP project with funding in the 
form of a loan from the Asian Development Bank 
and co -finance from the GoV for construction of 
irrigat ion mainlines.  
Under the WEIDAP project, the GoV will 
rehabilitate and/or construct 185 km piped 
irrigation mainline infrastructure to serve at least 19,200 ha in eight areas of the target 
provinces with financing from an ADB loan. The 
GoV will implement i mprovements to 
management, operations and maintenance of 
this mainline irrigation infrastructure.   
 1.1.1  185 km of new pipe 
systems taking water from 
canals or reservoirs, and 
supplying hydrants located at a 
reasonable distance from a 
farmer’s field  
1.1.2 19,200 ha served through 
modernization of main system 
including canal lining, control 
structure, balancing storage  
and installation of flow control 
and measurement devices with 
remote monitoring  
1.1.3 Provision of new and 
improved weirs replacing 
farmer constructed temporary 
weirs, permanent 
ponds/storage for irrigating 
HVCs, and upgrades of 
upstream storage and supply 
systems.  
 - 185 km of new pipe systems  
- 19,200 ha served through modernization of 
main system   
1.2.   Establish last -
mile connections 
between WEIDAP 
irrigation 
infrastructure and 
the poor and near 
poor farmer lands to help cope with increasing rainfal l 
variability and 
drought  
  The project will provide technical expertise for 
incorporating climate risk mitigation into the 
design and implementation of smallholder 
connections to WEIDAP infrastructure, as well as 
resources to cover the costs for poor/near -poor 
farmers for installing these connecting systems 
(pipes, water shifting valves, small water storage and others). Connectivity will be done through financing contingent on completion of initial 
equipment training, as well as smallholder 
contributions o f labor in co -designing, installing 
and maintaining the connecting systems. This 
support will be provided by means of vouchers given to poor and mear poor farmers only after successful participation in Farmer Field Schools 1.2.1 Design and construct 
4,765 connection and 
distribution systems including 
installation and maintenance 
of irrigation equipment to cope 
with climate variability on 
1,430 hectares  
1.2.2 Train 4,765 poor and near 
poor farmers (one 
connection/distribution system 
per farmer) on climate -risk 
informed utilization of 
irrigation equipment and 
system maintenance  
1.2.3 Establish Water Users 
Groups for O&M of communal 
or shared systems, incl uding - 4,765 last mile connections and distribution 
systems (one connection/distribution system 
per farmer)   
- Training of 4,765 poor and near poor irrigated 
farmers  
- Establishment of approximately 4 7 Water User 
Groups (on average at least one WUG in each 
of the 45 communes targeted for last mile 
connections)


---
*Page 101*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
(FFS) (see Activity 2.1, below) a nd completion of 
courses on climate -resilient farming (including 
water efficiency practices) conducted in the 
commune. The farmers will exchange the 
vouchers to purchase materials and equipment required to connect their plots to the WEIDAP system and transport water for climate -resilient 
agriculture to their farms in the eight target 
areas.
 structures and agreements on 
potential funding mechanisms  
 
1.3 Enhance 
supplementary irrigation for rain 
fed smallholders to cope with rainfall 
variability and 
drought
 This activity will augment water storage 
capacities in rain fed communities in the eight 
project areas, including rehabilitation or 
construction of ho usehold or community ponds, 
bioengineering to improve and maintain quality 
and quantity of water inputs to the ponds, 
organization of Operations and Maintenance committees and establishment of O&M 
protocols and funding mechanisms.
 1.3.1 Construct or upgrad e 
1,159 climate -resilient ponds 
(based on site -specific designs 
construct 675 new ponds and 
upgrade 484 existing ponds)   
1.3.2 Train over 16,000 poor 
and near -poor farmer 
beneficiaries in climate -
resilient water resource 
management to enhance 
supply  
1.3.3  Establish 185 pond-
management groups for O&M, 
including structures and 
agreements on potential 
funding mechanisms   
 - Construction of 675 new ponds  
- Upgrade 484 existing ponds  
- Training of 16,463  poor and near -poor rain- fed 
farmers  
- Establish 185 pond- management groups for 
O&M 
1.4 Increase 
smallholder 
capacities to apply 
on-farm water 
efficient practices and technologies to 
maximize water productivity in coping with rainfall 
variability and 
drought 
 This activity will enhance water availability for 
climate- resilient agriculture whe n smallholders 
adopt practices and technologies that maximize 
the efficiency of irrigation. This activity will 
support poor/near -poor households in target 
communes to apply water efficiency 
technologies and practices. This will include the provision of technical expertise to co- design, 
climate- resilient, low -cost technologies with 
poor farmers and train them in their application, 
as well as in their operation and maintenance.  
The project will train government extension 
workers to provide technical assistance to 
farmers in the design, operations and 
maintenance of water efficient technologies.   
Farmers will attend Farmer Field Schools to 
receive training on soil and biomass management to enhance soil moisture holding capacity, groundwater recharge and water 
productivity.  The project will support farmers to 
install on -farm water -efficiency systems and 
apply best practice in farm management to 
enhance water productivity.
 1.4.1 Train 30 DARD staff and 
champion farmers in 14 
districts (one course in years 2, 
4 and 6) to support farmers’ 
groups in co -design, costing 
and O&M of climate -resilient, 
water efficient technologies  
1.4.2 Train over 21,200 farmers 
through 900 Farmer Field 
Schools on soil and biomass 
management to enhance 
moisture -holding capacity, 
recharge  of groundwater, and 
water productivity to cope with 
evolving climate risks on water 
security (in conjunction with 
Activity 2.1)  
1.4.3 Install on -farm water 
efficiency systems for 8,621 
poor/near -poor smallholders 
linked to performance -based 
vouchers (linked to Activity 2.1)  
1.4.4 Train smallholder farmers 
in five provinces on climate -risk 
informed O&M of water 
efficiency technologies  - Training of 30 DARD extension staff and 
champion farmers in 14 districts   
- Conduct 900 FFSs and train 21,228  poor and 
near -poor small -holder farmers       
- Installation of on- farm water efficiency systems 
for 8,621 poor/near -poor smallholders  
2.1 Investments in 
inputs and 
capacities to scale 
up climate -resilient 
cropping systems and practices (soil, 
crop, land 
management) This activity will focus on providing farmers with 
the skills and capacities, a s well as continual 
access to information, to enable them to make informed choices about options to increase the 
resilience of their farms and income streams. 
Through Farmer Field Schools, farmer 
champions from the different villages in the 
target regions will learn simple methodologies 2.1.1 Sensitize smallholders to 
establish/re -activate 900 
Farmer Field Schools  
2.1.2 Train DARD personnel 
and lead (champion) farmers, 
as well as other interested 
parties (NGOs, Farmers and 
Women’s Unions, etc. ) to build - Conduct 15 provincial level workshops for 30 
DARD staff  
- Conduct 28 district and 120 commune level 
trainings for 30 lead farmers  
- Provide 8,621 targeted poor/near poor 
supported with CRA investments     
- Conduct 900 FFSs and train 21,228 poor and 
near -poor small -holder farmers


---
*Page 102*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
among 
smallholders 
through Farmer 
Field Schools  to analyze their agroecosystem vulnerability 
using traditional knowledge and scientific 
information, evaluate and confirm appropriate 
climate risk mitigation measures, and learn 
methods and practices of managing soil, water and crop genetic resources to ensure ongoing, iterative adaptation to continuing climate 
change. Post FFS, these farmers will upscale this 
approach across the two regions by returning to 
their communities and training neighboring 
farmers with support from government and 
NGOs.  
Under this project, farmers will be trained in 
application of simple methodologies to analyze 
agroecosystem vulnerability to evolving climate 
change parameters, including ecological and 
other factors and conditions. The ability to 
anal yze vulnerability to climate change will 
permit farmers to better identify potential 
adaptation solutions.  As part of this process, the 
project will support the development of climate risk management guidelines and enhance 
existing training materials for climate risk 
assessment evaluation of potential resilience 
enhancing measures. GoV staff will be trained to 
build the capacities of farmer champions from the five provinces to adopt and apply these 
measures and methodologies and to then 
extend this learning to neighboring farmers in 
their communes.  
 a cadre of farmer champions to 
galvanize adoption and 
application of CRA packages 
(15 provincial level workshops 
for 30 DARD staff in years 2,4 
and 6; 28 district and 120 
commune level trainings for 30 
lead farmers in years 2 and 6)  
2.1.3 Train over 21,200 farmers 
and value chain actors –  
particularly private sector input 
providers, buyers, processors, 
transporters - through 900 FFS 
on scaling up of climate 
resilient cropping systems and 
practices. (Each FFS will 
conduct 1 -day trainings twice 
per year)  
2.1.4 investment support to 
8,621 targeted poor/near poor 
smallholders to acquire inputs 
and technologies for 
implementation of the CRA 
packages through 
performance -based vouchers.  
2.1.5 Participatory auditing of 
implementation of voucher 
systems f or climate resilient 
cropping systems and practices 
(One 1 -day meeting for 100 
participants in each of the 60 
communes in Years 2, 4 and 6)  
 - Conduct One 1 -day Participatory audi ting 
meeting for 100 participants in each of the 60 
communes  
2.2 Technical 
assistance for 
enhancing access to 
markets and credit 
for sustained climate -resilient 
agricultural investments by smallholders and 
value chain actors 
 Through leveraged GoV co -financing, this activity 
will build capacities of smallholder farmers and 
lenders to facilitate adaptation investments in 
building and maintaining the resiliency of 
household agricultural production. This activity will support smal lholder farmers with the skills 
and information they need to plan and manage their agricultural production as a small business, including learning to access markets for climate -
resilient farm products in order to generate the revenue required to sustain cl imate resiliency of 
their agroecosystems. At the same time, 
smallholders will learn how to manage financial 
resources, particularly credit, to permit them to 
purchase inputs, cover the costs of operations 
and maintenance of irrigation equipment, 
improve cr op, soil and water management to 
enhance productivity and climate resiliency of 
their agroecosystems, and market crops 
successfully.     
The project will provide expert advice to lenders 
for the development of the necessary 
instruments to ease extension of credit to poor and near -poor farmers for climate -resilient 
production. Lending institution staff will be 2.2.1 Establish and 
operationalize multi -
stakeholder Climate Innovation 
Platforms (CIP) in each 
province and at the level of 
agro -ecological zones (Annual 
stakeholder meetings 
organized once every two years 
in each of the 5 provinces)   
2.2.2 Provide technical 
assistance and training to 
enable market linkages with 
input, information and 
technology providers and 
buyers for climate -resilient 
agricultural production (two 
trainings, two networking 
workshops and three trade 
fairs in each of the 14 districts 
over four years)  
2.2.3 Provide technical 
assistance and train farmers to 
enable access to credit through 
financial intermediaries (One  
workshop in each of the 60 
communes in years 2 and 4)  - Establish and operationalize multi -stakeholder 
Climate Innovation Platforms (CIP) in the 5 
provinces  
- Conduct two trainings, two networking 
workshops and three trade fairs in each of the 
14 districts C onduct one workshop in each of 
the 60 communes


---
*Page 103*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 trained in the analysis of farmer business plans 
and in how to assist in business plan 
development for climate- resilient production.  
At the same time, farmers will receive training in how to prepare business plans and manage credit successfully.  Farmers with more experience with credit management will be 
identified and employed to provide peer -to-peer 
support to poor and near -poor farmers.  Farmers 
who have successfully participated in FFS on 
climate- resilient agriculture, efficient water 
management and business plan development 
will receive vouchers for the purchase of inputs 
and equipment for their small enterprises. CIPs will bring togeth er value chain stakeholders to 
facilitate coordination and cooperation on enabling small holder access to markets and 
credit.
  
2.3 Co -development 
and use of localized 
agro- climate 
advisories by smallholders to 
enhance climate -
resilient 
agricultural production 
 This activity will develop and convey agro -
climate information in the form of agricultural advisories tailored to local conditions and 
educational levels. Data gathering will be 
localized/adapted to local conditions. 
Investments in improved outreach systems will 
enhance farmer access to agricultural and climate information f rom a variety of sources 
that can increase the climate resiliency and 
productivity of their farms, including information 
on climate -resilient agricultural or water 
management practices, input prices, etc.  
The project will support farmers and GoV staff to 
co-develop agro- climate advisories based on 
analysis of traditional knowledge and contemporary scientific information, including 
climate and weather data. These will be 
disseminated through conventional and digital 
channels.
 2.3.1 Train 50 hydromet and 
DARD  staff on generating and 
interpreting down- scaled 
forecasts for use in agricultural 
planning (eight training over 
four years for 50 participants)  
2.3.2 Provide technical 
assistance for the formation 
ACIS technical groups and 
training of 420 participants at 
district level (1 -day workshops 
for 30 participants in each of 
the 14 districts)  
2.3.3 Co -develop, through 
Participatory, Scenario 
Planning (PSP) of seasonal and 
10-day/15 -day agro -climate 
advisories with smallholder 
farmers (20 provincial level 
trainings for 30 staff and 56 
district level trainings for 60 
participants over four years)  
2.3.4 Disseminate advisories to 
139,416 households in the 60 
communes  - 50 hydromet and DARD staff  trained  
- Training provided to  the 14 ACISs (one in each 
of the  14 project districts)  
- Dissemination of climate advisories to 139,416 
households    
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
367. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy. . The primary responsibility for day -to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the 
Project Manager. The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the 
project. The Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties 
during implementation, including the implementation of the M onitoring & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the 
appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project 
staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring an d reporting project 
results.  
368. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as


---
*Page 104*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
outlined in th e UNDP POPP . Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be 
provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including 
the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.  
369. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document is signed by all relevant parties to: a) re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re- assess baselines as 
needed, and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan and schedule Project Board meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will 
be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser  and will be approved by the 
Project Board.  
370. A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of projec t implementation. The Project Manager, the 
UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to the annual PIR, 
equivalent to A nnual  Performance Review  (APR) in GCF terminology . The Project Manager will ensure that the 
indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well in advance of the P IR submission 
deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR. The annual PIR will be 
shared with the Project Board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the input of the NDA 
Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be used to inform 
the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report package. Semi -annual reporting will be undertaken in 
accordance with UNDP guidelines for quarterly reports that are produced  by the project manager.  
371. An independent M id-Term-Review  (MTR),  equivalent to an Interim Review in GCF terminology , process will be 
undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the management response will be incorporated as 
recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the 
UNDP 
Evaluation Resource Center . The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP 
Regional Technical Adviser and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report will be available in 
English. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational 
closure of the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard 
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center .  The final TE report will be cleared by 
the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be available in English. The UNDP Coun try Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation 
in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the 
management response to the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) ( www. erc.undp.org). The MTR and 
TE will be carried out by an independent evaluator. The evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then quality assessed and rated by the UNDP Independent Evaluation Office .  
372. The UNDP Country Office will retain al l M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the UNDP project document.  
373. UNDP will perform monit oring and reporting throughout the reporting period in accordance with the AMA and Funded 
Activity Agreement (FAA). UNDP has country presence and capacity to perform such functions. In the event of any additional post -implementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the 
GCF Secretariat in the final year of the project and will prepare a post -implementation monitoring plan and budget 
for approval by the GCF Board as necessary.  
374. A key tool for MRV for the project is an independent impact assessment which will be commissioned to a third party. 
While the detailed scope of the assessment will be further developed, it is expected that the assessment will involve 
data collection, at least twice in the course of the project at the baseline and end- line, of 3,000 farming households .  
These surveyed households will include both the project target beneficiaries and farmers not targeted in the project, 
who serve as a controlled comparison group.  Adoption rate will also be measured with test of options to improve the


---
*Page 105*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 rate of adoption of some of the interventions. Importantly, the outcome of interest in this assessment includes the 
changes in productivity ; access to water; the extent to which climate information influences farming decisions (i.e. 
the timing of cropping and harvesting; choices of crops; application of agricultural inputs, etc) . Moreover, this 
assessment will make use of satellite data to assess the productivity changes (at least for certain crops)  before and 
after interventions.  In addition to the independent impact assessment, the PMU, Gender Officer and DARD field 
level extensi on officers will produce reports such as  field reports and gender -sensitive impact surveys throughout 
the project to monitor progress of implementation and progress towards the expected outputs and outcomes. To 
monitor and verify the irrigation systems rev italization and adoption of climate- smart agriculture packages, field 
inspection of infrastructure sites will be conducted by DARD and PMU through district offices. MARD databases on 
farm households and cropping intensities will also be reviewed for progress on reach of agricultural practices and 
improved productivities. Household surveys will also be conducted through DARD to monitor the progress and 
capture the impact of the project. Finally, the development and diffusion of advisories, early warnings, an d forecasts 
will be monitored through field surveys conducted by DARD (for communities, end- user farmers and non- farmers, 
extension services, etc.). These project -generated sources of information will be triangulated with information 
generated outside of t he project to triangulate the information. This would potentially include Household Living 
Standard Surveys, which take place every two years by the General Statistic Offices from the Provinces; Annual DARD and DONRE statistics; and Agricultural extension reports.  
375. While the Vietnam Country Office, through its ongoing presence in the country, will continue to engage with the GoV, there is no provision for human  and financial resources to undertake formal reporting post -completion of the project. 
Information, where available, will be communicated to the GCF Secretariat as feasible.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 102 OF 102 
 
 
 I 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter Annex I  
☒ Feasibility Study Annex II  
☒ Financial Analysis Annex III (a)   
☒ Financial Analysis (excel) Annex III (b)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment Annex IV  
☒ Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) Annex V  
☒ Social and Environmental Screening Template (SESP) Annex VI (a)  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) Annex VI (b)  
☒ Environmental and Social Report Disclosure Annex VI (c)   
☒ Appraisal Meeting Report Annex VII  
☒ Evaluation Report of the baseline project Annex VIII  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme Annex IX  
☒ Timetable of project implementation Annex X  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation Annex XI  
 
Additional Information  
☒ Economic Analysis Annex XII (a)  
☒ Economic Analysis (excel) Annex XII (b) 
☒ Procurement Plan Annex XIII (a)  
☒ Operations & Maintenance (O&M) Plan Annex XIII (b) 
☒ Gender Assessment and Action Plan   Annex XIII (c)  
☒ Stakeholder consultation Annex XIII (d -1) 
☒ Stakeholder Engagement Plan Annex XIII (d -2) 
☒ Detailed budget and work plan Annex XIII (e)  
☒ HACT assessment Annex XIII (f) 
☐ Project activities and responsibilities Annex XIII (g)  
☒ Accredited Entity Fee Request Budget Annex XIII (k)  
☐ Responses to GCF comments on Concept Note Annex XIV (a)  
☒ Responses to GCF comments on Funding Proposal Annex XIV (b)  
☒ UNDP Endorsement Letter Annex XV  
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable 
supporting documents.


---
*Page 107*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 108*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture to 
climate change -induced water insecurity in the Central 
Highlands and South -Central Coast regions of Vietnam  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval No. (There are no identified sub -projects.   Within the ESMF, 
there is a screening process to cover elements of 
implementation such as activities, TAs,  and other sub -
components, the term sub -project has been used to 
collectively describe these elements ) 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme  (UNDP)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific location (s) 
of project  or target country 
or location (s) of programme  Vietnam , with a focus on 60 communes with in five 
provinces ( Dak Lak, Dak, Nong, Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan 
and Khanh Hoa) in the Central Highlands and South -
Central Coast regions . 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Friday, February 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Vietnamese  
Explanation on language  Vietnamese is the official language  of Vietnam . 
Link to disclosure  English :  
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject%20Documents/FP -UNDP -070220 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_b_ESMF%20(CLEAN).pdf  
Vietnamese:  
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject%20Documents/FP -UNDP -161219 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_b_ESMF %20 -%20VN.pdf  
Other link(s)  https://www.vn.undp.org/content/vietnam/en/home/op
erations/projects/environment_climatechange/_strengthe
ning -the-resilience -of-smallholder -agriculture -to-clim.html  
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B  
project is contained in the Environmental and Social  
Management Framework (ESMF).  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Friday, February 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Vietnamese  
Explanation on language  Vietnamese is the official language  of Vietnam . 
Link to disclosure  English :  
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject%20Documents/FP -UNDP -070220 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_b_ESMF%20(CLEAN).pdf


---
*Page 109*
---

Vietnamese :  
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject%20Documents/FP -UNDP -161219 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_b_ES MF%20 -%20VN.pdf   
Other link(s)  https://www.vn.undp.org/content/vietnam/en/home/op
erations/projects/environmen t_climatechange/_strengthe
ning -the-resilience -of-smallholder -agriculture -to-clim.html  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B  
project is contained in the ESMF.  
Environmental and Social Management System  (ESM S) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A   
Other link(s)  N/A   
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on accredited 
entity’s website  Friday, February 7, 2020  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Vietnamese  
Explanation on language  Vietnamese is the official language  of Vietnam.  
Link to disclosure  English :  
Ethnic Minority Action Plan and IPP Framework : 
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject%20Documents/FP -UNDP -070220 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_b_ESMF%20(CLEAN).pdf  
 
Social and Environmental Safeguards Procedure ( SESP ): 
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject% 20Documents/FP -UNDP -070220 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_a_%20 -%20SESP%20(CLEAN).pdf  
 
Vietnamese:   
Ethnic Minority Action Plan and IPP Framework : 
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject%20Documents/FP -UNDP -161219 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_b_ESMF%20 -%20VN.pdf  
 SESP : 
https://www.vn.undp.org/content/dam/vietnam/docs/Pr
oject%20Documents/FP -UNDP -070220 -6117 -
Annex%20VI_a_%20 -%20SESP%20 -%20VN.pdf   
Other link(s)  https://www.vn.undp.org/content/vietnam/en/home/op
erations/projects/environmen t_climatechange/_strengthe
ning -the-resilience -of-smallholder -agriculture -to-clim.html  
Remarks  • The ESMF includes i ) An Ethnic Minority Action Plan 
(Appendix Four); and ii) Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (Appendix Five)


---
*Page 110*
---

• The SESP is a UNDP document that is used for 
identifying social and environmental risks and 
mitigation measures. It does not replace or conf lict with 
GCF ESS requirements and policies.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Thursday, February 7, 2019  
Place  The links to the English and Vietnamese version s have been 
shared with the  National Designated Authority , Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development ( MARD ), Provincial and 
District Level Department(s) of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (DARDs ). E-documents  as well as physical 
copies will also be made available  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Tuesday, March 10, 2020  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 111*
---

G
CF/B.25/ 02/Add.02 
Page 111 
Secretariat ’s assessment of FP125 
Proposal name:  Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture to climate 
change -induced water insecurity in the Central Highlands and 
South- Central Coast regions of Vietnam  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Program me (UNDP)  
Country/(ies) : Viet  Nam 
Project/programme size : Medium 
O verall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
The p roject supports the poorest farmers in 
vulnerable regions in  implement ing climate -
resilient agriculture  
GCF funding will increase impacts and results 
beyond those achieved through Asian 
Development Bank  funding by connecting 
vulnerable poor and near -poor farmers to 
main irrigation systems  
The p roject contains a s olid operations and 
maintenance plan to secure the assets and infrastructures with financial commitment 
from the district government and beneficiary 
communities  
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum IX titled “List of proposed
conditions and recommendations”.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project  background  
3. Viet  Nam’s central h ighlands and s outh-central c oast are the two most climate
vulnerable regions of  the country in term s of hydro -meteorological hazards. The regions hav e
b
een experiencing  an incre ase in annual temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns .
C
limate change -induced water insecurity is affecting rainfed smallholder agriculture in the
regions, reducing crop productivity.  In these  regions , 48–64 per cent  of people rely on
agriculture and water resources for their livelihoods. The y also constitute Viet  Nam’s largest
perennial crop zone (coffee, pepper, cashew, rubber, tea and a variety of fruit s) primarily grow n
f
or market , and rice, maize and cassava for local consumption , especially by the poorest . Both
are important for food security and nutrition.


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 112 
 
  
4. The project aims to empower vulnerable smallholders in the two regions to manage 
increasing climate risks to agricultural production by securing water provis ion, supporting 
farmers to adopt climate -resilient agriculture, and strengthening access to agro -climate 
information, credit and markets.  
5. The project will directly  benefit around 222,412 people in five provinces through last -
mile connection s to the irrigat ion mainline and water storage to boost productivity on rain -fed 
lands. They will also benefit from increased access to localized agro -climate information for 
agricultural planning, climate -resilient agricultural practices, increased water security and 
greater access to markets. A n additional 335,252 people will indirectly benefit through climate 
information and agricultural advisories.  A total of 557,664 people will benefit from the project.  
6. The project is structured into t wo outputs:  
(a) Enhanced water secur ity for agricultural production for vulnerable smallholder farmers 
in the face of climate -induced rainfall variability and droughts; and  
(b) Increased resilience of smallholder farmer livelihoods through climate -resilient 
agriculture and access to climate info rmation, finance and markets.  
7.  The project requests USD 30 .2 million in GCF grants, which is 19  per cent of the total 
project cost. USD 99.6  million in c o-financing  of senior loans will be provided by the Asian 
Development Bank ( ADB ), and USD 26 .5 million  will be provided by  the Government of Viet  
Nam, including from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) and  the 
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development ( DARD ). The total project cost is USD 156 .3 
million.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Output 1: Enhanced water security for agricultural production for vulnerable smallholder farmers 
in the face of climate -induced rainfall variability and droughts (total cost: USD 138.1 million; GCF 
cost: USD 15  million, or 1 0.9 per cent)  
8. Output 1 will address  the water insecurity of smallholder farmers through establishing 
large -scale irrigation infrastructure and last -mile connections to poor and near -poor farmer 
lands.  The output will address water insecurity resulting from rainfall variability and droughts , 
and increase on -farm productivity with water -efficient technologies , including sprinklers and 
drip irrigation.  
9. The proposal delineates that GCF financing will cover the incremental cost of reaching 
additional smallholder farmers to link their plots to the  main irrigation systems. It also 
demonstrates that the GCF funding will enlarge the project impacts and beneficiaries by 
complementing the ADB financed main irrigation  scheme . A total of 20,630 hectares will be 
irrigated under this project, which is expected to bring significant benefits to farmers  and 
society at large . 
10. The proponent presented a detailed hydrological study which assesses the water 
balance for each project site. The irrigation systems will be sourced by existing dams and 
reservoirs, with no  groundwater extraction. The water balance study shows net zero or positive 
balances of wat er with results ranging from 85–90 per  cent reliability within the projected 
scenarios under a changing climate. The study also includes proposed crop  varieties unde r 
irrigation from last -mile connections, which are high -value crops such as mango, banana, 
custard apple, cashew, vegetables, avocado, durian and others. These are assessed to be appropriate  in the context of droughts  and rainfall variability resulting in wetter wet seasons.


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 113 
 
  
11. The exit strategy is clearl y analysed and delineated in the proposal. It provides an 
estimated cost for operations and maintenance ( O&M ) for 10 years after project completion. 
Sustainability is ensured through a solid O&M plan, including the commitment from district 
authorities and contributions from beneficiary farmers. Such commitment should be realized  
and monitored to ensure that the large -scale irrigation  systems are adequately maintained. It is 
also important to design and carry out the necessary trainings for the farmers to pr operly 
operate and maintain the irrigation equipment and systems.  
Output 2: Increased resilience of smallholder farmer livelihoods through climate -resilient 
agriculture and access to climate information, finance and markets (total cost: USD 14. 6 million; 
GCF cost: USD 13. 7 million, or 94 .3 per cent)  
12. With output 1 ensuring reliable water resources to smallholder farmers, output 2 
focuses on delivering climate -resilient agriculture to the same beneficiaries. It will be 
implemented through the provi sion of performance -based vouchers that will incentivize 
farmers to attend 900 farmer field schools (FFS) and adopt climate -resilient agriculture. At the 
same time, the project will establish multi -stakeholder climate innovation platforms  (CIPs)  in 
each pr ovince to link the farmers to market and  provide access to credit by bringing  together  all 
actors in the agricultural value chain. Finally, farmers will be supported with localized agro -
climate advisories to enhance their agricultural production.  
13. A propose d performance -based voucher system with climate -resilient agriculture 
packages is expected to attract local farmers to participate in this project. Beneficiaries 
participating in the FFS, upon successful completion of the trainings, will be provided with 
vouchers to purchase pre -determined technologies or inputs from  pre-determined sellers. The 
voucher cannot be exchanged  for cash or given to other farmers. The proposal presents the 
operational steps to implement the voucher system that was already designed  and implemented 
successfully by another United Nations  agency. In terms of beneficiaries, the system will benefit 
8,621 farmers , which make up  4 per cent  of the total direct beneficiaries of this project. Given 
that the voucher system cannot be extended t o all direct beneficiaries, the accredited entity  (AE) 
should explore the  design of a larger  financial incentive system to ensure replication and 
transform the agricultural system.   
14. The proposed CIP will enable  dialogues and knowledge exchange among various 
stakeholders involved in agricultural value chains. While this can be a good initial step to bring 
in stakeholders, it is important for the project to draw up concrete action plans and strategies, 
through the  CIPs, to catalyse private sector financing for innovative and sustainable value chain 
development.  
15. The output contains standard practices in generating and disseminating downscaled 
agrometeorological forecasts and advisories. Th is has merit in terms of re aching indirect 
beneficiaries at scale, but the AE should make sure that the methods and techniques are fully in 
line and harmonized with the overall climate information services at the national scale.  
Component 3: Project management (total cost: USD 3.5 m illion; GCF cost: USD 1 .4 million, or 4 0 
per cent)  
16. The last component is the project management cost for the implementation of the 
project. The GCF portion of the project management cost is around 4.8 percent of the total 
requested GCF funding, and it is compliant with the GCF policy on fees.


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 114 
 
  
III. Assessment  of performance  against investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                    Scale : Med ium–High  
17. Viet  Nam experienced  increases in temperature by 0.62  °C in 1958 –2014 and changes in 
precipitation patterns , with a 15–20 per  cent increase in the wet season and a  10 per  cent 
decrease in dry season. In  the central highlands and the south- central coast, inter -seasonal 
differences in precipitation will  increase with more rainfall in the wet season and less in  the dry 
season, requiring adequate water management and storage plan s. 
18. The proposal aims to reach a sizeable proportion of the population, with 222,412 
beneficiaries to directly benefit from a comprehensive  and complementary package of 
interventions , including access to reliable water resources through irrigation  and water 
harvesting , agricultural inputs and practices, training and support on resilient agriculture , and 
opportunities to access markets through  CIPs . In addition, 335,252 people will indirectly benefit 
by receiving climate information and agro -climate advisories  to improve the resilience of their 
agricultural livelihoods . 
19. The proposal is expected to promote water -saving technologies such as sprin kler and 
drip irrigation  and small -scale rainwater harvesting ponds that will focus on reducing water 
losses and secure water for agriculture on 4,938 hectares of rain -fed lands. The project does not 
include l ocked -in and long -lived climate -vulnerable infr astructure . 
20. The proposal targets poor and near -poor  smallholder farmers , as measured by  the 
multi -dimensional poverty line  officially defined by the  Government of Viet Nam . These 
beneficiaries are those who will be unable to cover the cost of connect ing to the ADB -financed 
main irrigation systems and  will therefore be left out of  the Water Efficiency Improvement in 
Drought -Affected Provinces (WEIDAP) Project  investment if GCF does not contribute. ADB  co-
financ ing will target  all types of farmers (small and medium) who have  the financial capacity to 
make their own investment s and resources to connect to the irrigation  schem e.  
21. The project’s irrigation infrastructure  mainly concerns  water distribution channels, 
overflow dams an d reservoirs that will be connected to the mainline irrigation systems. A l arge 
amount of water will flow naturally from reservoirs and overflow dams through the channels to 
agricultural fields ; pumping will  therefore  not be needed in most cases. In fields  where pumping 
is required,  electricity from the national and local grids will be utilized . 
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                  Scale: Medium /High  
22. The project has a good potential for upscaling  and replication to the other regions of the 
country. It presents detailed estimat es of the replication potential for the proposed 
interventions, supported by MARD and DARD staff, farmers and other relevant stakeholders 
whose capacity and knowledge are exp ected to increase as a result of GCF -funded activities. The 
proposal could have scored higher if a concrete financial planning and strateg y to achieve a 
paradigm shift were presented to implement such  upscaling a nd replication activities.  
23. The proposal demo nstrates good potential for knowledge and learning  by introducing 
the CIPs and various capacity -building activities through FFS. It is expected to  help create an  
enabling environment for access to credit and market development through the CIPs, but the 
scope and extent to which the actual market stimulation will happen depends on the 
participation of the private sector in the agricultural value chains.


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 115 
 
  
24. The proposal provides  a solid post -project O&M plan with  an estimated budget. 
Significant cost is expected  to be covered by beneficiary communities. The AE should assure 
that established infrastructure and assets are properly operated and maintained after project 
completion by  enabling full government and community ownership of the assets.   
3.3 Sustainable develop ment potential                                  Scale: High  
25. The proposal provides sound justification for the project’s potential to  produc e positive 
environmental, social and economic externalities. The proposed  climate -resilient agriculture 
packages inclu de generally well -recognized practices that have positive environmental impacts, 
such as intercropping and crop rotation. No harmful environmental impacts are associated with the selected seeds in the CRA packages, and the processing of the commodities wil l be carefully 
monitored  to avoid any negative environmental externalities.  
26. The proposed climate -resilient seeds will provide more reliable income for farmers , and 
economic co -benefits are assessed to be substantial. Potential for social benefits are also 
assessed to be high, as diversified agricultural production with climate information and better 
water management will directly benefit society and ensure local comm unities and farmers are 
well prepared in the  face of  long -term climate change impacts.  
27. Gender considerations have been taken into account in the project design with an aim to 
mainstream a women -centred approach in agricultural development. The proposal emp hasizes 
the prioritization of women and ethnic minorities throughout project implementation.  A 
detailed gender assessment and action plan was developed and submitted as an annex.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                    Scale: High  
28. The v ulnerability of the country and target beneficiaries and their adaptation needs are 
explained throughout the proposal, although it could benefit from more detail o n the scale and 
intensity of exposure to climate risks. The v ulnerability of poor and near -poor farmers, women 
and ethnic minorities is acknowledged , given the ir small -size farm (up to one  hectare) and high 
dependence on rain -fed agriculture, which is highly affected by rainfall variability and 
increasing temperature s. Approx imately  48–64 per cent  of people rely on agriculture and water 
resources for their livelihoods.  
29. Using financial estimates, t he proposal describes t he needs of the recipient with regard 
to implement ing climate change adaptation measures at the national level versus the current 
shortfalls in the national budget to cover the estimated cost. Although  Viet Nam is  not a least 
developed country , the inclusion of financial resource  needs  within the national planning and 
strategies is commended.  The target beneficiaries are clas sified by the official government 
definition as poor and near -poor, and their fiduciary capacity is deemed to be too weak to 
access credit.  
3.5 Country ownership              Scale: High  
30. The proposal clearly shows that the project would contribute to Viet Nam’ s nationally 
determined contribution  under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
and the country’s  various national development and climate change plans and strategies . It 
could have been more compelling if the proposal more concisely  delineated how and to what 
extent the project w ould c ontribute to Viet Nam’s nationally determined contribution.


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 116 
 
  
31. As the e xecuting entity (EE) , MARD  is the main coordinating body in the country for 
agriculture and rural development. Its annual budget in 2018 was USD 908 million and  it 
worked with the AE on many projects. It has a proven track record in managing similarsize d 
investments.  
32. The project w as designed based on rigorous consultations with relevant stakeholders , 
including the GCF n ational designated authority. A stakeholder engagement plan was submitted 
as an annex to the funding proposal. The proposal contributes  to the MARD restructuring 
strategy for irrigation and agriculture services, which aims to integrate climate change 
responses and combine them with agro -forestry and crop diversification  methods .  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: High  
33. The proposed financial structure is justified in a reasonable manner, considering the 
income status and vulnerability of target beneficiaries. The GCF grants will target smallholder 
farmers classified as poor and near -poor farmers, focusing on women and ethnic minorities, 
who are unable to p ay for connections to their main WEIDAP infrastructures.  
34. The proposal demonstrates high cost -effectiveness with an economic internal rate of 
return of 32 per  cent and net present value of USD 18.7 million over  the 25-year project lifetime. 
The calculation was based on avoided damages from droughts and incremental outputs generated through climate -resilient agriculture  and the FFS.   
35. Financial viability is demonstrated through the financial analysis , which shows a  net 
present value of USD 22 million and a financial internal rate of return of 8.9 per  cent. In spite of 
the result, t he proposal justifies  the need for high concessionality based on the budget 
constraints of the Government of Viet Nam to  financ e climate change adaptation.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
36. The accredited entity (AE) has undertaken a social and environmental screening to 
identify and address any potential social and environmental risks  and impacts that could arise 
from project activities and classified the overall social and environmental risk category to be 
moderate (which is equivalent to Category B as per GCF Environmental and Social Policy). The 
project includes activities with pote ntial limited adverse environmental and/or social risks and 
impacts that individually or cumulatively, are few, generally site- specific, largely reversible, and 
readily addressed through mitigation measures.  
37. The AE has developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for 
the project. The ESMF includes legal and institutional framework that concerns environmental 
and social issues, as well as the legislation, policies and regulations as regards the 
environmental impact assessment process in Vietnam. Individual Initial Environmental Examinations (IEEs) and Combined Resettlement Plan and Indigenous Peoples Plans have also 
been prepared for the subprojects under WEIDAP. The AE indicated that that the ESMF and any 
relevant safeguard instruments a lready prepared under the WEIDAP project will be part of any 
tender documentation and will be updated as necessary. These safeguards measures and plans will also be adopted as appropriate to the GCF project elements.  
38. The ESMF presented the key environmenta l and social indicators including that on 
climate, ecology, surface and groundwater, erosion, drainage and sediment control, waste


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 117 
 
  
management, air quality, noise and vibration and archaeological and cultural heritage. It also 
presents guidance on managemen t of social issues and in cases of emergencies. The ESMF 
identified key potential project risks and impacts and outlined possible management measures. 
It also identified the performance criteria, the responsible entities as well as the monitoring and 
repor ting protocols.  
39. Key potential adverse environmental impacts identified on the main irrigation systems 
which will be addressed through the environmental management plans provided for in the IEEs 
include temporary impacts as regards construction of canals, installation of pipes, as well as in 
upgrading of roads which are expected to be carried out in existing rights -of-way (ROW). No 
civil works are expected to be carried out in sensitive protected areas. Burying of pipes are also 
expected to cause temporary loss of income during installation. Minor land acquisition for the 
pumping stations and compensation for trees, crops, or small structures that may be affected 
will be needed. Hence, combined resettlement and ethnic minority development plans 
(REMDPs) are p repared which will be implemented by the government prior to commencement 
of any civil works. The last -mile connections will potentially result to loss of land in hydrant 
points, disruptions in farming activities, increase in nutrient runoff and possible contamination 
of groundwater due to increased fertilizer use, erosion and sedimentation due to excavations 
and vegetation removal as well as general community safety risks due to increased construction 
activities and vehicle traffic in the area. The AE has developed avoidance and mitigation 
measures in the ESMF.  
40. The ESMF also provides for the institutional arrangements for its implementation 
including the general management structure and responsibilities and project delivery and 
administration during project  implementation and operation. The Departments of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (DARD) are responsible for the supervision of the ESMF while the AE 
provides oversight and quality assurance. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
(MARD) will be responsible for the implementation of the ESMF and a Project Management Unit 
(PMU) will be established to support project implementation and ensure safeguards compliance 
by contractors and implementing parties.  
41. The ESMF also provides for guidance on public consultation and environmental and 
social disclosure. The project engaged the targeted communities during the conduct of the 
feasibility study where their inputs have been incorporated in the proposed interventions. Civil 
society organiz ations, non -governmental organizations and private sector players have also 
been engaged in the process. A stakeholder engagement plan is also developed to allow for 
discussions with various stakeholders at the national and provincial levels during project  
inception. Informal stakeholder engagements are also planned. The ESMF further provides for 
social inclusion and consultation, incorporation of sediment and erosion control strategies as 
well as considering health and safety for workers and the community.   The ESMF also includes 
budget provision for its implementation and continuing update.  
42. The AE included provisions for a two -tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) which 
includes eligibility requirements to lodge grievances in good faith and achieve mutu ally 
acceptable resolutions for all parties.  A complaint can also be lodged with the Social and 
Environmental Compliance Unit within the Office of Anticorruption and Integrity within the 
UNDP.  
43. With respect to indigenous peoples’ issues, the project object ive is to empower 
vulnerable smallholders in the Central Highlands and South -Central Coast regions of Vietnam – 
particularly women and ethnic minority farmers. Ethnic minority groups account for a disproportionate share of poor households in the country, a nd are particularly vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change. While the risk assessment conducted by the AE demonstrates that


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 118 
 
  
the risk of adverse impacts to ethnic minorities is low, the AE has prepared a series of measures 
to safeguard ethnic minoritie s and promote their participation in the project. These include an 
Ethnic Minorities Action Plan that identifies the barriers, needs, priorities, challenges and gaps 
of ethnic minority farmers, as well as proposed actions to address them. In addition, prio r to 
implementation, each sub -project/sub -activity will be assessed via a checklist to identify 
whether any previously unidentified adverse impacts to EMs are likely and when the need for 
FPIC and an IPP is triggered. The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framew ork (IPPF) provides 
guidance for the preparation of IPPs, based on the checklist. The finalization of a robust IPPF, 
incorporating all the references to ethnic minorities throughout the different safeguard 
documents, including the Gender Action Plan and St akeholder Action Plan, will be provided 
prior to implementation of the project.  
4.2 Gender policy  
44. The proposal contains a gender assessment  and a project -level gender action plan, and  
therefore complies with the requirements  of the GCF Gender Policy and Gender  Action Plan.  
45. The gender assessment conducted presents the national legal and policy framework for 
addressing gender equality and discrimination in Vietnam, including decrees that have been 
issued to facilitate the implementation of the law on gender equality. At the institutional level, 
the Ministry of Labor Invalids and Social Affairs (DOLISA), and the People’s Committees (PC) are 
responsible for mainstreaming gender. In addition, the Vietnam Women’s Union (VWU) protects 
the legal rights of women. The as sessment indicates though there is commitment at a wider 
country level in the various policies put in place there is a general lack of capacity to implement 
the various policies. In addition, the assessment highlights that those particular institutions 
such as the DOLISA, VWU and PC mandated to mainstream gender have limited capacity to fulfil 
their responsibilities of addressing gender equality and promoting the advancement of women.  
46. The objective of the gender assessment is to identify and implement inte rventions that 
will ensure equal access to and control over resources needed to implement climate resilient agricultural production to both women and men in the face of climate change induced rainfall 
variability and droughts. The gender assessment report was compiled from literature review, 
which included a review of the baseline survey of the WEIDAP. Stakeholder engagement 
through focus group discussions and interviews was also conducted in the project area to 
identify issues. The discussion with communit ies indicated that there are similarities in 
concerns between women and men. However, further elaboration highlights that women have 
additional concerns and questions regarding their need for capacity development, access to 
micro -credit, lower interest rat es, concern related to water efficiency, access to market and 
climate information. Women, during the consultation, also indicated the need for improvements in access to economic activities, for peer to peer learning opportunities and technical assistance. 
The gender assessment identifies women, ethnic minorities, female -headed and poor 
households as vulnerable to the effects of climate change. For example, due to droughts women are left to manage agricultural activities on their own without support or oppor tunity to share 
labor with men due to male migration to other provinces in search of work. Women also play a 
primary role in water collection for household use, and declining local availability increases the 
distance travelled to collect it.  
47. In the contex t of agriculture, the gender assessment discusses the perceptions and 
stereotypes that have defined gender roles. There are prescribed roles for women and men on 
agricultural tasks linked to the stereotypical assumptions that women are weaker and should be 
engage in household work while men are seen as stronger and can engage in agriculture work. 
Therefore overall, there is men’s domination and control over resources such as land at the 
family and community level and typically decision making concerning the  use of agricultural


---
*Page 119*
---

G
CF/B.25/ 02/Add.02 
Page 119 
production in addition to deciding on issues to do with inputs selection, and credit to invest in 
production. Men are also responsible for irrigating crops. Women make valuable contributions 
to food production, for example in fertilizi ng and drying crops which are still considered light 
works. Smallholder farmers, especially women face unequal access to knowledge and markets regarding agriculture. Female headed households are particularly identified through the 
assessment as more vulnerable. Climate information is generally poor, market access 
information is limited, and gender norms present a challenging reality for women to have the opportunity to access training, extension services or access to climate information. The 
assessment indi cates however, that both women and men are aware of the effects of climate 
change on agricultural production and daily life, however they have limited capacity to manage these effects due to lack of resources, to invest in infrastructure thereby being unab le to 
overcome scarcity in water resources caused by more incidences of drought.  
48. The proposal contains a project -level gender action plan with gender -related actions
aligned with the project activities, performance indicators with sex -disaggregated targets
(between 20- 50% women’s participation) and baseline (set at 0) and timelines. The action plan
is aligned to the funding proposal in that beneficiaries of the project have been disaggregated byfemale -household heads to demonstrate the project’s impact pot ential. In addition, sex -
disaggregated targets of beneficiaries are included at the Fund -level, outcome and output levels
in the logic framework. Timelines have been provided along with budget for the implementation
of activities listed in the gender action plan. Gender focal points are assigned across variou
s
o
rganizations involved in the execution of the project. Further a gender specialist from UNDP
will be undertaking capacity building works, documentation and sharing of the success storie s
a
s well as a ssess, facilitate and monitor the gender sensitiveness of the project outcome,
objectives, activities, indicators and targets and in the implementation of the gender action plan.
49. The gender action plan include actions that respond to issues raised in the gender
assessment which include: access to agro -climate advisory services, extension services to
smallholder farmers (for example through FFS), technical assistance for accessing credit for
poor and female smallholder farmers, and training of DARD staff, who are responsible for th e
ex
ecution of the project, on gender and differentiated needs for water resources .
50. The AE is recommended to go beyond reporting on the participation of women and
include reporting on changes in skills and empowerment levels of wo men as a result o f
a
ctivities e.g. membership in pond management groups, facilitators, for FFS, coaching etc. The
AE is also recommended to look into and monitor violence against women and gender -based
violence issues that might arise as a result of projec t interventions and provide interventions
that prevent and address issues. Further while adjusting timings of meetings is a good step,however the AE is recommended to look into time usage/role and responsibilities by women
and men in the communities and look opportunities to address time constraints and challenge
s
as
 would be identified by women and men .
4.3 Risks 
4.3.1. Overall programme assessment (medium risk) 
51. The f unding p roposal r equests a GCF g rant of US D 30.2 million t o complement t he 
WEID AP Project funded by ADB a nd t he G overnment o f Viet N am. The GCF grant w ill be used to 
support poor/near -poor f armers b y en abling t hem to m ake the last -mile co nnection f rom their 
farm p lots t o the W EIDAP Project primary irriga tion i nfrastructure. It is a lso used t o build 
capacities of all farmers in t he WEIDAP Project areas t o ap ply c limate -resilient a griculture 
practices and cr opping sy stems. The A DB i s providing a se nior l oan o f USD 9 9.5 m illion , and t he 
Government o f Viet Na m is providing co -financing o f USD 26.4 million in t he form o f grant s


---
*Page 120*
---

G
CF/B.25/ 02/Add.02 
Page 120 
(USD 25.4 million) and i n-kind contributions (USD 1 .0 million). There is no co -financing f rom 
the AE.  
52. According t o the r esponse from t he A E, the usage o f irrigation water is being asses sed by 
the W EIDAP Project , including t he estimation of costing an d fees. It i s an ticipated t hat r evenue 
will be generated from the funded activities under output 1 . Due to t he revenue- generating 
nature, th e potential s eems to exist for the G CF g rant to c ross-subsidize or f inance the 
repayment o f the debt instrument u sed t o fund t he c onstruction of t he irrigation i nfrastructure. 
However, according to the response from t he A E, the Government of Viet N am has a p olicy t o 
enable the poor/near -poor a nd e thnic mi noritie s to access water for free for agricultural 
activities.
4.3.2. Ac credited entity/e xecuting entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
53. The AE,  UNDP , has been working closely with the Government of Viet Nam since the
partnership started in 1978. UNDP has been managing the approximately  USD  20 million
budget annually, including  the implementation of over 35 projects with multiple donors over
the past five  years. The AE provides an oversight and quality assurance role for the project.
54. The EE, MARD, is currently managing 10 projects with the total budget of USD 1.9
billion . The Central Project Office of MARD will be delegated to coordinate the project. The
Central Project Office will be working  closely with DARD s (provincial departments of MARD) .
Th
e recent capacity assessment of the Central Project Office carried out in 2018 showed  low
risk.
4.3.3. Programme-s pecific execution r isks (medium risk) 
55. The power source of the irrigation infrastructure: the WEIDAP Project provides sizab le
i
nvestment under activity 1.1 to establish large -scale irrigation infrastructure in the target
areas. It includes the construction and improvement of pumping stations and pumped pipelines.
GCF resources will be used to make the last -mile connection from the irrigation infrastructure.
According to the response  from the AE, these pumping stations and pumped pipelines will be
connected to the grid, and poor farmers will be using electricity from the grid for pumping. In
Viet  Nam, hydropower cont ributes 41 per cent  of the national electricity mix, but more detailed
information on the mix of energy supply was  not provided.
56. Delays in co -financing fund flows and poor operation of co -financing activities: GCF -
financed activities under output 1 are heavily dependent on the progress and success of th e
a
ctivities funded by the WEIDAP  Project . Delays in co -financing fund flows and/or poor
operation of the WEIDAP  Project  would impact the GCF project. However, concerns may b e
a
llayed by the co mmitment of the Government of Viet Nam to prioritize the modernization of
the irrigation  systems stated in the funding proposal and the legally binding concessional loa n
ag
reement with ADB .
57. Economic and f inancial analysis: activities 1.1 and 1.2 are excluded as these are already
captured by the WEIDAP  Project . The proposal  considers the incremental increase in averag e
a
nnual income per household in the project area. The analysis results in a financial internal rat e
of
 return  of 8.82 per cent  over 16 years. The economic analysis was carried out with th e
d
ifferent timelines considering the O&M cost and lifespan of the equipment. Overall, it is
anticipated positive net present value with  an economic internal rate of return  of 32  per cent.
The rate of adoption by each farmer of resilience -enhancing crops and varieties has  not been
considered. The AE clarified that it is impossible to predict how successful the initiative will be
because it will be affected by ( 1) the farmer’s perception of risk based on their ow n


---
*Page 121*
---

G
CF/B.25/ 02/Add.02 
Page 121 
appreciation; (2) market prices of the new crops adopted ; and (3) market prices of other crops. 
In addition, the analysis assumes that the infrastructure funded by the WEIDAP  Project  is 
already in place.  
4.3.4.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
58. If approved , the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non -material
and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level
4.3.5.  Compliance (medium risk)  
59. The AE has indicated that it has sufficient internal controls in place to monitor and  take
ac
tion for any irregularities in the implementation of the program me. The AE has a whistle -
blower program me in place. The AE has indicated it will work with local authorities to build
appropriate integrity program mes for implementation when needed . Based on the information
from the AE, the Compliance risk rating on this project is assessed at medium.
Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  The success of GCF -financed activities 
is dependent on the timely 
implementation of the Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought -
Affected Provinces (WEIDAP) Project  
funded by the Asian Development 
Bank  Accredited entity /executing 
entity  capability  Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
60. UNDP will be the AE for this project. The role of the AE is  to ensure compliance with
donor requirements and rules pertaining to  the use of project resources. UNDP will also conduct
quality assurance role by carrying out objective and independent project oversight and
monitoring functions. UNDP will perform monito ring and reporting throughout the reporting
period in accordance with the accreditation master agreement ( AMA) and the funded activit y
ag
reement .
61. The MARD is the EE  (GCF terminology) /Implementing Partner (UNDP terminology). The
EE is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policie s
a
nd procedures (including “ National Implementation by the Government of UNDP Supported
Projects: Guidelines and Procedures”). MARD is accountable to UNDP for managing the project ,
in
cludin g the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes,
and effective ly using  UNDP resources. These include  fulfilling relevant requirements on
fiduciary, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and other performance standards.
62. Funding  will flow from the EE to  the responsibilities parties (RP s), which are directly
accountable to MARD. RPs will lead the implementation of the FFS for each province and th e
imp
lementation in the respective subproject in subdistricts.
63. The five RPs for the proposed project also underwent capacity assessments , a micro -
assessment of financial management and procurement capacity to fulfil  requirements under th e
H
armonized Approach to Cash Transfers  Framework  and and GCF requirements, as well as


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 122 
 
  
assessments on financial management, procurement and overall risk under the WEIDAP Project . 
The capacity assessment indicated high delivery performance. UNDP will ascertain the national 
capacities of the Implementing Partner and RPs by undertaking an evaluation of capacity of 
these partners, following the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers F ramework to 
Implementing Partner.  
64. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP 
financial rules and regulations. UNDP has procurement policies in place as outlined in the “Contracts and Procurement ” section of the UNDP Pr ogramme and Operations Policies and 
Procedures .  
65. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audit, 
based on specific requirements agreed in the AMA. UNDP will appoint the auditors. A scheduled 
audit, consist ing of a fina ncial audit or an internal control audit, is used to determine whether 
the funds transferred to the partners were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance 
with the work plan.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
66. As an adaptation project, the intervention expects to benefit 222,412 direct and 335,252 
indirect beneficiaries. The project will deliver benefits to 10.1  per cent  of the targeted rural 
population, of which women comprise 122,327 direct and 170,979 indirect beneficiaries as per 
the gender -disaggregated metrics for the GCF core indicator.  
67. Overall , the funding proposal  and log ical frame work  sufficiently apply GCF- level (impact 
and outcome) results management framework /performance measurement framework  
indicators.  The project has included baselines and is expected to implement data collection 
activities that can inform progress reporting on expected results. At the project performance 
level, as GCF financing will primarily apply to the technical assistance/training -based grant 
components, measure ments for behavioural change have been integrated , which are essential to 
understand, learn and deliver the expected project results.  
68. Regarding section H.1  of the funding proposal , overall the logic al framework complies 
with GCF standards and has been cleared through Secretariat review . 
69. The funding proposal theory of change would benefit from further details on the causal 
pathways at the project level and in relation to the climate rationale (which ideally are tested in 
implementation either with project performance management indicators or impact 
data/evidence generated to attribute changes to GCF investment).  
70. Under section H.2, the information provided is generic and primarily per AMA 
obligations, and does not provide sufficient information on the anticipa ted project monitoring 
and evaluation  activities and budgeting planned to collect essential project level data for 
adaptive management and results reporting. It is recommended that the AE provide linkages and clarity a s to what finances and activities will  be allocated to monitoring and evaluation  so 
that the Secretariat can ensure sufficient budget is allocated for evidence generation.  
71. Under section H.2, the Secretariat notes the application of the impact assessment. The 
Secretariat recommends that the AE  identifies the  proper methodologies in collaboration with 
the Secretariat and provides details on intention s related to conducting interim or final 
evaluations as an impact evaluation rather than a process performance evaluation. In addition , 
in the detailed budget , the AE needs to ensure that sufficient budget is allocated to conduct the


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B.25/ 02/Add.0 2 
Page 123 
 
  
impact assessment/evaluation and collect essential project -level data for results reporting and 
to enable adapti ve management.  
4.6 Legal  assessment  
72. The AMA was signed with the AE  on 5 August 2016 and became effective on 23 
November 2016.  
73. The AE has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals 
and it has the capacity and authority to imp lement the project.  
74. The proposed project will be implemented in  Viet  Nam, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, and the  risks need to be further 
assessed. The Secretariat submitted a revised draft of the privileges and immunities agreement 
to the Government of Viet  Nam on 21 December 2018. However, no response has been received 
yet. 
75. The Heads of the Independent Redr ess Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immuniti es. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or 
has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
76. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the  funded activity agreement  in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Bo ard approval; and  
(b) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 124*
---

G
CF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 124 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP125 
Proposal name:  Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture to  
climate change -induced water insecurity in the Central 
Highlands and South -Central Coast regions of Vietnam  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Project/programme size:  Medium 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Impact potential     Scale:  High  
1. The funding proposal considers a large- scale irrigation project, Water Efficiency
Improvement in Drought Affected Provinces (WEIDAP1), financed through a loan from the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) and resources from the Government of Viet Nam, and  a
co
mplementary project financed with GCF  grant resources to provide the last -mile irrigation
system connections for poor/nearly poor smallholders, with a particular focus on ethn ic
min
ority and women farmers. Both irrigation schemes will be developed in the provinces of Dak
Lak, Dak Nong, Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan and Khanh Hoa in the Central Highlands and South -
Central Coast regions of Viet Nam .
2. The project comprises two interlinked outputs: 1) enhanced water security for
agricultural production for vulnerable smallholder farmers in the face of cl imate chang e
i
nduced rainfall variability and droughts and 2) increased resilience of the livelihoods o f
s
mallholder farmers through climate -resilient agriculture (CRA) and access to climat e
i
nformation, finance and markets.
3. To deliver the first output, the project will establish large -scale irrigation infrastructure
(main pipeline systems connected to current reservoirs, upgraded canals and new weirs to
provide improved pumping ponds)  to bring irrigation water to eight farming areas across th e
ta
rget regio ns using resources from the ADB/Government of Viet Nam loan. The WEIDAP
project will also ensure the adoption of on -farm water management practices focused on
improving on -farm water productivity.
4. Using GCF resources the project will establish last -mile connections (pipes, water
shifting valves, small water storage structures and others) between the WEIDAP irrigation
infrastructure and the lands of poor and nearly poor farmers. Smallholders will contribute with
labour in co -designing, installing and maintaining their connecting systems. This support will be
provided only after successful participation in farmer field schools (FFS) and completion ofcourses on climate -resilient farming (including water efficiency practices) conducted in the
commune.
5. The prop osed project will also enhance supplementary irrigation for rain -fed
smallholder farmers to cope with rainfall variability and drought through the construction andenhancement of existing supplementary water storage systems, resulting in 1,159 climate -
1 The WEIDAP project was approved by the ADB Board on 26 November 2018 and signed on 28 December 2018. 
Subsequently the project became effective on 26 January 2019 with a planned closing date of 30 June 2026. For 
further details see < https://www.adb.org/proj ects/49404- 002/main#project -overview> .


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 125 
 
 
resilient ponds that will enable farmers to better maintain minimum irrigation water supply 
during climate change induced droughts. The project will enhance the productivity of water, 
strengthening smallholder capacities to apply on -farm water -efficient practices and 
technologies to maximize water productivity in coping with rainfall variability and drought.  
6. To deliver the second output the project will invest GCF grant resources, with co -
financing from national and provincial governments, in inputs and capacit ies to scale up 
climate -resilient cropping systems and practices (soil, crop, land management) among 
smallholders through FFS and will ensure the establishment of market and credit linkages 
through the Climate Investment Platform s to bridge relevant stakeh olders of the different value 
chains. Linked to the development of the climate innovation platforms, the project will assemble 
a technical group in charge of delivering agroclimate information services to produce tailored 
advisories for different cropping systems within the sub -project.  
7. The project will benefit over 139,416 households as direct and indirect beneficiaries in 
the climate -vulnerable areas of Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Ninh Thuan, Binh Thuan and Khanh Hoa 
provinces of Central Viet Nam, or 10.1 per cen t of the total population of the five provinces. 
From this: (i) 55,603 smallholder households will have the capacity to apply climate -resilient 
water management and agricultural practices to cope with rainfall variability and drought; and (ii) all the dire ct and indirect beneficiaries, including 83,813 households in communities around 
the targeted districts and communes of the five provinces, will benefit from agroclimate 
information, market and credit advisories and services and widespread dissemination of  
lessons learned and best practices in CRA. From the overall group, 21,228 poor/nearly poor farmer households will have obtained direct access to water to increase agricultural production, 
reducing the impact of climate change related rainfall variability and drought. 
 
8. Through FFS and training the project will improve the capacities of 3,600 agricultural 
extension workers and personnel from the farmers’ and women’s unions to provide their 
technical expertise to other farmers, enabling better agricultural pr actices with climate -resilient 
solutions in the selected municipalities.  
9. Since the rationale of the project is to improve access to water for vulnerable 
smallholder farmers for climate -resilient agricultural production in the face of climate change 
induce d rainfall variability and droughts, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) 
requested additional clarifications from the proponents to ensure the project’s climate 
rationale.  
10. In response, the proponents claimed that the dry winter season rainfall is decreasing in 
Viet Nam, while the average monsoon rainfall has been increasing and that the trend will 
continue in the short, medium and long term. The long -term observational data sets are 
analysed to produce reference evapotranspiration change for maj or crops such as maize, rice, 
cassava, coffee, pepper and avocado.  
11. It is found that " effective rainfall" , the indicator used for analysing the agriculturally 
relevant (crop -specific) drought index, has been changing with the seasonal availability of 
rainf all and the dependence on available rainfall is very high. Long -term data sets also show that 
effective rainfall has been consistently declining in both of the target regions during the post -
monsoon season for the above -mentioned major crops, which might h ave aggravated 
phenological drought in the two target areas. This justifies the arrangements to be made for 
irrigation in order to compensate for increasing agricultural drought.  
12. However, the extent of drought in relation to the change in effective rainfall over the 
seasons for the major crops could not be ascertained owing to lack of land -use data on major 
crops in different seasons in the two target areas. Even without such data, the independent TAP 
recognize s the climate linkage to irrigation as a viable modality to address rising moisture 
stress during critical growth periods for the major crops. The crop calendar and month -wide


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 126 
 
 
presentation of the crop -specific degree of aridity clearly highlights the build -up of drought, 
which warrants the proposed int erventions to address agricultural drought in the target areas.  
13. The impacts in relation to increased and improved provisioning of water through 
irrigation to compensate for higher evapotranspiration -ET0 is justified, and the impacts will 
reduce the risks of crop loss due to climate -induced water stress. The introduction  of training at 
the farmer level on CRA will further enhance farmers’ adaptive capacity to address climate 
change related extreme weather events and other phenomena which are aggravated by such 
events. The activities outlined in the project will have positive  impacts on the achievement of 
the overall objective of the project.  
1.2  Paradigm shift potential                                  Scale:  Medium   
1.2.1.  Innovation  
14. The project is presented as an adaptation solution to smallholder farmers focusing on 
ensuring access t o enough water for agricultural production. Farmers in the WEIDAP project 
areas are required to invest their own resources to obtain last -mile connections from the 
surface canal or pipe irrigation systems to their plots as well as in storage systems. Since  this 
presents an overwhelming challenge to poor and nearly poor farmers, the project is focusing on 
addressing these challenges under a “climate lens”.  
15. Developing this infrastructure does not represent a paradigm shift in itself.  Irrigation 
and drainage s ystems in Viet Nam are fairly well developed. However, according to the World 
Bank,2 in 2013 more than 50 per cent of the irrigation systems were degraded and/or not 
operating at design capacity. The operation and management of hydraulic works show 
deficie ncies such as poor performance, deficiencies in organizational structure, including low 
labour productivity, low -quality governance, fast physical degradation and high rates of 
unaccounted water.  
16. Moreover, even though Viet Nam has made great progress in i ts agriculture sector, it has 
also shown a decline in production due to challenges in efficiency, technical capacity and quality 
of production. The WEIDAP irrigation system together with the proposed “ last-mile connection 
proposal is addressing  this produc tivity challenge as well as  operation and maintenance 
challenges  that are not climate driven. It is also addressing w ater shortages  under  a climate 
change challenge. The integral vision with regard to these challenges is well addressed in the 
proposal.  
17. Large irrigation systems do not normally include small vulnerable farmers and ethnic 
minorities. This project presents a more inclusive approach, as it is designed to involve 
smallholders (with less than one hectare of land) and indigenous ethnic minorities w ho 
experience major barriers to sustaining their livelihoods. To ensure ownership, farmers will 
need to provide in -kind contribution of labour and the project will provide guidance, manuals 
and mentoring.  
18. Through FFS, farmers will be trained in resilience -enhancing crop diversification, 
shifting farmers away from traditional crops such as rice and coffee towards a more diversified mix of higher -value crops that also require less water. This will in turn enhance soil fertility and 
organic matter, improving soil structure and limiting soil erosion.  
19. For poor and nearly poor farmers, particularly ethnic minorities and women, who have 
a risk perception with respect to borrowing money to implement CRA practices, a conditional 
 
2 World Bank. 2013.  Project Information Document. Vietnam Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project. Available at 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/546681468176062038/pdf/PID -Appraisal -Print -P130014- 10-09-
2013- 1381374010620.pdf


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 127 
 
 
performance- based voucher system wil l be integrated within the FFS to motivate the 
application of CRA packages. Vouchers will be given when the courses have been effectively 
taken by relevant farmers and will allow them to redeem the crops/seeds and specific agricultural technologies support ed by this project and sold by registered local private sector 
suppliers. This voucher system is a good incentive for farmers willing to shift to more effective 
CRA systems.  
20. The project is also devoting some resources to link farmers to markets and to fin ancial 
schemes, establishing climate innovation platforms, bringing together all actors of a particular 
value chain in fairs, climate innovation platforms  networking events and workshops.  The 
independent TAP believes that in order to develop real and trans formative changes to ensure 
efficient and fair market mechanisms, the project could promote new financial schemes with 
better rates, longer payment periods and guarantees with relevant microlending institutions. 
Moreover, there could be an agreement with a gribusinesses already benefiting from the 
WEIDAP project to support smallholders with small circuits of trade.  
21. In terms of agroclimate information systems, the proposal presents several related 
programmes financed by the international community, including the GCF -funded project 
approved by the Board in 2016, namely “Improving the resilience of vulnerable coastal 
communities to climate change related impacts in Viet Nam”, which includes a component to 
enhance climate information and damage and loss data for private and public sector 
applications in 28 coastal provinces of Viet Nam, including the south -central coastal region. The 
proposal does not present a clear explanation of the coordination arrangements among 
different climate information system projects in the country, or a clear description of the 
proposed agroclimate component so as to ensure the innovation and effectiveness of this 
activity in the overall proposal.  
22. The theory of change explains the purpose of the project and addresses the core issues 
involving climate change. The paradigm shift will be only marginal, as rich and not -so-poor 
farmers have already been irrigating their lands in the dry season in the target regions. The creation of climate safety for the otherwise rain -fed crops is crucial but not new. What is 
perhaps new is that it involves CRA and institutional approaches along with irrigation to offer a 
holistic safeguard to current agricultural practices.  
1.2.2.  Potential for knowledge and learning  
23. As per the project document, the last -mile co nnections to large -scale irrigation 
infrastructure could be replicated in an estimated one million hectares in other areas in Viet 
Nam where similar conditions exist. However, replication will depend on the willingness of the 
Vietnamese Government to inves t in new infrastructure, the capacity to maintain and manage 
infrastructure and the willingness to connect vulnerable communities, rather than large -scale 
agricultural farms able to support the agricultural revenues of the country through exports.  
24. The know ledge and institutional capacity to support small farmers could be the 
foundation for delivering knowledge -sharing schemes to relevant provinces by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development (MARN) and to ensure better dissemination of agricultural practices to vulnerable communities at large.  
25. The project will construct water storage facilities, which is a common practice in Viet 
Nam to ensure availability of water in dry seasons. The project estimates that there is potential 
for an additional 8,683  household and communal ponds in other areas of Viet Nam. This 
requires investment aside from knowledge -sharing.  
26. The project will train 150 farmers at the district and provincial level under the 
provincial departments of agriculture and rural development  (DARDs) and farmers’ union 
trainers. These facilitators will train 1,800 lead farmers in the five target provinces. Two lead


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 128 
 
 
farmers will, in turn, train approximately  25 farmers in 900 FFS. This methodology has an 
expected replication potential to reach an  additional 194,317 poor and nearly poor households 
in the five project provinces, and an additional 2,845,325 poor and nearly poor households 
nationwide when mainstreaming of the contents and methodology is achieved. The FFS 
methodology will be evaluated by MARD and mainstreamed for future use throughout Viet Nam.  
27. According to the proposal, the agroclimate services could be shared with 32 districts (in 
addition to the 14 target districts encompassing 60 communes) of the five provinces through 
digital and print media as well as through mobile text messaging, reaching a total of 46 districts; 
this will then have covered 100 per cent of the total farm population of 1,379,450 households in 
the five target provinces in central Viet Nam. However, these services will need to be better 
defined to ensure effective uptake by the end users to create climate- resilient landscapes.  
1.2.3.  Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
28. As an export -oriented country, Viet Nam has supported efficient and larg e-scale 
agricultural farms, devoting less effort to supporting small farmers. The project could create an enabling environment to enhance the capacity of MARN and DARDs to ensure climate- resilient 
production systems that involve large, medium -sized and sma ll farmers.  
29. Maintaining water systems and information services will require a strong commitment 
by the national government, the provincial governments and the farmers. Raising agricultural 
and water productivity will require a considerable effort from the  different stakeholders and 
will also need the conditions to ensure that this project could be scaled with national resources 
and mainstreamed in the planning processes of the agriculture, environment and water sectors.  
30. Viet Nam has seen some of its water irrigation infrastructure deteriorate in the past. To 
ensure an effective use of the irrigation investments, farmers will need to prove that through 
efficient water systems and appropriate technology they are able to increase their revenues to 
pay for the maintenance of water systems in the near future. This will have a strong connection 
to the farmers’ ability to link with markets and to increasingly diminish their financial risks.  
31. The project gives different examples of climate information projects deliv ered with the 
support of the international community, including a GCF project, that will need to be better 
integrated to ensure an efficient agroclimate advisory scheme.  
1.2.4.  Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
32. The project will contribute to t he agricultural restructuring plan (ARP), which aims to 
drive a market -led and consumer -driven agriculture sector where the role of the Government 
shifts from the provider of investments to the facilitator of investments. The project presents a 
reference t o the linkage with the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE), 
which aims to strengthen the protection, use and development of water resources, as well as the 
prevention and mitigation of adverse impacts caused by water. However, it is impor tant to 
make effective linkages to conservation/regeneration programmes directly ensuring 
environmental services for the proposed agricultural landscapes. Unless there is a real balance 
between agricultural production and conservation/regeneration efforts, the project could end 
up posing critical sustainability challenges in the selected provinces.  
33. The project will contribute to fulfilling the Paris Agreement targets, especially in 
supporting vulnerable communities to adapt to climate change and to ensure food security and 
sustainable livelihoods. Moreover, the project will contribute to the provisions of the National 
Law of Gender Equality, promoting broader participation and a benefit -sharing mechanism in 
the project.


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 129 
 
 
34. However, as stated in the country ow nership section, most of the policies in the country 
have been designed up to 2020. Viet Nam needs to have new policies with a vision of change, 
and mainstream climate change as a short -, medium - and long -term priority for the country.  
1.2.5.  Scalability and rep licability  
35. Scalability and replicability will largely depend on the willingness of the Vietnamese 
Government to invest not only in large -scale irrigation projects but also in supporting 
smallholders in adapting to climate change with in -country resources. Lessons learned could be 
scaled and mainstreamed by MARN to ensure better agricultural practices for vulnerable 
communities at the provincial and national level. According to the proposal, the methodology 
will be evaluated, and lessons learned c odified for analysis and for mainstreaming best practices 
into MARD and provincial rural development planning.  
36. The potential to maintain the climate innovation platforms will depend on the 
willingness of DARDs to convene relevant stakeholders, including pr ivate sector actors, after 
project completion.  Upscaling climate innovation platforms will depend on the results of the 
project, including profitability and sustainability, and the willingness of the diverse actors to maintain equitable and effective produ ction systems and value chains.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential                 Scale: Medium   
1.3.1.  Environmental co-benefits  
37. During the last decades, Viet Nam has increased its revenues from the agriculture sector 
to the detriment of the environment.  More ou tput has come from more inputs at increasing 
environmental costs.  
38. In response to the question of the independent TAP regarding whether the project will 
accelerate this trend with the conversion of more forest landscapes to agricultural lands, the United N ations Development Programme (UNDP) stated that the risk is considered very low 
owing to the following combinations of factors: (i) there is a clear definition of land uses; (ii) the forest owner is required to sign an agreement with local authorities to maintain/protect/plant 
trees as well as cultivate crops in the allocated lands; and (iii) there is a payment for ecosystem 
services schemes. However, the project makes no reference to these schemes or to the need to 
ensure the protection of water basins and  the means to do so.  
39. The project provides limited details of conservation/restoration aspects to ensure 
ecosystem services for effective and sustainable agricultural systems. Moreover, the project 
does not provide references to ensuring good agricultural p ractices, including the use of 
pesticides and fertilizers to avoid further environmental deterioration.  
40. The proponents explained that a grievance redress mechanism will be set up by the 
project to address and resolve encroachment, expansion, unauthorized u sage of resources and 
other related issues brought forward by project beneficiaries and community members. 
However, this mechanism is not described in the proposal and the role of MoNRE is not evident 
in the monitoring and control of land -use changes in th e relevant provinces.  
41. Furthermore, the project addresses the challenges of the smallholders with GCF 
resources, but not the challenges posed by the WEIDAP project to ensure a real balance between 
production and conservation efforts. Since the two projects are presented as connected efforts, 
there is an urgent need to understand the regeneration and conservation challenge of the 
overall project for the selected regions and possible connections to the water basins where the 
water is produced.


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 130 
 
 
1.3.2.  Economic co -bene fits 
42. The benefit of ensuring water provision will in turn improve the sustainability of the 
agriculture systems by diversifying crops, intensifying productivity and reducing risk of crop 
failure while providing benefits to the most vulnerable communities.  
43. Improved and diversified agricultural production systems will ensure food security and 
will provide opportunities to connect to markets, generating revenues to achieve a better 
quality of life for the communities. There are also new possibilities to creat e on -farm 
employment and to ensure efficient value chains able to support local economies.  
44. However, if Viet Nam is willing to take loans to deliver irrigation systems for large -scale 
farmers in order to continue to compete in the world markets, the approac h to involve 
smallholders and vulnerable communities should gradually change to allow a more equitable 
approach to investments, possibly through a differentiated water tariff system that allows cross 
subsidies from rich farmers to poor farmers. Economic an d financial incentives should gradually 
bridge inequalities and inefficiencies.  
1.3.3.  Social co-benefits  
45. The project is designed to enable the participation of poor/nearly poor farmers to 
identify adaptive strategies and manage climate risks with the provision of water for irrigation. 
The FFS will strengthen collaborative schemes to support more vulnerable households and will 
in turn provide information and technical skills to ensure that better farming techniques will 
result in increased productivity, labour an d monetary income to improve the livelihoods of 
communities.  
46. The project ensures that products are tailored to specific audiences, including ethnic 
minorities with less formal education and language limitations. This will certainly empower 
communities to participate in the project, linking them with possible markets and stronger 
agricultural producers able to involve them in their own value chains and efforts.  
1.3.4.  Gender -sensitive development  
47. The project presents an assessment of the current situation of wome n in Viet Nam and 
the major policies to ensure the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women in line with the principles of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women. These include the National Strategy o n Gender Equality for 2011 –2020 and the 
National Program on Gender Equality for 2016 –2020, which aims to transform public 
awareness and promote behavioural changes in gender equality. The project also assessed the 
current capacity of institutions and secto rs to mainstream climate gender priorities.   
48. Women in the selected areas carry the major burden of manual labour on small farms 
since men increasingly migrate to urban areas in search of wage labour. During water stress periods women spend more time and en ergy sourcing water for domestic and irrigation 
purposes. Their work is less recognized in the communities and women are therefore less 
represented in community decision -making levels and have less access to relevant extension, 
market and financial services. There is also a significant difference between men and women, 
ethnic minorities and other marginalized groups in terms of education and literacy.  
49.  The project presents an action plan to (i) ensure women’s access to training, extension, 
market, microfina nce and information services; (ii) provide better services tailored to women’s 
needs; and (iii) ensure equal ownership between men and women and management of shared water management facilities.


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 131 
 
 
50.  The proposal is to promote increased opportunities for women through specific 
activities and to empower women to participate in decision -making and in economic activities. 
As woman become more empowered, they could use agricultural profits to advocate for their 
community improvements, allowing better nutrition and education for their families.  
51. The project outlines specific barriers to ethnic minority participation (particularly 
indigenous groups), including unsustainable traditional farming practices and n on-fluency in 
Vietnamese, and low literacy rates. The project proposes to address these challenges with tailor -
made information and capacity -building programmes that are inclusive with better access to the 
project activities and benefits for women, indigen ous groups and ethnic minorities.  
52. Overall, the sustainable development potential is rated medium because it presents 
weaknesses in terms of environmental considerations and social equity linkages.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient                    Scale: Medium -High    
1.4.1.  Vulnerability of the country and vulnerable groups  
53. According to the funding proposal, over the past 25 years, Viet Nam’s agriculture sector 
has made immense progress. Steady advances in smallholder rice productivity and 
intensification have played a central role in the country’s successes in poverty reduction, 
national food security and social advancement. Viet Nam ranks among the top five global 
exporters in products as diverse as shrimp, coffee, cashews, rice and pepper.  
54. However, Viet Nam lags behind in relation to agricultural land, labour and water 
productivity and has seen its agricultural productivity decline in recent years. There is a need to 
improve agricultural efficiency, farmer welfare and product quality. Moreover, increased 
agricultu ral productivity has been achieved to the detriment of the environment.  
55. Agricultural productivity has further declined owing to the consequences of climate 
change and this trend will become more evident in the future. The climate in Viet Nam is strongly a ffected by the Asian Monsoon and overlapping modes of climate variability, including 
the Madden -Julian Oscillation, the El Niño/Southern Oscillation and the Indian Ocean Dipole, 
which together make it difficult to observe clear trends in precipitation, ari dity and drought. 
Viet Nam is already impacted by more irregular and intense climate variability and change and 
more extreme weather events. When considering climate change exposure, sensitivity and the 
capacity to adapt, the country is consistently classi fied as under “very high risk” or “extreme  
risk”.
3  
56. The Central Highlands region has suffered from heavy rainfall- induced floods, storms, 
landslides and drought.  Droughts are becoming more severe and are impacting a larger area 
than before and new areas ar e experiencing drought, owing to reduced dry season rainfall and a 
longer than usual dry season.4 
57. For the entire South -Central Coast, the most frequent disaster events have been floods, 
drought, heatwaves and strong winds. Annual temperature has slightly i ncreased and annual 
rainfall has increased significantly. However, in future projected scenarios, droughts in general will occur less often as rainfall will increase during the dry season, but droughts will become 
 
3 The World Risk Index ranks Viet Nam as 18th most at- risk in the world, under the category of “very high risk”; see 
World Risk Report 2016 . 2016. Alliance Development Works and United Nations University Institute for 
Environment and Human Security. Available at www.WorldRiskReport.org. The Climate C hange Vulnerability Index 
ranks Viet Nam 13th, under the category of ”extreme risk”; see Verisk Maplecroft. Climate Change Risk Atlas . 
Available at <maplecroft.com/about/news/ccvi.html>.  
4 Nguyen TTH, Mai TN, Bui DC and Nguyen TPT. 2016. Mapping Droughts o ver the Central Highland of Vietnam in El 
Niño Years Using Landsat Imageries .


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 132 
 
 
more extreme and last longer due to rising  temperatures, a changing monsoon pattern and 
rainfall deficits in the dry season.  
58. The most vulnerable population in the two selected regions comprises poor/nearly poor 
farmers, particularly women and ethnic minority farmers. For both groups, there is a s trong 
positive correlation between vulnerability, poverty and inequality, making it urgent to prioritize 
adaptation support to climate change.  
59. Viet Nam will have to cope with the need to increase agricultural productivity under the 
effects of climate chan ge, leaving no one behind.  As noted above, the project will invest in 
adaptive capacities of farmers in five provinces of southern Viet Nam, focusing on equal access to adaptation resources and options regardless of ethnic background or gender.  This will in turn 
ensure alleviation of poverty conditions of the selected provinces and communities.  
1.4.2.  The need to strengthen institutions and implementation capacity  
60. The project proposal presents several ongoing plans and policies in the agriculture and 
climate chan ge related sectors in Viet Nam, but in all cases the timing framework continues only 
until 2020. It is therefore not clear to  the independent TAP whether there will be more forward -
looking policies and plans to ensure the effectiveness of the theory of change of the project.  
61. According to the feasibility study, the current capacity and resources of the MARD 
agricultural extension services are constrained, particularly on regularly providing technical 
information and advice on climate -resilient farming pract ices and technologies. The existing 
services are top -down, supply driven, not interactive, have a limited technical focus, are 
oriented towards rice and high -value crops for export, and mostly benefit better -off male 
farmers and farmers who are fluent in V ietnamese. Extension services have no systematic 
collaboration or working relationships with research institutes.  
62. Government, development partners and private sector support on value chain 
development and agricultural modernization is considerable, particu larly for high -value crops 
and in areas well connected to markets. However, farming practices still remain dependent on 
one or two markets only, lack long -term planning and are more focused on volume of 
agricultural outputs instead of quality and the appli cation of very resource -intensive and non -
resilient practices that degrade natural resources such as water and soil.  Therefore, there is a 
great need to mainstream more resilient and sustainable agricultural production practices at 
the national level, invo lving the coordination of MARD and MoNRE, and to ensure that provinces 
are able to implement plans and programmes aligned with this need. Moreover, the Government 
of Viet Nam should ensure that investments in agriculture include poor small -scale farmers to  
avoid increasing inequality gaps.  
1.4.3.  Absence of alternative sources of financing  
63. According to the World Bank overview, Viet Nam´s development over the past 30 years 
has been remarkable. Economic and political reforms have spurred rapid economic growth, 
tran sforming what was then one of the world’s poorest nations into a lower middle -income 
country. Between 2002 and 2018, more than 45 million people were lifted out of poverty.  
Poverty rates declined sharply from over 70 per cent to below 6 per cent, and gross  domestic 
product (GDP) per capita increased by 2.5 times, standing at over USD 2,500 in 2018.  
64. The overview predicts that in the medium term, Viet Nam’s economic outlook is 
positive, despite signs of cyclical moderation in growth. Real GDP growth is projected to remain 
robust at around 6.5 per cent in 2020 and 2021 and the external balance remains u nder control 
and should continue to be financed by strong foreign direct investment inflows, which reached


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 133 
 
 
almost USD 18 billion in 2018 – accounting for almost 24 per cent of total investment in the 
economy.5 
65. Viet Nam’s current population of 97 million is  expected to increase to 120 million before 
moderating around 2050.  Feeding a growing population and maintaining agricultural exports 
without affecting the environment and natural assets, and thus adding to the climate threats, 
will be a challenge.  
66. In the  agriculture sector, there has been an emphasis on irrigation as a driver of 
agricultural growth, which has absorbed the majority of the sector’s budget. Between 2009 and 
2012 public expenditure on irrigation increased from 65 to 70 per cent of total agric ultural 
expenditure, mostly for large irrigation schemes for land dedicated to rice cultivation.6 This 
increase is a concern if it indicates the crowding out of public resources for other priority areas 
such as crop diversification, agricultural services, forestation and other priorities outlined in 
ARP. It is recommended that some public spending be reallocated away from irrigation to other 
areas such as crop diversification, regenerative agriculture and agricultural services.  
67. The focus to diversify produc tion and improve water productivity is sorely needed as 
water productivity is low compared with other countries7 and crop diversity will support 
climate adaptation and add resilience to the agricultural and food production sectors.  
68. Viet Nam is taking a loa n from ADB and matching resources to develop the WEIDAP 
irrigation system. According to the project proposal, b etween 2012 and 2016, Viet Nam’s debt 
burden increased significantly as a percentage of GDP, and as a result, the Government has imposed stricter  loan limits, approving loans only for large infrastructure projects.  
69. However, it is not clear to  the independent TAP why the Government of Viet Nam is not 
able to prioritize further irrigation investments including last -mile connections for the 
vulnerabl e communities around the WEIDAP project as part of the overall loan, as this will 
represent only a small percentage of the project investment.  
1.5 Country ownership                                  Scale: High  
1.5.1.  Alignment with national climate strategy  
70. The Nation al Climate Change Strategy for 2011 –2020 recognizes Viet Nam as one of the 
countries most affected by climate change and outlines a large number of priority actions, 
including upgrading hydrometeorological forecasting and early warning systems, modernizing  
farming practices, including water efficiency, restructuring agricultural systems towards more 
climate -resistant crops with sustainable use and management of water resources and increasing 
forest coverage. In 2016, MARD issued an updated action plan on ad dressing climate change in 
the agriculture sector for the period 2016 –2020 and with a vision to 2050. The plan has three 
major sections: strengthening the policy and institutional framework and capacities; adaptation and mitigation actions within the agric ulture sector; and prevention and mitigation of disasters 
within the agriculture sector.  
71. Also in 2016 the Government of Viet Nam approved a specific implementation plan to 
make progress in its commitments towards the goals of the Paris Agreement, acknowle dging 
adaptation challenges such as inefficient institutions with weak capacity at the lowest level, 
where most of the work needs to be done; limitations in the country’s forecasting and  early  
 
5 World Bank Country Overview . 2019. [ https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/vietnam/overview ] 
6 Government of  Vietnam and the World Bank. 2017. Vietnam Public Expenditure Review: Fiscal Policies towards 
Sustainability, Efficiency, and Equity . 
[http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/156711508765460281/pdf/120605- PER -v1-PUBLIC -44p -
VietnamPublicExpenditureReviewSummaryReportEN.pdf ] 
7 As footnote 5 above.


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 134 
 
 
warning systems in terms of timeliness and reliability; a focus on disaster response rather than 
prevention; too much investment in structural measures with limited attention to non -
structural measures; and an underdeveloped risk insurance market.  
72. Viet Nam has also developed (i) a National Strategy on Natural Disaster  Prevention, 
Response and Mitigation for the period 2007 –2020; (ii) a Green Growth Strategy and Action 
Plan approved in 2014 with some actions oriented to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; and (iii) 
a REDD+ Action Program approved in 2012, with three differ ent phases ending in 2020 with 
actual implementation projects and activities.  
73. It is worth noticing that even though Viet Nam started climate change programmes 
some time ago, most of them have a time frame that will end in 2020. It is therefore important t o 
develop a new climate change strategy for the coming decades.  
74. Moreover, the proposed project mainly highlights the need to ensure water for 
agricultural productivity but does not demonstrate evident connections to ensure water supply 
through programmes t o conserve river basins or restoration and conservation programmes at 
large.  
1.5.2.  Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
75. MARN is the executing entity for the project. MARD oversees the coordination of a 
variety of national policy and  institutional frameworks for the agriculture and rural 
development sectors. It has proven knowledge and capacity to develop programmes for the vulnerable population and has an important budget allocation within the country’s overall 
budget.  
76. Besides the action plan framework for adaptation and mitigation of the sector  
commented above , MARN has a National Targeted Program on New Rural Development 2016 –
2020 and ARP for the period 2013 –2020, which aims to shift the Government’s role from being 
the primary investor and service provider to being the facilitator of investments and services 
provided by others.  
77. MARN and UNDP are currently collaborating in the implementation of the ongoing GCF 
Enhancing Coastal Resilience project as well as UN -REDD Viet Nam  – Phase II  Programme . For 
this reason, MARN has already passed the capacity assessment required under the UNDP 
National Implementation Modality, which considers managerial, technical, administrative and 
financial management capacities.  
78. Under MARD, the Central Project Office fo r Water Resources (CPO) will be delegated to 
coordinate the project. CPO will serve as focal point with donors to implement irrigation development projects and to manage, monitor and consolidate information on the proposed 
irrigation projects, including th e WEIDAP project and the proposed last -mile connection project.  
79. CPO has wide experience managing foreign -funded projects and has successfully 
completed five ADB projects, nine World Bank projects and two Japan International 
Cooperation Agency projects in the irrigation sector. CPO already works closely with ministries, 
including the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Ministry of Finance and MoNRE, as well 
as with provinces, including at the commune level, specifically through the WEIDAP project. 
MARD , through CPO, will also tap into ongoing partnerships with development partners (e.g. 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, Japan International Cooperation 
Agency, World Bank, ADB), civil society organizations, international non -governm ental 
organizations (INGOs) and private sector partners to mobilize and catalyse resources, 
maximizing the impact of combined resources.  
80. UNDP began its operation in Viet Nam in 1977 and has supported different policy 
formulation processes and implemented projects . UNDP has been involved in the formulation of


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 135 
 
 
the National Target Program to Respond to Climate Change (2008), the climate change 
scenarios, the National Climate Change Strategy and the Green Growth Action Plan.  
81. UNDP is recognized as an experienc ed agency in institutional development and capacity-
building, bringing a long -term and institutional and people -centred focus to capacity 
development. It has a portfolio of technical assistance projects on climate change with key 
ministries, including:  
(a) The project Strengthening Capacity and Institutional Reform for Green Growth and 
Sustainable Development in Viet Nam;  
(b) The MONRE -MARD project Capacity Building for Implementation of the National Climate 
Change Strategy;  
(c) The MARD project Integrating Agricultu re into National Adaptation Plans; and  
(d) The ongoing GCF- supported project Improving the Resilience of Vulnerable Coastal 
Communities to Climate Change Related Impacts in Viet Nam.  
82. UNDP has less proven experience in developing irrigation infrastructure proj ects. 
However, the proposed project has the support of the ADB WEIDAP project and MARN, and UNDP will need to ensure and encourage harmonious approaches towards mainstreaming 
climate change and ensuring sustainable livelihoods for the vulnerable communities.  
1.5.3.  Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
83. The project presents a stakeholder consultation report, which includes evidence of 
meetings in the selected regions in 2017, consultations with MARD and ADB in 2017, 14 
consult ations with non -governmental organizations (NGOs) and international donors and 2 
with private sector entities. The project further presents consultations with districts and 
communes and with farmer groups and a final consultation mission to the five target  provinces 
to consult with local authorities and households on proposed CRA packages and a pond operation and maintenance plan (3 –10 May 2018).  
84. The Government of Viet Nam with the support of UNDP has consulted NGO networks, 
including the Vietnam Women’s Un ion and other stakeholders, to ensure effective engagement 
in design and participation in implementation. The proposed GCF project will build on existing initiatives which already engage multiple partners including NGOs and INGOs, such as Vietnam 
Women’s U nion, CARE, SNV, Oxfam. To ensure that the views of women and ethnic groups were 
captured, specific efforts were made to consult with women and different ethnic groups, and to collect information regarding the impacts of climate change on them, in the desi gn of this 
project proposal.  
85. The project presents an extensive list of previous related projects and will benefit from 
lessons learned in the design of activities. The application of community -based approaches 
during implementation will also ensure that r egular communication is maintained throughout 
implementation with commune -level representatives, at least 30 per cent of whom will be 
women.  
86. The project presents a stakeholder engagement plan indicating how the project will 
continue stakeholder engagement during project implementation, including encouraging women and ethnic households to participation in the project.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                   Scale: Medium -High  
1.6.1.  Cost -effectiveness and efficiency


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 136 
 
 
87. The proposed project to complement the WEI DAP project is requesting total GCF 
financing of USD 30,205,367 million to implement all project activities. The total amount for the 
WEIDAP project is USD 124.26 million over the six -year project cycle. The breakdown of the 
funding for the total WEIDAP pr oject is (i) an ADB loan amount of USD 100.00 million from its 
Asian Development Fund; (ii) an ADB grant of USD 1.05 million; and (iii) government co -
financing of USD 23.22 million from the central and provincial budgets.  
88. From the GCF budget, around 50 per  cent will be invested in contractual services to 
deliver construction/provision of the following assets:  
(a) A total of 4,765 last -mile connections to the WEIDAP water infrastructure spread across 
five provinces and identified during project preparation usin g demographic and 
socioeconomic analysis;  
(b) Construction of 490 new household ponds and 185 new shared ponds with 
bioengineering solutions, in addition to upgrading 484 existing ponds;  
(c) Providing 8,621 households with CRA packages; and  
(d) A total of 65 learning  sites, including on seeds, seedlings, fertilizer, highly efficient 
irrigation and/or low -cost water saving schemes.  
89. The other 50 per cent will be invested in project personnel and in developing knowledge 
and development platforms such as FFS, farmer train ing, a train the trainer programme and 
delivering the agroclimate services component, through national and international consultancy services.  In the view of the independent TAP this percentage seems overestimated. Potential 
savings could ensure more direct support in the form of assets to the communities.  
90. The project estimates incremental earnings generated by the enhanced crop yields and 
income due to increased and more reliable water during the dry season.  In a modest scenario, 
the financial analysis mod el presented in the project includes a 20 per cent incremental income 
generation. With the GCF grant, the project achieves financial viability with an acceptable financial internal rate of return of 8.82 per cent and with the project investment resulting i n a 
net present value of USD 21,991,900.  
91. An economic analysis was carried out for the project by comparing with - and without -
project scenarios, following the guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects of the United 
Nations Development Programme (2015 ). The analysis shows a 25 –40 per cent increase in 
agricultural yield from CRA investments and a 10 per cent increase in the income of the 
benefited households. Overall, the project is expected to generate a total economic net present 
value of USD 34.9 mil lion assessed at 10 per cent.  
92. The operation and maintenance plan emphasize  the strong commitment to maintain the 
assets by the Government of Viet Nam and the community, expecting 10 years of continued 
operations of the assets beyond the project period. The proposed operation and maintenance 
costs have been estimated for a time s pan of 16 years (2020 –2035). Of the operation and 
maintenance costs outlay in the project, USD 1.549 has been committed by the central and provincial governments and USD 4,642,932 (cash and in kind) by the beneficiary households.  
93. The independent TAP considers that the proposed financial structure is heavily 
dependent on the investments in cash and in kind by the communities. A more detailed 
assessment should be developed in the design stage of the assets, ensuring a real assessment of 
the willingness to pa y for operation and maintenance of the individual and communal assets, 
refining the sustainability analysis of the project.  
94. On the other hand, the Government of Viet Nam should think of including last -mile 
connections to poor farmers in its irrigation infr astructure loans, and propose grant 
arrangements for knowledge -sharing, capacity -building and extension services, in order to 
ensure resources to scale the model to more vulnerable communities in the country.


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.02  
Page 137 
 
 
95. Moreover, the project could develop an effecti ve irrigation water tariff system that 
allows for cross subsidies between rich farmers and poor farmers, gradually ensuring 
sustainability of the infrastructure investments in a more equitable scheme.  
96. Based on the points mentioned in paragraphs 9 0–92 above, the project efficiency and 
effectiveness is rated medium.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
97. The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the project subject to the 
following condition:  
(a) Prior to the second disbursement of the project, the accredited entity shall submit to the 
Secretariat a report, in a form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat, which shall 
contain:  
(i) An estimate of the area cultivated for each major crop type per cropping season 
to es timate the potential adverse impacts of climate change and the additional 
volume of water needed for irrigation in the selected farm areas;  
(ii) An analysis of the current programmes to conserve and restore water basins that are providing water services to allo w the development of the proposed 
irrigation systems, assessment of water availability based on agricultural land -
use planning (by crop), detailing land -use planning actions as well as 
conservation and restoration activities in order to ensure continued su pply of 
ecosystem services (water, microclimate and soils) favourable to the 
downstream irrigation systems and the resilience of the agricultural production 
system, including  institutional, financial and operational responsibilities; and  
(iii) A detailed analys is of the sustainability of the project interventions after project 
completion including an analysis of a possible cross -subsidy water tariff system 
and an assessment of the willingness to pay by the farmers for water related activities under activity 1.2 of the project to maintain and operate the water 
assets.   
98.  The independent TAP further recommends that the accredited entity, together with the 
Government of Viet Nam, develop updated agricultural and climate change strategies and plans beyond 2020, suppo rting the vision of change of the proposed project, presenting the overall 
pathway to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 138*
---

G
CF/B.2 5/02/Add.02 
Page 1 38  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment  (FP 125) 
Proposal n ame : Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture to climate change -
induced water insecurity in the Central Highlands and South -Centr al Coast 
regions of Vietnam  
Accredited entity :  United Nations Development Programme  
I
mpact potential  
The high rating is noted.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The medium rating is noted. 
1.Climate Innovation Platforms are a key innovation that bring togethe r all
stakeholders in the differ ent value chains  – farmers, input and technical assistance
providers, microfinance, buyers, processors, exporters et al - to formulate
strategies for the development of the “industry” (from field to consumer)  for the
differen t products.  These will inc lude better -off farmers (“agribusiness”) to
mentor and support poor/near -poor  farmer groups. By implementing Farmer
Field Schools with mixed socio -economic groups, poor/near -poor farmers,
particularly ethnic minority and women fa rmers, project will be able  to develop
mentoring relationships and partnerships with more successful farmers and
strengthen cooperatives or other forms of collective effort.
2.A second innovation is the participatory development of agro -climate advisories
(Participatory Scenario Plann ing) involving farmers, agro -climatological experts,
and others in compiling and interpreting institutional data , analyzing traditional
knowledge and information , and synthesizing them to produce actionable,
localized, agro -clima te advisories for improved farme r management of climate
risk.
3.Basin protection through conservation, regeneration and management of f orest s
is w
ell-established in Vietnam, and includes a large number of plans and programs
detailed under section E.5.1. of the Funding Proposal  (Exist ence of a nat ional
climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs,
NAPAs and NAPs ), including the current UN -REDD + program in the Central
Highlands. While most of the policies have a timeline end ing in 2020, amendment
or renewa l of the se policies is under  discussion. The Institute of Water Resources
Planning (IWRP) operates within the Ministry of Agriculture and RuralDevelopment at national and provincial levels with major tasks including
regulati ng the use of water resour ces, as well as protecting and developing water
resources sustainably. IWRP formulat es strategies and policies for water
resources across Vietnam.  IWRP will be directly engaged by the ADB under the
WEIDAP project to undertake wat er resources assessment s (surface and
grou ndwater) and water allocation framework development.


---
*Page 139*
---

 
       GCF/B.2 5/02/Add.0 2  Page 139   
  
  
Sustainable development potential  
The medium rating is noted.  
4. The watersheds on which the provision of irrigation water depends are highly 
forested , and the overall forest area has incr eased over the p ast decades.  Vietnam 
has a large number of policies and programs to conserve and use forest s 
sustainably  and is well aware of the need to maintain optimum ecosystem 
function in watersheds for continual provision of water for irrigation . The 
Institute for W ater Resources Planning is part of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development, the Implementing Partner  for this project.  
5. The WEIDAP systems will make irrigation water available to all farmers 
regardless of  socio -economic status. The costs of the l ast-mile connections to 
these systems for better -off farmers are covered by these farmers themselves, and 
they will eventually pay for water use, pending future operationalization of a 
farm -level metering system. T he costs of the last -mile c onnections for poor/near -
poor farmers will be covered by the GCF grant; government policy provides 
irrigation water free -of-charge to poor and near -poor farmers.  This system of 
cross -subsidization may  evolve over time with improve ments in metering, higher 
yields and inco mes, an d other factors.  
6. In light of the independent TAP’ s comments as well as the suggeste d conditions 
presented below, the project will compile information about ongoing initiatives 
that aim to protect or restore w aters heds as w ell as assessment of land u se 
planning to understand the imp act of th ose activities on the overall water 
availability. Please see our response to the proposed condition #2 below.   
Needs of the recipient  
The medium -high rating is noted.  
7. The Government of  Vietnam chooses to access fundi ng from the Green Climate 
Fund to provide last mile connections to some of the most vulnerable smallholder farm ers in the fiv e project provinces. Vietnam avails itself of GCF funding as a 
developing country and  Party to the UNFCCC.   
Country ownership  
The high rating is noted . 
Efficiency and effectiveness


---
*Page 140*
---

 
       GCF/B.2 5/02/Add.0 2  Page 140   
  
  
The medium -high rating is noted.  
8. Please note that he project idea was originated with the recognition of the 
Government of Viet Nam that poor farmers would  not be able to  pay for the 
resilience bui lding , last -mile connection to benefit from a new irrigation 
infrastructure project financed through  concessional loans ; and that wit hout 
GCF ’s grant financing  there was a risk of entren ching the existing disparity  
between poor and non- poor in the opportun ities  to build resilience to climate 
risks.  The project has been designed with a view to increase t he income for poor 
and near  poor farmers, level the playing field in terms of their access to 
information, knowled ge, capacity  and markets, and potentiall y expan d the 
development finance assistance (e.g. concessional loan programs) to include these 
poor farme rs. The importance of b eneficiary contributions to the O &M 
requirements  has been fully reflected in the design o f the project . Consultations 
with stake holders  during  project preparation i ndicated that the proposed 
investment s in cash and in kind  by farmers were feasible and agreeable; farmer 
contributions were also considered desirable from the point of view of stim ulating 
and ma intaining ownership, resp onsibil ity, an d commitment (“skin in the game”).  
9. Development of “an effective irrigation water tariff system that allows for cross 
subsidies between rich farmers to poor farmers” is in line with the new Law on 
Hydrau lic Structures,  in which provinces are exp ected  to initiate water charging 
for irrigation. Under the WEIDAP portion of this project, a w ater charging 
framework, institutional arrangement s and protocols to engage service providers 
to operate modernized irri gation systems will be developed.  
Overall  rema rks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel : 
 
Max 250 words  
UNDP ’s response to the condition  prior to the 2nd disbursement proposed by the independent 
TAP.   
• Present an estimate of the area cultivated fo r each major crop type per cro pping season 
to es timate the pot ential adverse impacts of climate change and the additional volume 
of water needed for irrigation in the selected farm areas.  
This is noted.  
During the review process, w e provided informat ion with which to calculate the current a nd 
future water requi remen ts before and after the introduction of  Climate Resilien t Agriculture  
(CRA)  packages  (See a table here ). The responses an d table , organized by communes,  include  
the following:  
• Key crops currentl y grown ;  
• Total numbers of  hectares  that poor or near poor farm ers are currently cultivating;   
• Expected crop mix after applic ation  of CRA  packages;   
• Estimated  number of hectares of  resilient production that is expected to take place, 
and;  
• Estimated increase in the crop water demand for different crops under climate 
change.   
The CRA pa ckages , dis tributed through  the Farmer F ield School,  are intended to equip 
farmers with  technical skills and to prov ide financial incentives for 1) diversi fying the crop


---
*Page 141*
---

 
       GCF/B.2 5/02/Add.0 2  Page 141   
  
  
mix to include more d rought resi stan t crops and varieties (e.g. garli c); 2) introducing 
resilience -enhancing techniques  (e.g. crop rotation) ; and 3) diversification of the system itself  
by integrating a nnuals with perennials or perennials with other wa ter-efficient perennials 
(e.g. coffee with av ocado) .  
Before the second  disbursement , table s will be pr esented with updated estima tes of: 
• The areas of eac h crop cultivated  (estimate)  in each cr opping season within the a reas 
served by supplementary irrigation ; 
• The range of expected changes in ET0 and crop water requirements for e ach crop a nd 
cropping season ; 
• The total water requiremen ts for ea ch crop and cro ppin g season under both current 
climat e and future climate change;  
• The additional volume of wa ter required for supplementary irrigation in the farm ed 
areas  due to climate chan ge. 
Note that at the time of t he second disbu rsement , the  CRA packages will not have been 
delivered; therefore, refined e stimates of the new crop mix  will be used for this purpose.   
 
• An  analysis of the current programs to conserve and resto re water basin s that are 
providing wa ter ser vices to allow t he developm ent o f the proposed irrigation systems, 
assessment of water availability based on agricultural land use planning (by crops), 
detailing land use planning actions as well as conservation and restoratio n activities in 
order t o ensur e continued supp ly of ecosy stem services (water, microclimate and soils) 
favourable to the downstream irrigation systems and the resilience of agricultural 
production system, including  institutional, financial and operational  responsibil ities.  
Please not e that a water balance analy sis has been conducted for the large -scale irrigation to 
be fina nced through  the AD B loan  (WEIDAP) , and this analysi s has  been submitted  as part of  
UNDP ’s submission in October 2019. Purpose of this analysis is to understand water 
availability for d ownstream irrigation to m eet the dem and for irrigation, domest ic and 
industrial water supply , and environmental flow , and the complementary last-mile 
connection , to be finance d with GCF resources, has been designed accordingly.  Given that the 
GCF investment is a small additional component to the wider WEIDAP programme, it cannot 
be expected to m onitor the impact of  large -scale WEI DAP investments on irrigation  water 
demands.  
 
However , recogni zing that  moni toring of the water use through out the lifetime of the project 
and beyond  is desirable , the project will  work with the  Gove rnment and ADB to  mon itor the 
water use for irr igati on at  headwo rk for the WEIDAP command areas . It will also attempt to 
monitor , to the e xtent possible  via a combination of remote sensing and fieldwork , key crops 
cultivated per cropping season  and th eir water requirements  in the WEIDAP  areas , the 
results of which will be presented before the se cond disbursement .  
 In addition, s tocktaking of water conservation programmes with in the catchment areas  and 
an assessment of land use pl anning  (by crops)  to u nderstand water demand  will be 
undertaken before the seco nd di sbursement.


---
*Page 142*
---

 
       GCF/B.2 5/02/Add.0 2  Page 142   
  
  
 
• A detailed analysis of the sustai nability of the project interventio ns after project 
completion incl uding an analysis of a possible c ross -subsidy water tariff system and an 
asses sment of the willingness to pay  to maintain and operate th e wat er assets by the 
communities.  
Of the US$4.64M contributions expected from beneficiary households towards O&M , over 16 
years after the completion of the construction, annual cash contributions are expected to 
range from US$10 to US$6 7 per household  dependin g on the support they receive from the 
project. Those who receive the last -mile irrigation scheme is expecte d to pay US$27/year; 
supplementary irrigation US$10/year;  and on- farm water -saving  technologies US$ 40/year . If 
a hou sehold receives both last -mile c onnection and on- farm  water -saving technologies, th e 
annual O&M contributions will be US$67 .  
 
The average i ncremental increase in income from the project intervention  was con serva tively 
estimat ed at 14% of t he farm income f or beneficiary households or approximately 
US$159/ year. Based on this, the  financial obli gations e xpected to the project beneficiaries for 
the O &M purpose range  from  6% of fa rm incomes ( for app roximately 43% of the 
beneficiari es) to 42% of farm incomes (fo r approximately 5% of the b enefi ciaries) , which  is 
expected to be moderate and thus a willingness to pay assessment is deemed  not necessa ry 
for the project . Moreo ver, please note that it is a stand ard practice in Viet Nam for 
communities to take care of minor repairs and replacement s. Th is point has been discussed 
during stakeholder consultations undertaken in the target c ommunes.  
 
That said non etheless, we acknowledge the importance of monitoring the performance of 
comm unity and local government co -financing for O&M requirements  for ens uring 
sustainability of the project investments and resu lts. Thus,  the perfor mance of co-finan cing 
mobilization will be m onit ored and presented in the APRs.  Moreover, in light of comments 
from iTAP, towards the end of the  project implementatio n, a rep ort o n exit s trategy will be 
prepared with recommendations for ensuring the sustaina bility of the project interventions.


---
*Page 143*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
1 I 
G
ENDER ASSESSMENT AND  GENDER ACTION PLAN 
“Strengthening the resilience of smallholder agriculture to  
climate change -induced water insecurity in the Central Highlands and 
South-Central Coast regions of Vietnam” Project Gender documentation for FP125


---
*Page 144*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
2 
 
 I 
Table of Contents  
Executive summary  .................................................................................................................................... 4 
1. Introduction  ......................................................................................................................................... 8 
2. Objectives of the gender assessment  .............................................................................................. 8 
3. Methodology  ........................................................................................................................................ 9 
3.1 Desk review  .................................................................................................................................  9 
3.2 Consultative meetings with stakeholders  ............................................................................... 9 
3.3 Focus Group Discussions  ....................................................................................................... 11 
4. Key findings of the gender assessment  ......................................................................................... 11 
4.1 Policy framework on addressing gender inequality in Viet Nam  ....................................... 11 
4.2 Gender mainstreaming in climate change resilience policies  ........................................... 13 
4.3 Gender policy implementation mechanisms  ........................................................................ 15 
4.4 Poverty reduction and Gender  ............................................................................................... 17 
4.5 Health and waterborne disease ............................................................................................. 18 
4.6 Employment and gender issues  ............................................................................................. 19 
4.7 Political Participation and Decision Making .......................................................................... 19 
4.8 Land rights  .................................................................................................................................  19 
4.9 Gender -based violence ........................................................................................................... 20 
4.10  Ethnic minority issues  .............................................................................................................. 21 
4.11  Poverty and ethnic minorities  .................................................................................................  21 
4.12  Access to health services........................................................................................................ 22 
4.13  Employment and ethnic minorities  ......................................................................................... 22 
4.14  Political participation  ................................................................................................................ 23 
4.15  Assets ownership of ethnic minorities  ................................................................................... 23 
4.16  Early marriage in ethnic minority community  ....................................................................... 24 
4.17  Land rights issues of ethnic minority people  ........................................................................ 24 
5. Key issues on gender Inequality and social inclusion in the project areas  ............................... 25 
5.1 Population and ethnic minority  ............................................................................................... 25 
5.2 Poverty conditions  .................................................................................................................... 25 
5.3 Current gender mainstreaming capacity  ............................................................................... 27 
5.4 Gender mainstreaming capacity of DARD  ........................................................................... 28


---
*Page 145*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
3 
 
 I 
5.5 Gender mainstreaming capacity of the Women Union ....................................................... 29 
5.6 Knowledge and experience of women and men in climate change  .................................  30 
5.7 Gender labour division in agricultural activities  ................................................................... 30 
5.8 Community participation in social groups  ............................................................................. 32 
5.9 Access to water for production ............................................................................................... 34 
5.10  Decision making issues  ........................................................................................................... 36 
5.11  Household Liabilities  ................................................................................................................ 38 
5.12  Access to climate information .................................................................................................  41 
5.13  Migration and gender issues  .................................................................................................. 41 
6. Ongoing initiatives addressing gender and ethnic minority issues in the target areas ............ 42 
7. Analysis  .............................................................................................................................................. 43 
8. Recommendations  ............................................................................................................................ 45 
9. Proposed gender action plan (GAP) and budget  ........................................................................... 48 
Annex A: Bibliography  ......................................................................................................................... 65


---
*Page 146*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
4 
 
 I 
Executive summary  
1. As part of the project design process, the gender assessment was conducted by UNDP to provide an 
overview of gender and climate change policy and prioritize gender issues needing to be addressed by 
this project proposal. The assessment used different methodologies  such a s desk review of current 
policy documents and study reports; consultative meetings with different stakeholders at national, 
district and commune levels; and focus group discussions with farmers who are potential ly impact ed 
by this project. This gender assessment provides  inputs and baseline information to the design and 
implement ation of  the project’s gender action plan (GAP) aimed at  ensuring gender equality in climate 
change resilience in Vietnam. The gender assessment also provides  an overview of gender policy and 
prioritized gender  issues in  Viet Nam and in the target project provinces.  
2. Legal and policy frameworks on gender equality and climate change : The gender assessment 
showed that Viet Nam has a strong legal and policy framework to address gender equality and climate change response. This advantage can be seen through a series of legal and policy documents that 
have been issued by the Government of Viet Nam to promote and ensure gender equality and climate change response. However, the gender assessment also show s some gaps in implementation of 
gender equality policy and limitations  in coordination between the gender -related legal documents and 
clima te change- related legal documents. The primary issue is that the legal documents on gender have 
strongly confirmed that gender mainstreaming principles will be applied in the whole process of policy 
formulation and implementation, but there is unclear guidance from the state management agencies 
on gender equality as well as limitations  in the capacity to guide on gender mainstreaming in climate 
change response. In addition, the capacity and interest of policy makers and policy implementers is 
very low in id entifying gender issues and t aking action,  as well as allocating resources to address 
gender issues when designing and implementing climate change programs. As a result, gender 
mainstreaming in climate change policy formulation and implementation is poor.  
3. Mechanism s to promote gender equality: Viet Nam has three strong mechanism s to address gender 
equality in practice, but these mechanisms also show some limitation and confusion. The state 
management agency on gender equality is the first strong mechanism in theory. According to the Law 
on Gender Equality, the Ministry of Labour , Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA) will be a state 
management agency at national level , and the People’s Committee is the state agency on gender 
equality at provincial, district and commune level s. Both MOLISA and the People’s Committee have 
their own or ganizational structures from provincial level to district and commune level. However, the 
weakness of this mechanism is a limited capacity of technical staff and leaders in provision of guidance 
and orientation on gender mainstreaming into practice. Due to the limited capacity of gender 
mainstreaming, the technical staff and leaders from this agency have not been able to provide clear 
guidance on gender mainstreaming to other technical agencies at the same level. The second 
mechanism,  called National Commit tee for Advancement of Women (NCFA),  shows high potential and 
has significant power to influence how gender mainstreaming works. This also has an organizational 
structure from national level to commune level. This mechanism has  also been established in eac h 
organization.  However, the main weakness is that the focus is  on women issues only. In addition, the 
quality of activities performed by this  mechanism is poor. Last but not least, the Vietnamese Women’s  
Union (VWU) is a membership organization and has an organizational structure from national to 
provincial, district, commune and village  level. The mission and vision of the VWU  is to protect the 
legitimacy of rights and benefits of women. However, due to limitation of gender mainstreaming 
capacity, the VWU is facing with some challenges in facilitating gender mainstreaming into policy 
formulation and implementation process es in general and climate change in particular.


---
*Page 147*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
5 
 
 I 
4. Poverty  and social issues: Poverty and gender is different iated by  household structure and ethnic 
minority groups . Poverty is  a heavy burden on households headed by women, poor households  and 
ethnic minority households. Children and elderly people are more likely impacted by poverty . Women 
are disadvantage d in their ability to access and control resources, to advance their capacity and to take 
advantage of development opportunities, which result s in relegat ing them to the roles of mother and 
housewife. In contrast, men dominate control over land and other valuable assets  in the family and 
community. Most land tenure certificates are issued under the name of a male household head since  
registration has followed the old land law . This can lead to the denial of women’s rights in cases of 
divorce or inheritance. Men typically make the decisions about household business investments and 
use of income. Limited asset possession reduces women’s access to credit and investment 
opportunities. Small -scale farmers, in particular women, face unequal access to knowledge, technology 
and market s. Poverty persists in remote mountainous areas and is more concentrated in the communes 
where indigenous people live. The rural population in the WEIDAP irrigation command areas  in the five 
target provinc es accounts for 85% of the total population.  
5. Employment and gender issue s: Women are concentrated in fewer sectors and occupation than 
men. This highlights female workers’ greater vulnerability in working conditions and pay, reflected,  for 
example,  in women’s much higher share of unpaid family work. The Country Gender Assessment 2011 
of the World Bank also draws attention to the disproportionate time spent by women on unpaid work at 
home and recommends collection of better and more detailed data on various forms of unpaid work, 
given that systematic evidence on these activities is still sparse. Women’s wages are now about 75% of men’s , according to the 2009 Labour Force Survey (LFS), not considering differences in education 
or job experience. Nevertheless, differences remain that are suggestive of higher vulnerability for 
women. Women are also in more vulnerable jobs, for example, own- account work and unpaid family 
labour, the two categories seen as a minimum estimate of the lack of decent employment . In the 
agriculture sector, w omen make essential contributions to food production and to agricultural and rural 
economies, but it is impossible to verify empirically the share produced by women. Female farmers, for example, play a key role in buying inputs  and selling their products, but are frequently unrecognized as 
economic actors, both at household level and in value chains .  
6. Gender mainstreaming capacity  of key actors in the target project areas:  In regard to the state 
management agency on gender equal ity (People’s Committee and DOLISA), m ost staff and leaders 
assigned to do gender work from the state management agencies have been trained on gender equality 
concepts. However, even so , many of them still lack skills to identify the gender issues (gender analysis 
skills) and to propose specif ic actions for gender mainstreaming into specific technical areas. The 
interviews with this agency during the gender assessment showed that there is a high need to make 
sure that these two agencies can perform state management tasks effectively.  In regard to provincial 
DARDs, the provincial government agency on agriculture, they must  develop their own action plans  on 
gender equality and advancement of women within their  organizations . However, there is a large gap 
in knowledge and skills of technical staff and leaders of DARD on gender concepts ; and gender 
mainstreaming is limited. It is the same with the state management agency on climate change : gender 
equality and gender mainstreaming are not realized effectively by the technical staff and leaders 
because of a lack of knowledge and skills to do so . The Vietnam Women Union’s staff are not currently 
able to maximize their role in promoting gender equality in agriculture activities and climate change resilience.  
7. Key gender issues in the target project communes : Both male and female farmers are aware of 
negative impacts of climate change on  agricultur al production and daily life, such as reductions in 
productivity and quality and lack of water leading to abandoned production land. There are limited


---
*Page 148*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
6 
 
 I 
actio ns by men and women to overcome the scarcity of water resources, especially during the dry 
season, i n which women often have less access to information on climate change and water 
conservation models than men because women are more likely to be busy with household work.  
Gender stereotypes determine the r oles of women in a gricultur al production.  Work related to irrigation, 
such as planning, building, and maintaining systems, equipment and infrastructure are led by men. 
Women are reluctant to do this work because it is considered to be heavy work , and they are not often 
given opportunities to do this  in any case. As a result, women do not have experience and their 
contribution is limited in this field.  In regard to community participation, the Farmer s and Women’s  
Unions are organizations where most female -head ed households  participate.  For community meetings, 
men are generally in the majority, especially in ethnic minority areas. Men are predominant in 
community meetings both in terms of amount and quality of participation. Women are less likely to 
participate in community meetings because they are occupied with housework. Women only participate 
in community meetings when men/husbands are busy. On the other hand, due to the lack of information 
and knowledge and limited self -confidence, even when participating in community meetings, women 
often do not provide much feedback or comments. As a result, women are less likely to influence the 
decision -making process  on water management and production planning at community  level.  
8. Access to water and gender issues: Poor and near -poor households have to invest a large proportion 
of their income to buy equipment, pumps , and pipe, and to pay for electric ity, etc. if they want access 
to water. This creates an excessive  financial burden on poor and near poor households , among th em, 
households  headed by women account for a significant number. Poor and near -poor households, 
especially the poor and near -poor households headed by women,  are often faced with difficulties to 
invest in infrastructure in order to access water for production. In addition, the change in water 
availability also serious ly impact s women’s  health and livelihoods . Declining access to water leads to 
increasing distance s to collect available water. Most of women ’s livelihood options are dependent  on 
agricultur al production, however, due to gender norms that rule that women should stay at home to 
take care of children, women are not prioritized for agricultural training opportunities  nor are they often 
able to participate in community discussions on water solutions. The change in water availability 
serious ly impact s women’s  livelihood s and early recovery.  
9. Decision making on climate change resilience : At household level, men make most of the important 
decisions within the family. Women may be involved in a consultation process, but men make the final 
decision. Women follow the guidance and direction of men. Women’s  roles are often limited to  domestic 
work and child care. Women retain  money but the final decision of how to use this money is  made by 
men. In agricultur al production, men also make fi nal decisions on almost all of the work , for example, 
selection of seeds, borrow ing money to invest in production; buying high value equipment ; or access 
to market.  
10. Access to climate information: T elevision is the most popular medium  helping both men and women 
access public information, including climate information. Both men and women access weather 
forecast s through television to adjust  their daily production plan such as watering, fertilizing or arranging 
their daily labour . Climate information is gener ally very poor , limited  only to general predictions about 
rain or sun, temperature, etc.  Some limited market information is also available through this medium 
but not much. Another channel that provides information for local people is the community meeting or 
technical training conducted by seeding companies or fertilizer companies. They sometimes  conduct 
technical training or introduce techniques related to agricultur al production , however,  it is mostly about 
introduction of new seeds  or use of fertilizers. There is very limited information about market access for 
local people. There are yet no training courses  on adaptive agriculture options in the context of climate 
change.


---
*Page 149*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
7 
 
 I 
11. Migration and drought impact : Men have more opportunity to work outside the community while 
women are expected to stay at home to take care of children and do domestic work. Due to lack of job 
opportunities in the commune, local people must find employment in other provinces (e.g Lam Dong, 
Ho Chi Minh). M ale migrants are the majority . Drought is another reason that people migrat e to other 
provinces . In most of the project target communes, approximately 50- 60% of the farmland could not be 
cultivate d in the drought season. Currently, access to water for agricultur al production is a serious issue 
for farmers in the drought season.  
12. In addition, drought more serious ly impact s female farmers than male farmers. As mentioned above, 
women are expected to s tay at home to take care of children, while men move more easily to work in 
other provinces. Gender norms block women from the opportunities and resources to perform their 
roles effectively. As the livelihoods  of women are completely dependent  on agriculture , lack of water in 
the dry season with increasingly inadequate adaptive solutions make it difficult for women to achieve a 
stable income from agricultur al activities. Due to men’s migration  to other province s, there is no support 
from or shar ing of labor  by men in agricultur al production and household work. In addition, lack  of 
knowledge and information about climate change adaptation in general and adaptive solutions in 
agricultur al production in particular make women more vulnerable than men. Women are limited to 
some access to climate information, deficient learning opportunities and insufficient participation in 
community events.        
13. The gender analysis also provided specific r ecommendations to address gender inequality issues in 
project communes by providing a gender action plan that  focus es on some key solutions  including:  
14. Build capacity for gender equality mainstreamin g for local stakeholders, with a focus on 
strengthening ge nder analysis and mainstreaming skills in planning and implementing climate- resilient  
agricultural production and water and agricultural management activities;  
15. Promote women’s participation in social groups and climate change resilience by strengthening the participation of men and women in public consultations on project implementation and climate 
change resilience in particular. The project will provide an enabling environment to promote women’s 
participation by providing them appropriate opportunities and mechanisms  to raise the percentage of 
female participants in project management boards, interest groups , water users groups ; farmer field 
school facilitator groups, etc.  
16. Promote equal access to climate information: The project will design specific activities such as field-
based training (using FFS approach)  and regular group/club meetings  that target both male and female 
farmers as key agents of change in prov iding and sharing information with other farmers in the project 
areas. The project will also use diversified methods and gender -sensitive design and implementation 
of communication activities on climate- resilient agricultural production and water and agricultural 
management. These opportunities provide a constructive space for both men and women to maximize 
their experience and capacity to apply this information in daily practice as well as share this knowledge 
with others in the project areas .  
17. Promote equality in decision making process es: At community level, the project will design 
interventions to promote equality between men and women in making decision s about agriculture 
production and investment. S pecific models for women will be considered to provide an enabling 
environment and opportunities for women to enhance their roles and contribution s to implement ation 
of initiatives on climate- resilient agricultural production and water and agricultural management. At 
household level, the projec t will support men and women to implement water conservation models in 
agricultur al production and access to markets. These models can be considered as means  to promote 
open discussions  between men and women in decision making process es. The project will  support


---
*Page 150*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
8 
 
 I 
both men and women to improve access to loan service s by strengthening  the available lending 
mechanisms  to make sure that the farmers can access this service easily when needed.  
18. Ensure equal access to climate information for e thnic minorit ies: Ethnic minorit ies in the target 
project areas, both men and women, must have equal to access to information about the project and 
actively participate in the project implementation process. The project aims to achieve some specific 
objectives including: strengthen ing the active participation of ethnic minorit ies in public consul tations 
done by the project; build ing capacit ies of the ethnic minorit ies to empower them to engage in decision 
making related to their own issues and strengthen ing the access of ethnic minorit ies to climate 
information and indigenous knowledge in implementing climate- resilient agricultural production and 
water and agricultural management.  
 
1. Introduction  
 
19. The project is designed aiming to empower vulnerable smallholders in the Central Highlands and South-
Central Coast regions of Viet  Nam . The focus is to empower women and ethnic minority farmers to 
cope with climate change. The project will help ethnic minority farmers to address  climate risks of  
agricultural production in the context of climate change.  The main activities focus on  securing water 
availability, adopting  climate- resilien ce, and water -efficient agricultural cropping systems . The project 
also emphas izes the use of climate, agricultural and market information for risk management related to 
water and agricultural planning and management.  
20. The project aims to achieve two key outputs . The first output is to improve access to water for vulnerable 
smallholder farmers in the face of climate- induced rainfall variability and droughts . The second output 
is to strengthen capacities of smallholder farmers to apply climate and market information, 
technologies, and practices for climate- resilient water and agricultural management.  
21. The gender assessment was conducted as part of the project design process to ensure that the pr oject 
will address key gender issues in climate change response.  The assessment not only review ed current 
policy frameworks but also analysed  key gender issues in climate change response and provide d 
specific recommendations of how the project  will promote gender equality in practice.      
2. Objectives of the gender assessment  
22. The overall  objective of the gender assessment was  to identify key gender issues that are relevant to 
climate change polices  and explore potential opportunities  and actions need to promote gender 
mainstreaming in climate change resilience activities  in the project  areas.   
 
23. The specific objectives of the gender assessment include :  
 
1. Review current gender and climate change policy frameworks  (both strengths and gaps ) on 
gender mainstreaming promotion in climate change resilience.  
2. Assess current capacit ies of the rel evant stakeholders and current gender mainstreaming  
practice in climate change resilience activities . 
3. Identify key gender issues in cli mate change  resilience  and key actions need to be done to 
facilitate gender mainstreaming into climate change response.  
4. Provide recommendations on actions needed  to promote gender equality  in climate change 
resilience.  
 
24. This Gender assessment is building on what has been proposed by the GCF -funded project titled  
“Improving the resilience of vulnerable coastal communities to climate change related impacts in Viet


---
*Page 151*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
9 
 
 I 
Nam”. The assessment was also based on available data from studies conducted by the Government  
of Viet Nam, UN and civil society organisations, and multilateral development banks.  
3. Methodology  
3.1 Desk review  
25. The desk review was conducted to collect all available data  and gender  baseline information  for project 
design.  The desk review focussed on  gender  and climate change policies  consulting  study reports  
made by the Government of Viet  Nam,  donor  agencies  and international organizations  in Viet  Nam .   
26. The desk review  aims to provide  an overview of gender  and climate change policies as well as policy  
implementation in Viet Nam. This also explored the key gaps  in implementation of  gender policy in 
climate changes and agriculture practice.  
3.2 Consultative meetings with stakeholders    
27. The field visits  were conducted to a number of target project communes in three provinces (Dak Lak, 
Dak Nong and Ninh Thuan)  among the five  project provinces . The focus of field visits was to consult 
with local stakeholders on the implementation of gender and climate change policies  and their current 
experience in mainstreaming gender into climate change resilience activities . One consultative meeting 
was conducted with  participation of  representatives from key agencies  at provincial level , such as  
People’s Committee (PC), D epartment of Agriculture and Rural Development  (DARD); Department of 
Labour , Invalids and Social Affairs  (DOLISA); Committee of Ethnic Minority  (CEM), Women’s  Union 
and Farmer s Unions . This process was t he same at district and  commune level, and the consultative 
meetings  were also conducted with participation of  leaders and technical officers from key agencies at 
district and commune level .  
28. These consultative meetings  at provincial, district and commune level  aimed to gain a better  
understand ing of gaps in knowledge, attitude and practices related to climate change and gender 
mainstreaming in climate change resilience program/project. These discussions also explored c urrent 
practice on gender mainstreaming in the process of  planning, implementing and monitoring  climate 
change resilience activities at grassroots level.  These discussions also provided a space for 
stakeholders to express their needs  and concerns  on building  gender mainstreaming capacity  in climate 
change response . 
29. At national level, the consultative meetings were conducted with representatives from UN agencies (e.g 
IFAD, FAO, UN Women), government partners ( e.g MARD, MOLISA, Women ’s Union) and 
international development partners  (e.g Oxfam, AAV, DFAT, CARE, etc.) . The focus of these 
consultative meet ings was to identify potential opportunities  to collaborate and utilize current 
experience and good practice from those organizations in this project.  
30. Consultations with prospective stakeholders for the project have been extensive and involved a wide 
range of people, from farmers (women and men) to government agencies (commune, district, province) 
to NGOs. In those cases where women were explicitly involved either through their representation in 
the Women’s Union or as farmers and heads of households, gender -specific concerns were not 
necessarily or explicitly highlight ed. It is noteworthy that many ethnic groups in Dak Nong, Dak Lak and 
Ning Thuan provinces, are matrilineal, in which women, especially mothers, assume leadership, power and property passed from mother to daughter. Men assume the main responsibilities to g o out to work 
and earn a living. Women farmers tended to focus their comments on agricultural production concerns, in essence mirroring the concerns of their fellow men farmers. As such, women farmers tended to


---
*Page 152*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
10 
 
 I 
indicate their desire for the same assistance as men: access to irrigation and water security; technical 
assistance; access to markets and credit; localized climate information, etc. The following is a brief 
summary, taken from the notes on stakeholder consultations, involving women farmers and/or 
Women’s Union representatives.  
• Khanh Hoa province –  Women’s Union: There was a strong focus on credit access and micro-
credit in particular, but also on training and guidance from DARDs and others.  There was 
discussion of women’s roles in agriculture and ex amples of solidarity groupings around labor 
(shared labor and mutual support). Recommendations from this consultation include: land use and potential allocation of land to poor/near -poor; hand- holding mechanisms where three better -off 
farmers encourage and support two poor/near -poor farmers with knowledge, information exchange, 
and technical guidance; strengthening of technical capacities via training courses and credit 
access; organization in groups for greater efficiency and scale opportunities; and fundi ng 
mechanism to support women’s economic activities.  
• Khanh Hoa province – Suoi Tan  commune, women  (11) and men (4) farmers: No specific 
gender issues were highlighted during this meeting; however, it is noteworthy that 2/3 of the farmers 
interviewed were w omen who focused their comments on production concerns related to water use 
efficiency, climate information, credit, peer -to-peer learning and information exchange and 
technical guidance.  
• Binh Thuan province – Women’s Union: Interviews with the Women’s Uni on indicate a total of 
204 women’s groups for the entire province with 118 ‘environmental protection’ groups established to promote clean water use, trash collection, etc. The WU Women’s Business Clubs receive one-
off training.  The WU has a role in promoti ng agriculture with facilitation and dissemination of water 
efficiency technology e.g. for dragon fruit; advocating credit programs or a Credit Fund for Poor 
Women, with no collateral requirements (in Ham Thuan Nam and Phan Thiet, 2,000 women have 
access).  In other districts, WU works with banks to support production or small business. A notable 
remark during this consultation was that more women than men participate in capacity development under the P135 program, because “they are more eager to learn”.  
• Ninh Thuan province: Most projects and Government investments target poor and near -poor, 
ethnic minority and women- headed households, particularly for climate change adaptation.  There 
is a Women’s Union loan program, also IFAD supported ‘Women Development Fund support to 
cow cooperatives, and SNV cooperative support program for women farmers’ needs. Non- farm 
options were discussed, as well as credit availability for agriculture. Recommendations from this consultation include improved market access, reduced in terest rates, links to companies that offer 
non-farm jobs, involvement in technology transfer programs.  
• Ninh Thuan province -  Ninh Hai district, Nhon Hai commune: Women (10) and men (2), mixed 
poor near -poor farmers.  No specific gender issues were highlighted during this meeting; however, 
it is noteworthy that over 3/4 of the farmers interviewed were women who focused their comments 
on production concerns related to water use efficiency, climate information, credit, peer -to-peer 
learning and information ex change and technical guidance.  
• Farmers’ group,  Thuan Bac district: 15 women farmers, Raglai ethnic minority, most landless, 
with some owning little land (0.2 to  0.33ha) in upland areas, very unproductive.   No specific gender 
issues were highlighted during this meeting; however, it is noteworthy that all the farmers 
interviewed were women who focused their comments on production concerns related to water use 
efficiency, climate information, credit, peer -to-peer learning and information exc hange and 
technical guidance.  
• Commune Loi Hai, Chairman, DARD, Farmers’ Union, Women’s Union: The Women’s Union 
participated in commune level discussions highlighting production problems and rural development needs


---
*Page 153*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
11 
 
 I 
3.3 Focus Group Discussions    
31. The f ocus group discussions  (FGDs) were conducted with participation  of male and female farmers , 
who direct ly benefit  from and will be impact ed by  the project . The FGDs w ere conducted in a 
representative number of target communes in Dak Lak, Ninh Thuan and Dak Nong provinces . At least 
one FGD was conducted  per each target commune , and there was an average of eight  people ( four 
men and four women) invited for each group discussion .   
32. The objectives of FGDs  with farmers was  to identify key gender inequality  factors in division of labour  
and decision -making process es in climate change response in general and agriculture resilience in 
particular. The FGDs also identif ied gender needs and social factors that block women and men from 
accessing  climate change  information and implement ing climate change resilience solutions  in 
agriculture production . 
33. In addition, the FGDs also helped to provide a better understanding of the feasibility of gender actions 
to be done by the project . FGDs also provided specific recommendations of how to address gender 
issues  and meet the concerns of both male and female farmers, when planning, implementing and 
monitoring climate change resilience activities in the target project communes .   
4. Key findings of the gender assessment  
4.1 Policy framework on a ddressing  gender inequality in Viet  Nam   
34. Viet Nam was one of the first countries to sign the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1980, which was subsequently ratified in 1982. The country 
also made huge progress  in reforming its legal and policy framework to guarantee gender equality and 
non-discrimination against women in line with principles and regulations  of CEDAW. This progress  
could be seen through the effort s of the Government of Vietnam to establish a solid legis lative 
framework and policies to address  gender inequality  issues and promote gender equality practice in all 
fields of life .  
 
35. At the highest level  of law , the principles of “non- discrimination of race and sex” and “female citizens 
and male citizens have the same rights in every aspect of politics, econo my, society and family”1 were  
included in the Constitution  (which was  revised in 2013) .  This provides  a strong foundation to ensure 
that gender equality is addressed in the whole process of legislative formulation and implementation. 
The Law on Gender Equality  was adopted in 2006, which defines gender equality and gender -based 
discrimination for the first time and sets out specific measures for achieving gender equality  in all fields 
of life. This law also provides general instruction about gender mainstreaming into the legislative 
formulation and promotion process, which is considered as one of six key principles2 to promote gender 
equality in Vietnam.  The Law on Domestic Vi olence Prevention and Control , passed in 2007, is 
another significant piece of legislation acknowledging for the first -time violence against women by 
partners as a punishable offence.  
 
 
1 Article 16 –  Constitution 2013 –  approved by National Assembly, on 28 November 2013.  
2 The law on gender equality mentions  six key principles for gender equality including: (1) M en and wom en are equal in all fields 
of social and family life; (2) M en and wom en are not discriminated against in terms of gender; (3) The measures aimed at 
promoting gender equality are not considered g ender discrimination; (4) Policies aimed at protecting and supporting mothers 
are not considered gender discrimination; (5) Ensuring gender mainstreaming in the process of development and implementation 
of laws and (6)  Exercising gender equality is the responsibility of agencies, organizations, families and individuals.


---
*Page 154*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
12 
 
 I 
36. The Government of Vietnam has  also issued three decrees to facilitate implementation of the Law  on 
Gender  in an effective way.  
  
37. Decree 70/2008/ND -CP was approved on 4 June 2008. It  provides guidance on implementation of  
some articles of the Law on Gender Equality , specifically , the roles and responsibilities, and 
coordination among state agencies, ministries, People’s Committee, and other agencies in the 
implementation of gender equality. The Ministry of Labour  Invalids and Social A ffair (MOLISA) was 
assigned to (1) support the development of strategic policies and legal framework s, action plans , and 
national tar get programs  on gender equality, (2) evaluate the process of mainstreaming gender into 
policy formulation, and (3) monitor the implementation of the Law on Gender Equality and all 
international regulations on gender equality. Other ministries are responsible for r eview ing, develop ing, 
and approv ing legislative documents, and providing direction for gender mainstreaming in their own 
sectors.  
 
38. Following this Decree, the People’s Committee s at various levels  are responsible for developing  
policies and legal documents on gender equality, as well as for implementing national policies within 
their domain. The People ’s Committees  are also responsible for  mainstream ing gender  issues  into 
socio -economic development plans  and into policy formulation at  management level .  
 
39. Decree 48/2009/ND -CP (19th May 2009)  provides  specific guidance and methodologies  to ensure 
gender mainstreaming in practice. It  provides guidance on how to implement key articles of the Law on 
Gender Eq uality . These include gender mainstreaming in communications , education and training, and 
the methodologies for how  to promote gender equality, and policy development to support gender -
related workers in remote and under -developed areas. Decree 55/2009/ND -CP (10th June 2009)  
provides  guidance on recognizing violations  of the Law on Gender Equa lity and provides a framework 
for use by the authorities for penalt ies in cases  of violations .  
 
40. Resolution 57/NQ -CP (1st December 2009) , approved the Action Plan for  Resolution 11/NQ -TW that 
aims at the effective mobilization of female workers in th is period of industrialization and modernization.  
The Action Plan aims to raise awareness , to promote effective management of administrative agencies, 
to enable women, by 2020 to achieve higher level s of knowledge and to open higher education and the 
professions . It also aims to meet the goal s of national industrialization and modernization. In the f uture,  
women will have better  career  opportunities , which will enable them to achieve a higher material and 
cultural status. It furthermore improves the possibility  of participating in social activities . They will be 
equal to men in all fields, including the ir contributions  to family and society. Ministries and sub- branches 
are required to carry out their responsibilities as stated in the a ction plan. 
 
41. National Strategy on Gender Equality for 2011 –  2020  (24th December 2010 ) emphasizes  that 
gender equality is one of the key factors for enhancing the quality of life of individuals, families, and 
society. The goal of the National Strategy on Gender Equality is to ensure substantive equality between 
men and women in terms of opportunit ies, participatio n, and satisfaction in the fields of politics, 
economy, culture, and society, and contribution to the nation’s rapid and sustainable development. The 
Strategy has set seven objectives3, in which there is one objective on improvement of state 
 
3 Seven specific objectives of the national strategy on gender equality including (1) to strengthen female representation in 
leadership and management in order to gradually reduce gender gap in politics; (2) t o narrow down the gender gap in the 
economy and employment, improve the access of poor rural women and ethnic minor ity women to economic resources and 
labor market; (3) t o improve female human resources, gradually ensure equal participation of men and women in education and 
training; (4) t o ensure gende r equality in access  to healthcare services; (5) t o ensure gender equality in culture and 
communication; (6) t o ensure gender equality in the family, to step -by-step eliminate gender -based violence; and (7) to improve 
state management capacity on gender equality.


---
*Page 155*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
13 
 
 I 
management capacity on gender equality. The official seven objectives of the national strategy on 
gender equality also include the improvement of state management capacity on gender equality.  
 
42. In addition, the National Program on Gender Equality for 2016 – 2020 was approved by Decision 
1241/QD -TTg, dated 22nd July 2011. The Program objective is to fundamentally transform public 
awareness and promote behavioural  changes in gender equality, make steps to bridge the gender gap, 
promote women in high- risk areas of inequality, and contribute to successful implementation of the 
National Strategy on Gender Equality for 2011 – 2020. To ensure an annual state budget for gender 
equality and advancement of women, the Circular 191/2009/TT -BTC was approved by the Ministry of 
Finance on the 1st of October 2009. This Circular  regulation/law  provides guidelines for management 
and use of budget  for gender equality  and advancement  of women.  It also provides government 
agencies with detailed information on budgeting, budget items, allocations , and payment procedures 
for activities promoting gender equality.    
 
43. In addition to the enactment of these laws that specifically concern women’s rights, notable efforts are being made to ensure that gender equality is promoted in all other laws. For example, the revised 
Labour Code , which came into effect in May 2013, added new provisions on non- discrimination and 
women’s labour rights such as: prohibition of sexual harassment; extension of maternity leave to six 
months; official recognition of the rights of paid domestic workers; and equal pay for work of equal 
value. Gender has been also mainstreamed in Civil Law, Labour Law, Penal Code, Law on Marriage 
and Family, Law on Government Officials and Civil Servants, Land Law, Social Insurance Law, Education Law, Vocational Training Law, Law on Public Healthcare, Law on Complaints and Denouncement, Law on Legal Document Promulgation, and Ordinance Against Prostitution, as well as 
other legal documents such as Prime Minister decrees and decisions, and ministerial circulars. The Regulation on Grassroots Democracy on 07 July 2003 has improved socialist democracy  and promoted 
the participation of  men and women in the community’s political life.  
4.2 Gender mainstreaming in climate change resilience policies  
44. The Government of Viet Nam has also developed a strong legal framework and framework  to respon d 
to climate change.  Resolution 24 -NQ-TW (23th June 2013) of  the Communist Party  is a high -level 
directive on climate change.  It outlines aims  to strengthen the active roles  of relevant agencies in 
responding to climate change.  Its three objectives focus on climate change response,  natural resource 
management and environment al protection. It is the basis and premise for planning directions and 
policies for socio- economic development, ensuring national defense, security and social security. 
Climate change adaptation  is strongly addressed under this guidance.  
 45. The 2013 Law on Natural Disaster Prevention and Control  reconfirms  gender equity  as one of seven  
core principles of disaster prevention and control
4. The document provides clear guidance on how to 
implement natural disaster prevention and recovery  and assigns  clear roles and responsibilities  of 
relevant agencies in this work. It prescribes the activities of natural disaster prevention and control , the 
rights and obligations of agencies, organizat ions,  households and individuals participating in natural 
disaster prevention and control , and state management and available resources to ensure achievement 
of this effort . However, there is no specific guidance on gender mainstreaming in this process.  There 
are no clear roles and responsibilit ies of relevant agencies on gender m ainstreaming in this effort . This 
gap makes  it difficult for relevant agencies  to address gender  issues when planning and implementing 
natural disaster prevention and control.   
 
46. The Strategic Orientation for Sustainable Development in Vietnam ( National Agenda 21) was 
approved in 2004. There are challenges in implementing Vietnam’s Agenda 21. Adaptation challenges 
include eradication of extreme poverty, narrowing the gap between rural and urban areas, women and 
 
4 Clause 5, Article 4, Law on Natural Disaster Prevention and Control, National Assembly 19 June 2013


---
*Page 156*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
14 
 
 I 
men, ethnic and other social groups , strengthening of  sustainable practices in agriculture and forestry, 
sustainable land and water management, and protection of marine, coastal and island environment. 
Greenhouse gas mitigation challenges include improvement in energy efficiency , production and use 
of renewable energy, improvement in land and forest management (for carbon sequestration), and 
strengthening of policy instruments , including incorporation of environmental aspect s in national 
accounting.  
 
47. National Target Program in R esponse to Climate Change (NTP -RCC) : In 2007, the Ministry of 
Natural Resources  and Environment (MONRE) was assigned, in coordination with other ministries, to 
formulate the law/regulation NTP-RCC for the period 2012 –  2015. NTP -RCC was approved in 
December 2012 by Decision 1183/QD -TTG (30th August 2012) . The goal of NTP -RCC is to implement 
the National Strategy on Climate Change Response, including increas ing awareness and capacity to 
adapt to climate change, greenhouse gas emission reduction, low -carbon economy, and active 
participation in the international community to protect the Earth's climate system. NTP -RCC identifies 
six specific objectives:  
• Update sc enarios of climate change in Vietnam, particularly sea level rise, conduct impact 
assessment of climate change on specific fields and locations, and identify solutions for 
adaptation;  
• Develop database system on climate change and sea level rise in order to provide inputs for the 
planning of socio- economic development;  
• Update the sectoral action plan to respond to climate change;  
• Build capacity  for organizations and institutions, and policy on adaptation and mitigation of 
greenhouse gas emission in priority  areas;  
• Strengthen international cooperation on climate change;  
• Raise awareness of the community on climate change.  
 
48. The NTP -RCC highlights the importance of gender equality  in sustainable development. It stresses 
the need to conduct vulnerability assessment s at sectoral, regional, and community level s, as potential 
climate change impacts on women can hinder the achievement of the MDGs.  
 49. National Strategy on Climate Change Response  was approved under Decision 2139/QD -TTG 
dated 5 December 2011. The Strategy identifies key tasks for government agencies and ministries and local authorit ies: 
• to actively respond to climate change and rising sea level s; 
• to ensure food and water security, sustainable development, biodiversity, greenhouse gas emissions  
reductions , and the role of the State in climate change response;  
• to develop community models to respond to climate change;  
• to strengthen technology and research, promote international cooperation, and allocate budget 
resource on climate change response;  
• to assign MONRE as the coordinating agency for  climate change response.  
 
50. The National Strategy on Climate Change  mentions gender equality as one of its specific objectives
5. 
The mainstreaming process requires that targets for mainstreaming are clearly formulated, monitoring 
and evaluation tools are established to measure gender -related impacts of climate change, and climate 
change activities are integrated in all action plans.  
  
51. National Action Plan on Climate Change Re sponse for 2012 –  2020  was approved under Decision 
1474/QD -TTG dated 5th October 2012. The Action Plan identifies key tasks of government and other 
agencies:  
 
5 UN Vietnam, 2011. Policy Brief Gender Equality in Climate Change Adaptation and disaster risk reduction in Viet Nam. 
http://www.un.org.vn/en/publications/cat_view/130 -un-vietnam - joint -publications/209 -climate -change- joint -un 
publications.html [accessed 04. April 2012].


---
*Page 157*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
15 
 
 I 
• to build capacity in forecasting and monitoring climate change and disaster risks;  
• to ensure food security and water resource management;  
• to actively respond  to climate change and flooding in large cities;  
• to ensure greenhouse gas reductions  and develop the low carbon economy;  
• to build management capacity and policy framework to respon d to climate change;  
• to mobilize  the community and private sector for climate change response;  
• to improve international cooperation and recognition of Vietnam’s climate status in the 
international community;  
• to set the budget for climate change.  
 
52. The Law on Gender Equality  (2006) does not mention gender mainstreaming in climate change 
directly .  However, it does provide an overall  framework that requires gender mainstreaming in all policy 
development s, which will include climate change policies . Under this law, gender mainstreaming in  
legal documents includes defining gender issues and measures, forecasting impact s of the regulations 
on women and men and determining the responsibility and resources to deal with gender issues. In 
addition, state agencies have the responsibility to mainstream gender in policy formulation, and prepare gender mainstreaming reports as part of policy documentation. They are required to work with the agency in charge of gender mainstreaming to appraise the gender equalit y in policy development.    
 
53. Research shows that  climate change impacts affect women’s ’ lives in many ways . Impacts including 
increasing natural disasters, sea level rise and changes in rainfall patterns  will affect  women’s 
livelihoods. Viet Nam is still a predominantly rural society, where women are concentrated in agriculture 
and/or are self -employed and participate in most production ac tivities. At the same time, compared to 
men, women have less access to, and control over the resources that they depend upon for food and  
income. Long- term gradual climate change will affect agricultural and ecological systems. Because 
women are more depen dent on land and natural resources for their livelihoods, they are more 
vulnerable to resource scarcity.  Some key recommendations made by international development 
partners
6 include : 
• Elimination of gender stereotypes;  
• Participatory gender mainstreaming and gender analysis;  
• Quotas on women’s leadership and participation in decision- making;  
• Expanded mandate of the Women’s Union;  
• Gendered M&E and reporting;   
• Institutionalising training on gender;   
• Expert networks including male allies;  
• Multi -stakeholder  gender and climate change dialogues and reviews;  
• Advocacy and action at the regional and international level.   
4.3 Gender policy i mplementation mechanisms  
54. In Viet  Nam,  there are three structural  mechanisms  with a specific  mission  to address gender equality 
and advancement of women. The first mechanism is  the state management agency on gender 
equality . At national level, MOLISA  is the state management agency and it has it s own organizational 
structure established from national to c ommune level.  The Department for Gender Equality  in MOLISA 
is a key  actor in the implementation, monitoring , evaluation, and reporting of the Law on Gender 
equality . It was established in early 2008 to advise the Minister on carry ing out state management 
activities on gender equality. However, it is unclear how well its staff understand the role and responsibilities of the Division of Gender Equality  vis-à-vis the agency as a whole. There is a gap in 
 
6 Beyond Words -  Advancing Gender Equali ty in Climate Change Policy and Programming in Viet Nam.  This is one of the joint 
products of the organisations supported under the Community Based Climate Change Action Grants, funded by the Australian 
Government, Care International, SNV, Oxfam, Save the Children,  Australian Red Cross, and DEF


---
*Page 158*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
16 
 
 I 
gender knowledge where gender equality is still considered a “women’s issue‟. Therefore, all issues 
relating to women come to the Division of Gender Equality . However, it is not fully clear which 
department in MOLISA is r esponsible for evaluating the inclusion of gender equality in drafting of all 
laws and reviewing GE in material and reports of other agencies.7  
55. The Law on Gender Equality also confirmed that the People’s Committees  are the state management 
agenc ies at provincial, district and commune level s. However, the implementation of the state 
management roles relies completely on consultation and technical support provided by DOLISA and 
the Vietnamese Women’s  Union at the same level. But these  agencies have li mited capacity and 
experience to do gender mainstreaming.  The People’s Committee have  been facing many difficulties 
and challenges when managing the state agencies on gender equality.  
 
56. According to the Law on Gender Equality (2006 ), DOLISA at provinc ial level  is also a state management 
agency on gender equality. DOLISA has established organizational structures  at provincial and district 
levels. At the provincial and district level, DOLISA’s role is to provide consultation for the People’s 
Committee and at the same level to implement gender equality policies and legislations . To do this, 
one specific division of DOLISA has been assigned at the provincial level, but staff and leaders were 
assigned in part-time positions.  These persons  have as their primary tasks to provide recommendations 
to leaders of agencies  in implementing gender policies. They also provide consultation to other 
agencies at the same level , to mainstream gender into professional  activities . However, there are often 
one leader and two technical  members of  staff assigned to provide overall technical support on gender 
equality for the whole province. This human resource structure is similar  at district level, wh ere one 
leader and one member of  staff will work part -time to facilitate gender work. At commune level , one 
member of  the staff is responsible for all social issues including gender.  
57. The second structural mechanism to promote advancement of women is the Committee for 
Advancement of W omen  (NCFAW) , which is  established from national  to district level . The committee 
is an inter -sectoral body  that counsels Viet Nam’s Prime Minister (at national level )  and People’s 
Committees  (at Provincial and District level s) on gend er equality and women’s empowerment, including 
economic empowerment.  At national level, NCFAW also supports research and coordinates 
interdisciplinary research on women’s equality in Viet Nam, working with ministerial agencies and line ministries. In support of building gender equality into the legal framework, NCFAW promotes the implementation of relevant law, supports the realization of national gender equality laws, and reports 
on its progress to the Prime Minister.  
58. The Minister of MOLISA serves as the president of NCFAW, with vice- chairs from the Viet Nam 
Women’s Union and the Vice Minister of MOLISA.  At provincial level, the vice chairman of the provincial 
People’s Committee serves as  head of NCFAW . The member s of NCFAW are heads of relevant 
agencies s uch as  DOLISA, Women ’s Union, Agriculture and Rural Development division, etc.  Since  
the members of this committee are l eaders , they are persons who can make final  decision s on 
promotion of gender  equality within their organizations . The quality of  gender  work will depend very 
much on their interest  direct ing and show ing willingness to promote gender within their organization.          
59. The Vietnam Women ’s Union (VWU)  is a mass organization with the specific mission and vision to 
protect legitimate  rights and benefits of women.  The VWU  has its own organizational structure,  
established from national level to commune level. One of the main functions of the VWU  related to 
gender equality  is to conduct dissemination of  gender policies and develop capacity  on gender equality. 
This organization was also assigned by the Government to implement the task of monitoring and 
providing feedback  on the implementation of ge nder policy.  Among other mass organizations , VWU  is 
known as an organization with good knowledge and experience in  gender equality . The staff is often 
invited for technical support to other organizations to provide  training courses  on gender equality. 
However, this organization still lack s experience related to gender analysis and gender mainstreaming 
in specific areas. In addition,  the VWU  is a representative member of many committees  and joint  
mechanisms  with the mission to promot e the voice and interest s of women and girls. However, their 
 
7 Capacity Assessment of the State Management Agencies and Other Concerned Agencies to Implement the Gender Equality 
Law and the Domestic Violence Law, UN Women, 2010.


---
*Page 159*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
17 
 
 I 
actual voice in negotiation and ability to influenc e process is still very weak due to lack of capacity and 
experience in policy advocacy.         
4.4 Poverty  reduction  and Gender  
60. Viet Nam reached lower middle- income country status in 2010 and poverty has been declining 
continuously from 58% of the population below the poverty line in 1993 to 8.4% in 20148. However, 
poverty reduction in Viet  Nam is still uneven , and there is a  huge  difference between urban and rural 
areas9. According to VHLSS  2014,  3% of the urban population lives  below the nationa l poverty line, 
compared to 10.8% of the rural population.  There is also evidence that reductions in poverty and 
bene fits of  growth have been spread unevenly across Viet  Nam , increasing income inequality between 
regions and to some exten t within regions. By region, the Red River Delta and the South East are 
considerably overrepresented in middle- income groups, whereas the Mekong River Delta is 
overrepresented in the near -poor group. The North West and Central Highlands10 are the two regi ons 
where most of the poor live11.  
61. The most recent survey data that is publicly available for Viet Nam’s Multidimensional Povert y Index 
(MPI) estimations  refer to 2013/2014. In Viet Nam, 3.9% of the population (3,646 thousand people) are 
“multidimensional poor ” while an additional 4.3% live near multidimensional poverty (3,930 thousand 
people). The average deprivation score in Viet Nam  by people in multidimensional poverty, is around 
39.9%. The MPI, which is the share of the population that is multi -dimensionally poor, (adjusted for 
intensity of deprivations, ) is 0.016. The Philippines and Thailand have MPI s of 0.033 and 0.004 
respectively (UNDP, 2016)12. Although tens of millions of Vietnamese households have incomes above 
the official poverty line, many do not earn much above this line and could still be considered poor under 
a multi -dimensional definition (Oxfam 2017).  
62. According to the World Bank, the Gini index  which measures economic inequality in Viet  Nam has 
increased from 35.7 to 38.7 over the 20-year period from 1992 to 2012. However, these figures may 
underestimate actual inequality in Viet  Nam  for various reasons. For instance, the incomes or 
expenditures of the rich are under -reported and under -captured in household surveys; therefore, 
empirical measures of inequality may be downward- biased. Different metrics, timelines and density of 
measurement s may provide different pictures of inequality in Viet  Nam.  
63. The Viet  Nam Gender Country Assessment of the World Bank  in 2011  pointed  out that the relation  
between gender and  household poverty is not clear because poverty conditions  are measured at 
household level . Therefore, the gender differences in poverty will  have to be associated with different 
household structures , such as between the households headed by women and the households headed 
by men or  the ethnic minority households and Kinh households . In addition, the report also expressed 
that there are intersection s between gender and age in  income poverty  distribution in Viet Nam. 
Children and elderly  people  are more likely than exclusively working  age adults to live in relatively poor 
households  because these groups have low ability to work and limited opportunities  in society  This is 
clearly related to dependency ratios13. Women are also more likely to be poor, particularly if they are 
elderly , mainly because they  have less control over assets. However, t here is no significant difference 
in other gender indicators pertaining to health or investment in children’s education.   
64. The Viet  Nam Gender Country Assessment of the World Bank  in 2011 also showed that discrimination 
against women in various aspects of economic and social life is still of concern. Women are 
disadvantaged in their ability to access and their control over resources  affecting their capacity  
development  and opportunities  in many aspects of life as a result of gender norms that relegate them 
 
8 GSO, Viet Nam Household Living Standard Surv ey 2014  
9 WB, Viet Nam Country Gender Assessment,  2010  
10 In five project province, Da Nong and Dak Lak are two provinces belong to Central Highland. The remain provinces Ninh 
Thuan, Binh Thuan and Khanh Hoa are provinces belong to south central coast area.  
11 GSO, Viet Nam Household Living Standard Survey 2014  
12 Human Development Report 2016, UNDP 2016  
13 World Bank –  Vietnam Gender Country Assessment -  2010


---
*Page 160*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
18 
 
 I 
to the roles of mother and housewife. Today, women remain disadvantaged compared to  men, despite 
the fact that there is a legal framework which supports gender equality. Men dominate control over 
land and other valuable assets ; most land tenure certificates are issued under the name of a male 
household head since  most registration followed the old land law (2003) . This has led to the denial of 
women’s rights in cases of divorce or inheritance. Men typically make the decisions about 
household business investments  and use of income.  Limited asset possession reduces women’s 
access to credit and investment opportunities. Small -scale farmers, in particular women, face 
unequal access to knowledge, technolog ies and market s. More than 50% of women have not 
finished primary education.  
65. Women make essential contributions to food production and to agricultural and rural economies, but i t 
is impossible to verify empirically the share produced by women. Female farmers, for example, play a 
key role in buying inputs and selling their products, but are frequently unrecognized as economic actors, 
both at household level and in value chains14. 
4.5 Health and waterborne disease  
66. The improvement in health indicators for women has been remarkable, but the problems of 
HIV/AIDS and gender -based violence are still significant  with women in Viet Nam continuing  to be 
victims of gender -based violence. According to result s of a national survey on domestic violence, 58% 
of married women have experience with at least one form of physical violence. The rate of women ever experiencing physical violence from their husbands was 31.5%
15 (GSO 2010).  
67. Disadvantaged groups fac e unequal burdens in the health financing system. In 2015, the total planned 
budget for health in Vietnam almost doubled in cash terms from about VND  64,000 billion ($3.2bn) in 
2011 to VND117,000 billion ($5.8bn). Total health ex penditures  as a percentage of GDP increased 
from 4.9% in 1998 to 6.7% in 2012, and the health budget as a percentage of the total state budget rose from 8.8% in 2011 to 9.4% in 2015. However, as much as 90% of the health budget is reserved for recurr ing costs such as salaries and facility operations. Meanwhile, public service providers have 
made little progress in improving efficiency, particularly regarding the cost of medical services. Vietnamese health financing is dependent on private expenditures  by ho useholds, especially out of 
pocket payments. The value of out of pocket increased from 43.5% in 2012 to 48% of total health 
expenditures in 2013 – making out of pocket the largest type of health expenditure and putting many 
households (notably women, the r ural poor and ethnic minorities) at significant risk of impoverishment. 
This rate of out of pocket is much higher than the maximum 30% recommended by the WHO, which has recognized that high out of pocket levels have led to catastrophic health expenditure i n many 
countries. In Viet  Nam , the rates of catastrophic health expenditure (an out -of-pocket payment for health 
care ≥ 40% of a household’s capacity to pay) and impoverishment have been high (though decreasing) between 1992– 2012, especially among disadvantaged populations such as the poor, people with low 
educational access and rural residents
16.  
68. According to Minh Hoang Van and Phuong Nguyen Thi (2015), 583,724 Vietnamese households were pushed into or further into poverty due to health expenditures in 2012. Rates of impoverishment as the 
result of catastrophic expenditure were higher among already poor households and households in rural 
areas. The ineffectiveness of pro- poor policies and inefficient public health allocation and expenditure 
are due to the absence of evidence- based policy development, effective health administration  
(including reliable quality control mechanisms and monitoring) and inputs from civil society. Health 
insurance coverage has increased over time, up to 65% in 2012 and 75% in 2015. However, there are 
still many people in Viet  Nam  without health insurance, which leads inevitably to inequities in access to 
health care and reliance on out of pocket payments.  
 
14 Even it up: how to tackle inequality in Viet Nam  -  Briefing Paper , Oxfam 2017  
15 National survey on domestic violence, General Statistics Office (GSO), 2010  
16 Even it up: how to tackle inequality in Viet Nam -  Briefing Paper, Oxfam 2017


---
*Page 161*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
19 
 
 I 
69. Unequal access to, and outcomes from, quality services remains a sali ent feature of the health system. 
Health issues in Viet Nam are concentrated in the poor . The poor utilize health services less than 
the rich, while higher income groups are much more likely to use multiple types of inpatient and 
outpatient services and ar e more likely to visit hospitals. Lower -income households are more likely to 
use public health centres, particularly at the commune level.  
4.6 Employment and gender issues  
70. The 2011 Viet  Nam  Country Gender Assessment notes that the structure of the Vietnamese economy 
has been changing rapidly over the last decades as a result of liberalization and international economic 
integration. However, the report highlights persist ent gender segmentation of the labour market, with 
women concentrated in fewer sectors and occupations  than men. It also highlights female workers’ 
greater vulnerability to working conditions and pay, reflected for example in women’s much 
higher share in unpa id family work. The country Gender Assessment 2011 also draws attention to 
the disproportionate time spent by women on unpaid work at home and recommends collection of better 
and more detailed data on various forms of unpaid work, given that systematic evi dence on these 
activities is still sparse17.  
71. The gap in labour force participation and earnings has narrowed considerably, but gender differences 
remain that may put women at risk. Women’s wages are now about 75% of men’s according to the 
2009 Labour Force Survey (LFS), not considering  differences in education or job experience. 
Nevertheless, differences remain that are suggestive of higher vulnerability for women. Women are 
also in more vulnerable jobs, for example, own- account work and unpaid family labour, the two 
categories seen as a minimum indicator of the lack of decent work18.  
72. There is a significant differen ce between men and women employment rate s. The annual 
employed population at 15 years of age and above among men account for 60.2% while this per centage 
of women account s for only 55.1%. According to GSO, 1.84% of women were vulnerably employed in 
2015 compared to only 1.52% of men. Moreover, data from GSO statistics in 2015 suggests that 22.4% 
of men and 17.3% of women are classified as skilled workers. The number of w omen involved in 
agriculture is higher than men, equal to 38.0% of men and 45.5% of women (GSO 2015). In addition, 
the extent and persistence of informal employment  is a challenge that Viet Nam faces in 
consolidating its middle- income status. Informal employment makes up around 17% of employment in 
foreign enterprises, 53% in domestic enterprises and 48% in formal household- based enterprises. 
Informal workers are likely to make very different contributions to future growth in Viet Nam and need 
very different kinds of policy support.  
4.7 Political Participation and Decision Making  
73. In political leadership, participation is another important area, where gender differences emerge. Even though representation of women in the National Assembly is high by regional standards . There are 
signs that women do not have an equal voice in the public sphere. In fact, there are some indications 
that women’s representation in some areas, for example the 2011- 2016 National Assembly term, got 
slightly worse, from 27.3% for 2002- 2007 to 24.4% for 2011- 2016 and 26.80% in term 2016 -  2021.  
4.8 Land rights   
74. In Viet  Nam , land is the property of the “entire people” and is allocated or leased by the State to 
organizations, households or individuals for use terms  ranging from 20 years (for agricultural land) to 
50 years (for forest land) or indefinitely (residential land)
19. At household level,  according to the 
regulations of Land Law 2013,  the land  use rights will be granted to both wife and husband , and both 
 
17 World Bank, Country Gender Assessment 2011  
18 Ibid. 
19 Article 4, Land Law 2013.


---
*Page 162*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
20 
 
 I 
husband and wife will be entitled on the certification of land use rights (red book). However, the  Viet 
Nam Household Living Standards Survey 2014 showed that nationwide, one in four households are 
admini stered/managed/headed by women (equal to 26.54% ), compared to 73.46% of households  
headed by men20. This situation derives from the regulations in the old land law 2003, where land use 
rights were granted to the heads  of households, with the majority being men.   
75. Land-use plans are made for both 10-year and 5- year durations; the master plans for the longer period 
are linked to socio- economic development plans, while the shorter period plans focus on 
implementation. In practice, although some in formation is available, other mandatory items are 
publicized in less than 10% of cases, and the overall land administration system is difficult for lay  
persons  to navigate. The 2003 Land Law states that land use planning must be “democratic and open 
to the  public” but that does not provide guidance on who will  be consulted or how disputes will be 
resolved. Current regulations require the participation of the community  in land use planning only at 
commune level, where few decisions are made. As a result, community participation,  especially 
participation of women , in land use planning is still limited (Oxfam 2012d). According to the above-
mentioned public administration survey, only 22% of respondents said that they had been given an 
opportunity to make comments about local land plans, and of these,  only two out of five said their 
comments had been taken into consideration (CECODES et al 2012).   
4.9  Gender -based violence  
76. Gender -based violence is a complex problem with roots in attitudes and behaviours deeply engrained 
in culture that are difficult to change. GBV refers to a wider set of issues than domestic violence and 
can take many forms, such as sexual assault , rape, human trafficking and sexual harassment at school 
and in the workplace, or a preference for boys over girls through sex -selective abortions21. Although 
men and boys are also affected, women and girls predominantly suffer from gender -based  
violence.  The fundamental cause of gender -based  violence is gender inequality, the persistent 
attitudes and beliefs that see women as inferior to men and less w orthy of rights and control over their 
own lives22. 
77. According to the national survey on domestic violence against women done by GSO 2010, 58% of 
married women have experience with at least one form of physical violence from their partner 
during  their  life t ime, and at least 27% of women have experience with at least one of  the four 
forms of gender -based  violence from their partner during  the last 12 months . The rate of women 
experiencing physical violence from their husbands was 31.5% and physical and/or sex ual violence 
was 34%. Especially, 54% of married women have experience of emotional abuse23 (see the table 
below).  
78. The sex ratio- at-birth imbalances are a strong indication of sex selective abortions,  whereby female 
foetuses are aborted in preference for sons. Data from 2010 suggests that the sex ratio at birth in Viet 
Nam is currently significantly imbalanced, with 111.2 males to every 100 females born in 2010 (GSO, 
2010). Guilmoto found differences in sex ratio at birth between  different ethnic groups, with the 
Kinh majority demonstrating the greatest SRB imbalance24. In addition, the sex ratio at birth 
imbalance was higher among better -educated women, with an imbalance of 113 males to 100 females 
amon g women who had studied for 10 years or more and almost no imbalance among illiterate mothers. 
The regional differences were also noted, with the Red River Delta in northern Viet Nam demonstrating 
the greatest sex ratio imbalance at birth25.  
79. Human traffick ing is less common with a few large- scale studies and fragmented data from 
government sources. Between 2005 and 2009, almost 6,000 women and children were identified as 
 
20 UN Women, Figures on ethni c minority men and women in Viet Nam 2015   
21 UNFPA 2014: From domestic violence to gender -based violence: connecting the dots in Vietnam –  an UN discussion paper.  
22 Ibid.   
23 GSO, National survey on domestic violence against women 2010  
24 UNFPA 2014: From domestic violence to gender -based violence: connecting the dots in Viet Nam –  an UN discussion paper  
25 Ibid.


---
*Page 163*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
21 
 
 I 
victims  of trafficking in Viet Nam. Trafficking in men, however, remains largely unknown. Further 
difficulties in estimating the prevalence of human trafficking in Viet Nam are caused by the lack of 
recognition of self-identified and self-rescued victims of traffi cking. Viet Nam’s National Steering 
Committee on Trafficking in Persons reported 430 Vietnamese trafficking victims . 250 Vietnamese 
trafficking victims  were repatriated by foreign governments or NGOs, while 120 victims were self - 
identified  as victims  of trafficking  in 2011.  Between  2012  and the first quarter of 2013,  550 cases of 
trafficking with 950 perpetrators and 1,080 men, women, boy and girl victims were identified (Ministry 
of Public Security (MPS), unpublished report, 2013) although the data was not disaggregated by sex. 
In 2012, the Supreme People’s Court stated that it had prosecuted 490 defendants in relation to human 
trafficking (US Dept. of State 2013). These statistics provide a picture of the prevalence of trafficking in 
Viet Nam but only represent a mi nority of cases given the vast majority have never been identified by 
authorities26. 
80. A preference for sons leads to men outnumbering women and an increased ‘pull factor’ to supply 
women as wives and sex workers and baby boys as sons. China, where the sex ratio at birth imbalance 
caused by a preference for sons favors men, is one of the most common destinations from Viet Nam 
for women trafficked  for marriage or sex work and for baby boys. Sexual violence and  engagement in  
sex work put women at increased risk of being trafficked for sex work  to other  parts  of Viet Nam or other 
countries. Women trafficked for marriage are also vulnerable to domestic violence because they are 
separated from family and other sources of support, potentially facing communication barriers to 
seeking help and with little or no economi c independence. Gender inequalities perpetuate both ‘push’ 
(economic necessity, son preference and sexual violence) and ‘pull’ factors (imbalance of SRB, male 
power, economic power) that drive human trafficking in Viet Nam.  
4.10 Ethnic minority issues  
81. Viet Nam has 54 ethnic groups  in which, Kinh is the majority group, account ing for 85.50% of the total 
population. The remained 53 ethnic minority groups mak e up 14.50%. The total population of ethnic 
minority people is 13.38 million, with 6.72 million males (equal to 50.21%) and 6.66 million females 
(equal to 49.79%)27. There are six ethnic minority groups with  a population over 1 million including the 
Tày (1.76 million); Thái (1.72 million); Mư ờng (1.39 million); Khmer (1.29 million); Mông (1.25 million); 
and Nùng (1.02 million). T here are also six ethnic minority groups  with a population under 1,000 people,  
including: Ngái (806); Si La (783); Pu Péo (736); Rơ Măm (483); Brâu (806); and Ơ Đu (406). Ethnic 
minorit ies live mostly in hamlets and villages of 5,453 communes national wide.28 
4.11 Poverty  and ethnic minorities  
82. The Kinh majority accounts for approximately 85% of the population. Kinh tend to live in delta areas 
and have higher living standards than other ethnic minorities. Hoa (Chinese) are also a better off group 
also liv ing in delta areas. Thus, Hoa are often grouped to gether with Kinh and may face ethnic 
discrimination in other areas29. Income poverty is disproportionately higher among ethnic minority 
groups. Ethnic minorit ies make up less than 15% of the country’s population, but account for up to 70% 
of the extreme poor.  
83. According to the 2014 survey conducted by MOLISA, the incidence of poverty among ethnic 
minorities is as high as 46.6%, compared to 9.9% for the Kinh and Hoa groups.  Ethnic minority 
children are facing higher poverty risk s (about 62– 78%) than Kinh or Hoa children (24– 28%). In 2006, 
for households headed by an ethnic minority in Vietnam, the probability of being in the bottom quintile 
 
26 UNFPA 2014: From domestic violence to gender -based violence: connecting the dots in Viet Nam –  an UN discussion paper  
27 GSO, Results from Population change and family planning as of 1/4/2014 and Survey on socio -economic situation of 53 EM 
groups 2015.  
28 Ibid.  
29 Even it up: how to tackle inequality in Viet  Nam  - Briefing Paper, Oxfam 2017


---
*Page 164*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
22 
 
 I 
was 3.2 times that of majority -ethnicity households. This probability increased to 3.5 by 201130. The 
gap in income mobility among ethnic groups is also large, and there are signs that this gap has been 
increasing over time. Between 2010 and 2014, around 19% of ethnic minorities in the bottom quintile 
moved to a higher income quintile, while for Kinh and Hoa, this figure was 49%. In addition, ethnic 
minorities are more likely to move down but less likely to move up, compared with Kinh and Hoa31. 
84. Ethnicity also intersects with gender, with larger gender gaps reported by ethnic minorities.  
Paradoxically, the largest gender poverty gap is to be found among the better off Khmer/Cham minority ethnic groups, reinforcing the point that while gender inequality is linked to poverty, the relationship can 
be complex and be manifested to a different extent across various cultures and circumstances  (World 
Bank, 2011)
32. 
4.12 Access to h ealth  services   
85. Lower access to health services among ethnic minorities is endemic, caused by factors such 
as lower income, reliance on out of pocket spending, a bureaucratic health system, ethnic discrimination, and internal features of minority groups (such as patriarchy, religion, and 
worldviews).  Data indicate that pregnant women from poor households in Viet  Nam are three times 
more likely to go without prenatal care. Studi es show that increasing accessibility to quality service for 
ethnic minorities can only be solved if the following factors are considered: awareness, opportunity 
costs, language barriers, mistrust, rituals, culture, taboos, and network habits
33. 
4.13 Employment and ethnic minorities  
86. Percentage of ethnic minority people employed in agriculture is very high at 81.41%, twice as 
high as that of the Kinh ethnic group. Over 90% of people of 33 out of 53 ethnic minority groups 
are employed in agriculture.  Women of 53 ethnic minority groups work more in the agriculture sector 
than men (male: 79.16%; female: 83.81%)34. In regard to ethnic minority groups, the employment 
structure of ethnic minorities is  mostly linked to agriculture (cultivation, husbandry) and forestry. In 
agriculture/ forestry production, most ethnic minority people still apply traditional production 
techniques with low productivity and yield .  
87. Traditional far ming practices are taught to children in early years. When they reach adolescence,  they 
can work independently and cultivate more land for production35. Thanks to such a simple livelihood, 
the rate of ethnic minority employment  is very high compared to that of the Kinh ethnic group.  
88. The percentage of ethnic minorities employed in industry  is correspondingly very low. It  has been 
reached 8.71%, roughly one third the national average (23.49%) or the percentage of Kinh (26.39% ). 
The share of ethnic minority women employed in industry (6.23%) was roughly half that of ethnic minority men (11.03%) and far below the share of Kinh women employed in industry (21.71%)
36.  
89. In addition, there is a significant difference in educational and technical qualifications of ethnic 
minority workers.  The educational and technical qualifications of employed ethnic minority workers 
aged 15 and older is remarkably lower than that of the Kinh ethnic group. The overall rate of employed workers aged 15 and older who underwent technical training nationwide w as 19.9% , which was 3.5 
times higher than that of ethnic minority workers (at 5.73%). The proportion of ethnic minority women 
undergoing professional technical training (5.72%) is not significantly different from that of ethnic 
 
30 World Bank, Viet  Nam  Country Gender Assessment, 2010  
31 Ibid.  
32 World bank, Viet Nam Country Assessment Report 2011  
33 Even it up: how to tackle inequality in Viet  Nam  - Briefing Paper, Oxfam 2017  
34 UN Women, Figures on ethnic minority men and women in Viet Nam 2015  
35 Ibid. 
36 UN Women, Figures on ethnic minority men and women in Viet Nam 2015


---
*Page 165*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
23 
 
 I 
minority men (5.74%), but among ethnic minority workers with vocational college qualifications, a higher 
percentage of women than men are employed (male: 2.14%; female: 2.25%).37 
90. The total number of state officials/civil servants who are from communes in ethnic minority  areas was 
57,268 people, accounting for 41.48% of the state officials/civil servants38. Lower socio- economic 
conditions prevail in areas/regions/provinces that have a higher percentage of ethnic minorities as well 
as higher rate of ethnic minority state of ficials/civil servants and vice versa. Specifically, 15.85% of state 
officials/civil servants in urban area were ethnic minorities, remarkably lower than the share of 45.75% 
in rural areas. The Northern Midlands and Mountain Area had the most disadvantaged socio -economic 
conditions and the highest proportion of ethnic minority state officials/civil servants at 66.40%; followed 
by the North Central and Central Coastal Areas with 35.67%. Although conditions in the Central 
Highlands are similar to the Northern Midlands and Mountain Areas, the proportion of ethnic minority 
state officials/civil servants ranged from only 30% to 50%39 
4.14 Political participation  
91. Currently, there are 425,999 party members, who are ethnic minorities in communes in ethnic minority 
areas n ationwide, accounting for 36.91% of total party members of the respective provinces . The 
percentage of party members who are ethnic minorities in urban area is 16.97%, significantly lower than rural areas ( 43.24% ). In different regions and areas with large populations of ethnic minorities, the 
percentage of party members who are ethnic minorities is often higher: Northern Midlands and 
Mountain Areas, 54.82%; North Central and Central Coastal Areas, 32.21%; and the Central Highlands, 
23.48%. Female ethnic minority party members in ethnic minority communes were only 30.04% , 
and this rate in the rural areas was even lower at 28.19%. By region, female ethnic minority party 
membership was lowest at 25.57% in the North Central and Central Coastal Areas and 25.97% in the 
Central Highlands
40. 
4.15 Assets ownership  of ethnic minorities  
92. A television is one of the most popular assets in ethnic minority households, accounting  for 
84.86%,  in which, the households  headed by men are 85.4% and the household headed by women are 
82.36%), compared to 94.80% of Kinh households (male household head: 94.03%; female household 
head: 91.95%)41. This is a basic foundation to ensure that ethnic minorit ies could access climate 
information in particular and other information in general. The second most popular asset is a 
motorcycle, owned by 80.59% of ethnic minority households (male household heads : 83.45%; female 
household heads : 67.30%), nearly equal to 83.63% of Kinh households  (male household heads : 
87.77%; female household heads : 72.88%)42.  
93. Telephones , computer s and internet connections  are also important assets to ensure that local people 
could access climate and other information. The survey of  53 ethnic groups showed that t here are 
significant differences in access to information between ethnic groups, and differences between 
households headed by men and women in ownership of telephone, computer and internet connection.  
94. Nearly 90% of  households nationwide possess  a telephone (landline or/and mobile). There is a 
significant difference between Kinh households and ethnic minority households. In 2014, Kinh 
households had a rate of telephone  possession of  91.82% while in 2015 ethnic minority 
households the rate was 75.59%43. There is also a significant difference between households headed 
by men and households  headed by women in both Kinh and ethnic minority people. The households  
 
37 Ibid.  
38 Ibid.  
39 Ibid.  
40 Ibid. 
41 UN Women, Figures on ethnic minority men and women in Viet Nam 2015  
42 Ibid.  
43 Ibid.


---
*Page 166*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
24 
 
 I 
headed  by Kinh males with a  telephone account ed for 94.20% while this percentage among ethnic 
minority households  headed by males was  only 76.88%. The percentage of Kinh households  with 
telephones headed by women account ed for 85.65% while ethnic minority households  headed by 
women account  only for about 69.70%44.  
95. The GSO’s survey also show s that there is almost no difference between households headed by men 
or women owning a computer, however the difference between ethnicities is quite large. In 2015, 
21.25% of households nationwide possessed a computer (male household head: 20.37%; female household head: 23.69%). While 23.44% Kinh households use computers, the corresponding rate in 
ethnic minority households is only 7.70%. Similarly, the percentage of Kinh households headed by 
women using a computer is 24.73%, while ethnic minority households headed by women account for  
12.81%. In addition, the percentage of households connected to the internet is also different between 
Kinh households and ethnic minority  groups . Among internet -connected households, the Kinh 
households reached 17.71% while et hnic minority household only reached 6.50%.  
96. In 2015, over 98% of households nationwide used grid electricity (male household head: 97.91%; 
female household head: 99.22%).  Ethnic minority households us ing grid electricity reached 
96.65% . The gender difference is small in access to grid electricity for living.   However, some ethnic 
minority groups living in high mountainous and remote areas do not have a sufficient connection to the 
electricity grid including : Mảng (42.09%), Lô Lô (46.35%), La H ủ (48.02%) and Khơ Mú (58.32%).  
4.16 Early marriage in ethnic minority community  
97. Ethnic minority  groups  in Vietnam have been facing various  social and gender issues. One of those 
issues is early marriage. According to the Marriage and Family Law 2014, the minimum aged for marri age is 20 years for men and 18 years for women. The report made by UN Women in 2015 stated 
that early marriage may create difficulties for young couples in ensuring livelihood security for 
themselves and their children as well as having greater ri sks of maternal  and child health issues
45. 
According to the Population Change and Family Planning Survey 2014, 2.61% of all marriage 
nationwide were early marriage. T he Kinh group had the lowest child marriage rate (equal to 1.48%) in 
comparison with other 53 ethnic minority groups (equal to 26.59% on average). There is not quite much 
difference between men and women on early marriage (male: 26.04%; female: 27.12%). 46   
4.17 Land rights issues of ethnic minority people     
98. Ethnic minority communities have owned and managed land, forests and water resources for 
generations in accordance with customary law and practices. As such, land, forests and water are 
central not only to their livelihoods , but also to their ethnic and cultural identities. Agriculture is  the 
primary livelihood activity for ethnic minorities across Viet  Nam. According to the Viet  Nam Household 
Living Standards Survey (2010), poorer rural households (including a preponderance of ethnic minorities) cultivate  more land on average than better -off households do, but their productivity is lower, 
as is the quality of land and availability of water. Particularly in mountainous areas where non-
agricultural job opportunities are minimal, disparities in agricultural land distribution are perceived as 
decisive  in determining inequality of outcomes. Farmers with sufficient, quality land have multiple 
options to escape poverty; those with less land depend on high- value cash crops that need special soil  
and weather conditions . 
 
44 Ibid. 
45 UN Women, Figures on ethnic minority men and women in Vietnam 2015  
46 GSO, Results from Population change and family planning as of 1/4/2014 and Survey on socio -economic situation of 53 EM 
groups 2015


---
*Page 167*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
25 
 
 I 
5. Key issues on g ender Inequality and social inclusion in the project area s 
5.1 Population and ethnic minority  
99. All project provinces are home to different ethnic minority groups .  Most ethnic minorities live in Ninh 
Thuan, Dak Lak and Dak Nong with populations ranging from 20% to 30% while ethnic minority 
populations  account for 5.7% and 7.4% population of Khanh Hoa and Binh Thuan provinces 
respectively. The ethnic minority groups  living  in the five target provinces are classified into indigenous 
ethnic minority groups  - Raglei and Cham (in Ninh Thuan) , M’Nong and E De (in Dak Lak and Dak 
Nong province)  - and immigrant  ethnic minority group, such as Mong, Tay , Nung and Dao. Those 
groups  migrated from n orthern Viet Nam.  Indigenous ethnic minorities in South- Central Coastal 
provinces are mainly Cham, Raglei and Chau Ro while the ones in the Central Highlands  include E De, 
Gia Lai and Mo Nong (M’Nong).  
100. In general, indigenous ethnic minority  people are concentrated in separated villages with 
matriarchy regimes ; in contrast, immigrated ethnic minority groups live alongside Kinh people and 
under patriarchy regimes . 
Table 1: Population of target provinces, 2015  
Administrativ
e unit  Average population (person)  Ethnic minority 
population 
(*)  
Percentage 
of ethnic 
minority population  Population density (person/km2)  By sex  By sub - region  
Male Female  Urban  Rural  
Khanh Hoa  1,205,300  68,779  5.7% 231 594,200  611,100  541,300  664,000  
Ninh Thuan  595,900  137,629  23% 177 300,500  295,400  215,700  380,200  
BinhThuan  1,215,200  89,906  7.4% 156 608,200  607,000  477,700  737,500  
Dak Lak  1,853,700  363,491  19.6% 
141 932,800  920,900  450,600  1,403,10
0 
 Dak Nong  587,800  170,363  28.9% 90 297,300  290,500  89,400  498,400  
Source: Statistic Yearbook 2015, GSO;  
         (*) Social - Economic Survey of Ethnic minority in Vietnam conducted by CEMA and GSO, 2015  
5.2 Poverty conditions  
101. The table shows the incidence of poverty in  the target provinces in 2016 using the new poverty line  
based on multi -dimensional  poverty criteria. I n three of the five target provinces the rate of poor 
households of ethnic minority groups  is higher than the nat ional poverty rate (Ninh Thuan: 14.93%; Dak 
Lak: 19.37%; and DakNong:  19.26%). This implies that poverty gains remain fragile,  and a significant 
portion of the population, particul arly in rural areas and among ethnic minority remains vulnerable. 
Poverty persists in remote mountainous area s and is more concentrated in the communes 
where in digenous people live.  The rural population in the WEIDAP command areas  of the five target 
provinces accounts for 85% of the population.  
Table 2: Poverty incidence in target provinces  
  Whole 
country  Khanh 
Hoa Ninh 
Thuan  Binh 
Thuan  Dak 
Lak Dak 
Nong  
Rate of poor household as whole  9.88 9.87 14.93  5.81 19.37  19.26


---
*Page 168*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
26 
 
 I 
Rate of poor household as ethnic 
minority  23.1 (*)  68.6 38.8 19.54  37.17  40.75  
Rate of near poor household as 
whole  5.22 6.69 8.82 3.95 8.28 6.15 
Rate of near poor household as 
ethnic minority  13.6 (*)  9.8 14.95  8.66 10.91  8.6 
Source: MOLISA and provincial DOLISA, 2016  
(*) Social - Economic Survey of Ethnic minority in Vietnam conducted by CEMA and GSO, 2015  
102. In the table above,  significant difference s between poor and non -poor  and between Kinh and 
ethnic minority groups in access to education  can be identified . The higher the educational level 
attained, the more likely the household is to be non- poor. The highest level of education that the poor 
households  and ethnic minority people attained was high school while the highest level attained by 
Kinh people and non-  poor household was university level.  The level of education of the Kinh people is 
generally higher than of the ethnic minority groups.  
Table 3: Education by Economic Status, Ethnicity and Sex disaggregation  
Education level  % respondent      
By economic 
status  By Ethnicity    By Sex  
Total  Female -
headed 
HH Poor  Non- 
Poor  Kin
h Indigenou
s EM  Immigra nt 
EM Femal
e Male  
Never been to 
school  27.3 4.2 2.6 22.6 15.7 16.3 5.6 8.5 14.3 
Primary school  41.8 24.4 21.
7 28.3 49.0 31.3 26.3 27.6 47.6 
Secondary school  27.3 42.9 43.
4 41.5 25.5 35.0 41.8 39.9 23.8 
High school  3.6 23.5 25.
9 7.5 9.8 12.5 22.5 19.8 11.9 
Vocational training  0.0 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 0.0 
College/University  0.0 4.6 5.8 0.0 0.0 5.0 3.3 3.8 2.4 
 Source: WEIDAP socio-  economic baseline household survey, 2017  
Table 4: Education level by Subproject  Area 
  Khanh 
Hoa 
subprojec
t Ninh Thuan 
province  Binh Thuan  
Dak 
Lak Dak Nong  
Thanh 
Son- Thanh 
Hai- Tra 
Tan Du 
Du- 
Tan Cu 
Jut Dak 
Mil


---
*Page 169*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
27 
 
 I 
Phuoc 
Nhon  Nhon 
Hai Than
h 
Never been to 
school  3.2 42.9 3.8 4.4 0.0 7.1 6.5 10.7 
Primary school  15.9 46.4 15.4 22.2 26.7 35.7 38.7 32.1 
Secondary school  49.2 10.7 46.2 62.2 33.3 35.7 35.5 25.0 
High school  30.2 0.0 15.4 11.1 33.3 19.0 16.1 25.0 
Vocational training  0.0 0.0 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
College/University  1.6 0.0 15.4 0.0 6.7 2.4 3.2 7.1 
 Source: WEIDAP socio-  economic baseline household survey, 2017  
5.3 Current gender mainstreaming capacity     
103. According to the Law on Gender Equality, the  People’s Committee is the state agency for gender 
equality. The People’s Committee has its own organizational structure at three levels (Provincial, 
District and C ommune).  The main state management roles  are developing guidelines  for the 
implementation of gender policies  and focus sing on the implementation of the Law on gender equality 
and the National Plan of Action on Gender Equality. At present, the People’s  Committees have  already  
developed the provincial plans  of action on gender equality  for the five project provinces (Ninh Thuan, 
Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Binh Thuan and Khanh Hoa) . The People’s  Committee s have also developed their 
own plans  of action based on request s and guidance from the province level  for district level. The same 
process has also taken also place  at commune level . All communes have developed their plans of 
action based on request s and guidance from the district level .   
 
104. The Plan of  Action on Gender E quality developed by the People’s Committee  of Ninh Thuan aimed 
to achieve seven  specific objectives on gender equality47 including (1) p romote the participation of 
women into leadership positions; (2)  reduce gender gaps in labour, economic,  and employment, and 
strengthen access of rural women to market and employment; (3) improve quality of the female labour 
force and strengthen the participation of women in education and training; (4) ensure gender equality 
in access to health care service; (5) ensure gender equality in access to information and culture 
activities; (6) ensure gender equality in family life and prevent domestic violence and (7) build state 
management c apacity on gender equality. The Plan of A ction also identified the specific solutions and 
assigned specific tasks for all relevant agencies.  
 
105. Ninh Thuan People’s Committee has issued the provincial action plan on gender equality  for the 
period 2016 –  2020,  under Decision 1059/QD -UBND, dated 4 May 2016 and Plan 153/KH -UBND dated 
8 September 2016.  The People’s Committee issued Decision 2382/QD -UBND, dated 15 August 2016 
for approval of the plan to implement the national action plan on gender equality for the period 2016 – 
2020. This Decision also identified the seven  specific object ives of gender equality and ass igned the 
tasks for all relevant agencies at provincial level. Under the direction of this decision a ll districts of the 
province will develop their own action plan on gender equality. The district s and communes  will select 
and identify the same objectives  and target indicators  
 
 
47 Decision 1059/QD -UBND dated 4 May 2016 –  Ninh Thuan People Committee on approval of the action plan to implement  
national action plan on gender equality for period 2016 –  2020.


---
*Page 170*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
28 
 
 I 
106. The Khanh Hoa  People’s  Committee has issued Decision 883/QD -UBND, dated 3 April 2017,  to 
implement the national action plan on gender equality for  the period 2017 – 2020. The Decision also 
identif ied seven  specific objectives, targets  and indicators on gender equality that need to be achieved 
within this period. The Decision also identified key solutions and assigned the tasks for all relevant 
agencies to achieve the expected objectives and indicators.  
 
107. The Binh Thuan People’s Committee has issued Decision 1061/KH -UBND , dated 27 March 2017,  
and Plan number 1793/KH -UBND,  dated 21 April 2017 , to implement the national action plan on gender 
equality.  This plan of action also highlighted seven  objectives  and the roles and  responsibilit ies of all 
relevant agencies in implementing this plan of action.   
 
108. At the same time,  DOLISA  is an agency whose mission is to support the People’s Committees  to 
implement the plans for  gender equality at the provincial level. This agency has its organizational 
structure from provincial to district level. At commune level, there is only one member of its staff,  who 
is responsible for all activities there. At provincial level, DOLISA s have  limited capacity to provide 
consultation and support  to the provincial People’s Committees  to implement gender policies and laws . 
This effort is limited to develop ment of  general guidelines  on gender policy implementation. It also 
include s awareness -raising  activities  on gender equality for relevant agencies  from provincial, district 
and commune levels .  
 
109. Most staff and leaders  assigned to do gender work  have been trained on gender equality concepts . 
However, even so, many still lack skills to identify gender issues (gender analysis  skills ) in specific 
professional areas . Interviews with this agency during the gender assessment showed that there  is a 
high need to fill this gap to make sure that these two agencies can perform state management tasks 
effectively .            
5.4 Gender mainstreaming capacity of DARD  
110. The Department of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD) has a  specific  mission to promote 
agricultur al sustainability and productivity at  provincial and district level s. This agency  represent s the 
state management agency for agriculture and rural development.  The main task of this agency is to 
identify suitable crops and livestock for each location by considering climate change adaptation and 
market potentiality. However, current risks from market s remain  as barriers to farmers making them 
reluctant to invest in agricultur al production. Existing climate change adaptive solutions are largely 
spontaneous, without explicit guidance or orientation from specialized agencies like DARD.  
 
111. According to the Law on gender equality, DARD must  develop its  own action -plan on gender 
equality and advancement of women  within the organization. While the result s of the gender  
assessment show that the action plan on gender equality and advancement of this agency is available,  
there is a big gap in knowledge and  skills  regarding gender  concepts and gender mainstreaming among 
staff and leaders of this organization at all level s. Most of the technical staff and leaders from DARD at 
provinc ial, district and commune  level still lack knowledge and understanding of gender  concepts.  
 
112. DARD lacks skills to identify  gender inequality issues when design ing and implement ing 
agriculture extension activities.  They also do not have the abilities to identify and consider the 
differences between men and women in needs and concerns  related to agriculture production activities . 
The DARD s also do not have experience to identify difference between men and women in access to 
and control over the resources when they implement policies or projects/program.  They also do not 
recognize men and women as impacted differently by social factors.  Therefore, it is essential to 
strengthen gender equality within the organization.  They are also unable to identify and consider the 
difference between men and women in needs and concerns associated with agricultural production. I t 
is therefore essential to promote gender equality in the organization . There is furthermore a high need  
for building gender analysis and mainstreaming capacities for the technical staff if this agency.


---
*Page 171*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
29 
 
 I 
 
113. Under the DARD, there is one specific technical division, which is  responsible for agriculture 
extension activities (Cent re for Agriculture Extension Office) . Most of the leaders and technical staff  
from this office do not have knowledge or skills for gender analysis  and gender mainstreaming.  As a 
result, the  specific knowledge and experience of women,  who are target groups of agriculture promotion 
activities  in general  are undervalued.   Additionally , women’s capacity in climate change adapt ation has 
not been considered when planning and implementing activities . Without gender sensitiv ity, most of the 
technical staff and leaders from the Agriculture  Extension office do not know how to identify and 
maximize knowledge and experience of women and men nor do they  know how to consider the 
difference between men and women in needs, capacit ies and interests and tak e them into account.  In 
these agencies , leaders and staff member s need to deepen their knowledge of  gender concepts and 
gender mainstreaming.  
 114. In summary, the gender equality has been known by DARD’s leaders  since  the Law on Gender 
Equality c ame into effect  in 2007 , but there i s still a  gap in gender knowledge and skills among technical 
staff and leaders of DARDs. Leaders and technical staff still lack understanding of the importance of 
gender equality in agriculture work , and they do not have skills to identify gender issues and how to 
address these issues while  planning and implementing agricultur al extension activities.  During the 
gender assessment, they show ed the need for  awareness raising on gender equality and skills  building  
on gender analysis and gender mainstreaming.          
5.5 Gender  mainstreaming  capacity of the  Women Union  
115. The Viet Nam Women's Union (VWU)  is a mass organization, which is structured in four 
organizational levels (central, provincial, district and commune level). VWU  has a specific mission  to 
protect  the legitimate rights and interests  of women.  At provincial and district level s, the  gender 
assessment showed that t he technical staff and leaders of  the provincial Women ’s Unions in the five  
project provinces  have  better  knowledge and understanding of gender  concepts  in comparison with 
other agencies,  but the staff  and leaders  of the provincial Women ’s Union in the surveyed project 
provinces still lack  skills  to identify gender equality issues in agriculture activities , and they also 
do not know how to consider the difference between men and women in planning and implementing 
professional activities . Due to the lack of information and experience related to climate change 
adaptation, the VWU’s staff are not currently able to maximize their role  in prom oting  gender 
equality  in agriculture activities at the moment.  
 116. In addition, the provincial  Women ’s Union s have experience in  implement ing livelihood models for 
women through  establishing and maintaining women ’s interest groups. Esp ecially, the Ninh Thuan 
provinc ial Women ’s Union has experience in implement ing livelihood models  to cope with/ adapt to 
climate change effects . Ninh Thuan Women’s  Union al so has  experience in mainstreaming gender  into 
livelihood models under  a project funded by SNV. However, the  provincial Women’s  Union only has 
experience in conduct ing communication and awareness raising activities  on these issues. They still 
lack skills to facilitate gender mainstreaming to address  climate change issues, especially related to 
agricultur al production activities.   
 
117. The Provincial Women’s  Union has  experience in maintaining small- scale savings and credit  
models for its members.  They also play an important role in coordinating with local commercial  and 
policy  banks to enable female members to access loans to invest in agricultur al production activities.  
Most of the banks  only provide loans and  do not have any technical support  for borrowers  to use the 
loans effectively.  
 118. Due to resource limitations , the Women Union focuses  only on securing access to loans. They 
furthermore do not have any technical support for borrowers.  In addition, there is a lack of knowledge 
and experience in using loans  and a fear of taking risks. Consequently, many women do not dare to


---
*Page 172*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
30 
 
 I 
access loans  or make investment s for daily agricultur al production purposes .  In case they do want to 
access loans, they expect to access loans with low or no interest .  
 
119. The mission of the provincial Women’s  Union is to protect the rights and benefits of women. The 
Women ’s Union aims to address women ’s issues rather than focus  on gender issues  (both issues of 
women and men) . As a result, the provincial Women’s  Union does not consider women’s  issues in 
relation to the specific  roles and responsibilit ies of men. This excludes men from th e process and does 
not encourage them to joi n with women to face women’s issues.  
 
120. Despite the fact that VWU is the standing member of the committee for the advancement of women  
at all level s (provincial, district and communes) they have a weak voice in  local Government  
decision -making  process es.  
5.6 Knowledge and experience of women and men in climate change  
121. Most of the men and women inte rviewed during the  gender assessment in  the three 
provinces shared that  they are aware of the negative effects of climate change related to their 
agriculture production and daily life . In these interviews , drought is mentioned quite a lot. Dry spells 
usually occur between March and June every year. D rought s affect productivity, product quality, water  
availability  and lead to abandoned production land .  
 
122. While both men and women are aware of negative impacts of climate change on their agricultur al 
production, there are still  limited actions by men and women to overcome the scarcity of water 
resources, especially during  the dry season . The most popular actions done by men and women 
include  (1) digging ponds and (2) drilling wells.  In addition, f armers  have heard about water  
conservation systems . There are a few households with better economic conditions who have applied 
these systems. The survey does not show any poor  and near poor  households apply ing these systems 
in the project areas . 
 
123. Television is the most popular instrument that has helped local people to access public 
information including climate information . In-depth interviews with local people in three project 
provinces showed that  most interviewed women and men in the project are as have access to weather 
related information through television. C limate information is mainly used to adjust  or plan production 
activities, such as irrigating, fertilizing or drying agricultural products. Many had hear d the term “climate 
change” through this channel but only had a very general knowledge of it. Both men and women also 
receive information on water saving models  through television , but it is  difficult  for them  to ap ply these 
model s because of high cost .  Additionally, th ese model s are only suitable for families with compact  
production areas .  
 
124. The results of the in -depth interviews  with men and women also show ed that there are two main 
reasons for farmers  not apply ing water saving model s in practice,  including  (1) the main sources  
of water  are from ponds, rivers and lakes  near production areas ; and (2) the investment cost of the 
water  saving model is quite high while this model  is only suitable for some kinds of crops ( e.g. 
vegetables, pepper  and not suitable for coffee) . This fact raises the need to improve knowledge and 
understanding of water -saving solutions  for farmers. W omen often have less access to information  
on climate change and water saving models  than men because women are more likely to be 
busy with household activities.  
5.7 Gender labour division  in agricultur al activities  
125. There is a hidden gender norm that affect s the division of  labour  between men and women in most 
agriculture activities  in the target project areas . The main crops in the target project area inc lude coffee 
and pepper . Both men and women are involved in these crops , but they divide the tasks based on a


---
*Page 173*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
31 
 
 I 
rule that men automatically take on the heav ier work and women the lighter tasks . To explain this 
division, local people do not conceive the iss ue of “who does what” in the family. For them, it is simpl y 
that each person should do one thing and whoever does something better from their experience should 
continue working on it. There is a perception from the community that wo men are physically weaker  
and more suited for housework  rather than for job opportunities outside the village , while m en being  
stronger , are capable of  heav ier work . Gender stereotypes  makes both men and women uncapable of 
recognizing the inequality in the current division of labour in agriculture- related actives.  
 
126. In coffee- growing activities, men take on most of the work, especially the heav ier tasks. Women 
are also involved but only with the lighter work . Women’s  tasks tend to include clearing grass, fert ilizing 
and drying while men focus  more on planting, pruning, digging drainage around the root s; watering and 
grinding activities.  Men and women have a n equal share in harvesting and selling the product.        
Table 5: Gender Division of Labour in coffee growing  
 
Tasks in growing coffee  Men Women  
Planting  xxxxxx  xx 
Pruning  xxxxxx  xx 
Clearing grass  xx xxxxxx  
Digging surround the root  xxxxx x xx 
Fertilizing   xx xxxxxx  
Spraying pesticides  xxxxxx   
Watering  xxxxxx  xx 
Harvesting  xxx xxx 
Drying  xx xxxxx 
Grinding  xxxxx  xx 
Selling  xxx xxx 
Source: Focus Group Discussion with ethnic minority group in Blech Village, Edrang town, Ealeo District, Dak Lak Province  
Symbol note: xxxxxx  mean do most; xx mean do little , xxx mean do equal  and blank mean no role at all.   
 
127. The division of labour between men and women in pepper growing is quite similar to  coffee growing. 
Men tend to take heav ier tasks while women take light er ones . Both men and women are involved in 
most of the tasks, but men have the tendency to take task s which are more expected of men, such as 
making pillar s for pepper plants , spraying pesticides and watering while women take tasks such as 
clearing grass, fertilizing, pruning and drying. Men and women have an equal share in harvesting and 
selling product.   
 
Table 6: Gender Division of Labour in pepper growing  
 
Tasks in Pepper growing  Men Women


---
*Page 174*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
32 
 
 I 
Make pillar  xxxxxx   
Planting  xxx xxx 
Clearing grass  xx xxxxxx  
Fertilizing   xx xxxxxx  
Spraying pesticides  xxxxxx   
Watering  xxxxxx  xx 
Pruning  xx xxxxxx  
Harvesting  xxx xxx 
Drying  xx xxxxx 
Selling  xxx xxx 
Source: Focus Group Discussion with ethnic minority group in Buor Village, Tam Thang Commune, Cu Jut District, Dak Nong Provi nce 
Symbol note: xxxxxx  mean do most; xx mean do little, xxx mean do equal and blank mean no role at all.   
 
128. In agricultur al production in  the project target areas, w ater pumping and irrigation, in general, are 
considered as heavy work, thus, it has been done by men so far. Women are reluctant to take on this 
work. The result s from Focus G roup Discussion s showed that both men and women reported that men 
are responsible for irrigating crops within their family and men  also manage irrigation in the community. 
In the family, women are also involved in watering crops, but this task is considered as heavy work, 
and women reported that they should only do it when men are busy with other work s. Women are not 
involve d in buying or preparing the equipment, digging well s or ponds , watering crops, etc .  
 
129. Irrigation- related work , including such as planning, building, and maintaining are led by men. This 
is owing to the fact that men are mainly responsible for water use and irrigation management. As a 
result, women have limited knowledge and experience in managing and coordinating water resources 
for agriculture production activities. The voice and contribution of women in this work are minimal.   
5.8 Community participation in social groups  
130. The result of baseline survey of the WEIDAP projec t showed that 77% of respondents belong to 
Farmers Associations  (FA). This survey also found a slight difference between social groups 
participating in this organization. It shows that Farmers Associations appear to be very active in the 
area. Religious  groups  and Women ’s Unions  are other organizations  where farmers participate with at 
18.4% and 17.4% respectively. Very few people belong to other types of community groups like w ater 
users’  groups , cooperatives , interest groups, agricultural extension groups  or savings groups .  
131. The baseline survey also showed that Farmer Association s and Women’s  Unions are organizations 
where most female- headed household participat e. Indeed, if the participation strategy of the project is 
well-designed and executed and includes the establishment and development of water user groups, 
local communities could gain significant social capital, in their capacity to work together to manage this 
important resource, which they could then apply in addressing other social and developmental problems.


---
*Page 175*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
33 
 
 I 
 
Table 7: Membership in Community Organizations  
 
  Membership in Community Organizations  
Farmer 
Association WUG/WUA  Cooperative  Interest group  Agricultural 
Extension 
group  Youth 
Union  Women Union  Religion group  Savin
g and credit group  Agricultural processing group  
Total 
response  77.1 1.0 1.7 1.0 3.4 5.5 17.4 18.4 5.1 0.3 
Female -
head ed 
Household  66.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.1 38.1 14.3 4.8 0.0 
By Ethnicity  
Kinh 75.7 1.6 2.6 1.6 3.2 6.9 16.4 20.6 4.8 0.5 
Indigenous 
EM 81.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.7 5.7 13.2 17.0 7.5 0.0 
Immigrated 
EM 78.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.0 0.0 25.5 11.8 3.9 0.0 
By economic status  
Poor48 72.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.8 5.5 16.4 18.2 0.0 1.8 
Non poor49 78.2 1.3 2.1 1.3 3.8 5.5 17.6 18.5 6.3 0.0 
By sub project  
Khanh Hoa  87.3 0.0 1.6 0.0 3.2 4.8 12.7 30.2 7.9 1.6 
Thanh Son - 
Phuoc 
Nhon  78.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.
7 25.0 17.9 0.0 0.0 
Thanh Hai - 
Nhon Hai  61.5 3.8 3.8 0.0 3.8 23.
1 23.1 15.4 3.8 0.0 
Tra Tan  80.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.7 0.0 0.0 20.0 6.7 0.0 
Du Du - Tan 
Thanh  73.3 0.0 6.7 0.0 0.0 13.
3 33.3 20.0 0.0 0.0 
 
48 The poor household is regulated by Vietnamese Government under the Decision 59/2015/ND -CP on 19 November 2011 for 
period 2016 –  2020.  A pooor household is a houshold with an avarage income of 700,000 VND per month (equal to US$31) in 
rural areas and 900, 000VND (equal to US$39).       
49 The near poor household is regulated by Vietnamese Government under the Decision 59/2015/ND -CP on 19 November 2011 
for period 2016 –  2020.  A near pooor household is a houshold with an avarage income from above 700,000VND –  900,000VND 
per month (equal to above US$31 to US$39) in rural areas and above 900,000VND –  1,300,000VND (equal to above US$39 to 
US$59).


---
*Page 176*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
34 
 
 I 
Dak Lak  76.2 4.8 2.4 2.4 2.4 0.0 2.4 4.8 9.5 0.0 
Cu Jut  77.4 0.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 0.0 29.0 12.9 3.2 0.0 
Dak Mil  67.9 0.0 0.0 3.6 7.1 0.0 35.7 17.9 3.6 0.0 
Source: WEIDAP socio - economic baseline household survey, 2017  
 
132. Participation of local people, especially women in community meetings is limited.  Both men 
and women are involved, but men are often in the majority in such meetings, especially in ethnic minority areas.  Men are predominant in community meetings both in terms of quantity and quality of 
participation. Women are less likely to participate in community meetings because they are occupied 
with housework . Women only participate in community meetings when men/husbands  are busy. W hen 
participating in community meetings, women often provide extensive feedback  and numerous  
comments.  However, women  are less likely to influence the decision -making process on water 
management and production planning  in their community . 
 
133. The Women’s  and Farmer s Union s are two agencies who have established and maintained farmer 
groups that provide a space for local people to learn and share specific information. The Women ’s 
Union  has already established women ’s clubs for different purposes such as women’s  clubs on 
environment al protection; voluntary saving associations and credit groups . The Farmers Unions have 
organized farmer groups who are involved in livelihood programs . These clubs and groups  have a high  
potential for strengthening  popular participation. However, currently, no farmer group has yet been 
established for economic activities . Each commune has at least one cooperative group provid ing 
service to agriculture production for farmers, but they  still lack skills to facilitate local farmer access to 
market s.            
5.9 Access to water  for production  
134. There are two main source s of water that have been used by farmers for  agriculture production 
activities. The water  pumped  from river/stream/canal/ reservoir  is the major source of almost all water 
for use in i rrigated production. A secondary source comprises a farmer's own shallow well/pond/bore-
hole. In some areas, where farmers cannot dig well s or farmland is located far f rom river s or lakes , local 
people are forced to invest in extensive piping systems  to bring the water to the fields . If the land is 
located too far away or too high up,  the land will be abandoned. L ocal people interviewed during project 
preparation had heard about the water  conservation  systems, but there are very few models in practice 
due to their high cost , and farmers  may still feel  little pressure from water shortages,  so they do not yet 
consider water cons ervation models  to be a priority.   
 
Table  8: Source of water  used for agriculture production  
 
Sources of water  Overall  By ethnicity  By Economic status  
Female-
head ed 
HH Kinh   Indigenous 
EM Immigra nt EM Poor  Non- 
poor  
Rainy season  
Rain fed only  19.5 18.5 32.1 9.8 32.7 16.4 21.4 
Irrigated by pumping from 
river/stream/canal/ 
reservoir  15.0 11.6 24.5 17.6 18.2 14.3 21.4


---
*Page 177*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
35 
 
 I 
Irrigated by pumping f rom 
farmer's own shallow 
well/pond/ borehole  6.5 7.4 5.7 3.9 1.8 7.6 2.4 
Irrigated by buying water 
from private source  0.3 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 
Dry season  
Rain fed only  5.5 2.6 9.4 11.8 7.3 5.0 7.1 
Irrigated by pumping from 
river/stream/canal/ 
reservoir  60.1 58.7 47.2 78.4 52.7 61.8 45.2 
Irrigated by pumping f rom 
farmer's own shallow 
well/pond/ bore- hole 25.9 26.5 32.1 17.6 20.0 27.3 26.2 
Irrigated by buying water 
from private source  2.7 3.2 0.0 3.9 0.0 3.4 2.4 
Source: WEIDAP socio-  economic baseline household survey, 2017  
135. The most common method applied was water by hand- held hose. Overall , over 50% of the farmers 
in the project area used this method of irrigation.  
Table  9: Irrigation methods applied by ethnicity and economic class  
 
  Number of 
HH applied  By ethnicity  By economic status By Sex   
Kinh  Indigenous 
EM Immigrated 
EM Poor  Non- Poor  Female -
headed HH  
Flooding/ 
moveable 
hose 
irrigation  53.6 51.9 73.6 39.2 69.1 50 38.1 
Overhead 
sprinkler 
irrigation  17.4 14.3 0 47.1 0 21.4 31 
Micro 
sprinkler 
irrigation  18.1 22.2 13.2 7.8 7.3 20.6 19 
Drip 
irrigation  0.3 0.5 0 0 0 0.4 0 
Other  1 0.5 1.9 2 3.6 0.4 0 
Source: WEIDAP socio-  economic baseline household survey, 2017  
136. In regards to irrigation practice, it can be seen that over 60% of farmers in the project areas  in the 
South- Central Coastal province still used the flooding/moveable hose irrigation method ; 76% of 
indigenous ethnic minority households and 69% poor farmers used this method compared to 52% Kinh 
households. Overhead sprinkler irrigation was commonly used in Dak Nong province (55% in Cu Jut subproject and 71% in Dak Mil subproject). Participants in FGDs had the opinion that overhead sprinkler 
irrigation is the most suitable method for coffee. Another reason can be the cost of equipment. It is 
notable that 50% of fema le-headed households stated that they apply overhead sprinkler and micro 
sprinkler irrigation methods .


---
*Page 178*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
36 
 
 I 
Table 10: Irrigation methods applied by subproject (% of response)  
  Khanh 
Hoa 
subproject  Ninh Thuan 
province  Binh Thuan  
Dak 
Lak Dak Nong  
Thanh 
Son- 
Phuoc 
Nhon  Thanh 
Hai- 
Nhon 
Hai Tra 
Tan Du Du - 
Tan 
Thanh  Cu 
Jut Dak 
Mil 
Flooding/ moveable 
hose irrigation  61.9 64.3 65.4 44.4 60.0 57.1 41.9 28.6 
Overhead sprinkler 
irrigation  0.0 0.0 0.0 8.9 6.7 19.0 54.8 71.4 
Micro sprinkler 
irrigation  33.3 0.0 7.7 20.0 33.3 23.8 3.2 0.0 
Drip irrigation  1.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Other  0.0 7.1 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Source: WEIDAP socio-  economic baseline household survey, 2017  
137. The majority of the poor and near-poor households have little production land. If they have 
production land, the area is often small, scattered or  located far from a water source. In addition, if they 
want to have access to water, the  poor and near -poor households  must invest a significant 
amount of their own income to purchase equipment, such as pump s and  pipe,  and to cover 
electri city costs, etc. This creates a financial burden on  poor and near poor  households , among which  
households  headed by wome n account for disproportionate number . Therefore, poor and near -poor 
households, especially the poor and near -poor households headed by women , are often challenged to  
invest in  necessary infrastructure for access to water for production.     
 
138. Changes  in water availability may also seriously impact women’s  health and livelihoods . One of  the 
most common gender norm s in most of the project communes  is that  women are play  the primary role 
in water  collection for household.  As local water availability decl ines, the distances travelled to obtain 
water may increase.  This has negatively impacted women’s health and hygiene . Women also have 
knowledge and experience in managing water for agricultur al production. Due to gender norms  that 
women should stay home to care for children, women are not prioritized for training opportunities n or 
are they able to participate in community discussions on water solutions.  
 139. The findings from the rapid assessment  of drought  done by  a joint team f rom different  agencies 
(e.g. Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, United Nations and INGOs)  in 
2016  also concluded that changes  in water availability is  serious ly impact s women ’s livelihoods  and 
potential for early recovery.  
5.10 Decision making issues  
140. Men make most of the important decisions within the family . Women may be consult ed, but men 
make the final decision, and  women are enjoined to follow the guidance and direction of men. Women ’s 
roles are often limited to domestic tasks and childcare. Women guard household money , but the final 
decision of how to use this money is made by men.


---
*Page 179*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
37 
 
 I 
141. In agricultur al production, men also make the decisions on almost all of the work, for example, 
selection of seeds, credit  to invest in  production; market ing.  
 
142. According to the result of baseline survey of the WEIDAP project, although female- head ed 
households  owned a larger area of resident ial plot land than male headed households , other types  of 
land held by female- headed households  were smaller than those held by male headed households. 
Female- headed households holding an average of agricultural land of 11,000m2 and 820m2 of house 
garden compared to 12000 of agricultural land and 1456 m2 of garden land holding by male headed 
households. It is note agriculture land and house garden land are used for cultivation, therefore, holding 
a smaller land area, female -head ed household has disadvantages not only in term of assets but also 
in term income generation.  
143. This survey also showed that ownership of house and farming land by male is dominant in the 
project area. Women/ female -headed households seem to be disadvantage in term of ownership of 
valuable  asset like land. 40% and 55% red book (land user right certificates) of agricultural land and 
house garden land were in only husband’s name compared to 7 and 11% in wife’s name respectively. Even in female -head ed household, 25% red book was still in husba nd’ name. The lack of secure tenure 
limits women farmers’ land use and cropping choices, women who do not possess a red book cannot 
apply for loans from any of the commercial banks.  
Table 11:  Land holding by gender  
 
Residential Land Holding  Agricultural L and 
(sao)  
Residential Plot (m2)  House garden (m2)   
Female -head ed HH  401.90  819.76  11.03  
Men headed household  293.39  1455.82  12.12  
Source: WEIDAP socio-  economic baseline household survey, 2017  
144. The baseline survey results of WEIDAP project also showed that overall the males (husband) play 
a dominant role in making a decision. 31% households who said that the male play dominant role in deciding household’s budget and finances and production investment respectively and 21% 
households said that sele ction of job or education for their children were also determined by the 
husband. Meanwhile, over 50% respondents agreed that this was both husband and wife’s 
responsibility for decision making on the management of household budget and finances and 
product ion investment. 63% respondents saying that decision on their children education/job were 
determined by both male and female.  
 
Table  12: Gender division of Responsibilities in non - production activities  
(% responses)  
Responsible 
Person  Participation in  Decision making on  
Community 
meetings  Attend 
agricultural 
extension 
training courses  Mass 
organization  Community 
supervi sion 
activities  Budgeting 
& 
Financial  Production 
investment  Education/ 
job of their children  
Total survey


---
*Page 180*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
38 
 
 I 
Husband  63.5 63.5 59.0 47.1 31.1 31.1 20.8 
Wife 18.1 11.6 16.4 13.3 6.5 3.4 5.5 
Both husband and 
wife 7.5 10.9 8.9 6.8 53.9 50.2 63.1 
Other  3.4 3.1 2.4 3.8 3.4 2.4 2.4 
No activity  7.5 10.9 13.3 29.0 5.1 13.0 8.2 
Female -head ed 
household    
Husband  35.7 28.6 31.0 26.2 23.8 19.0 9.5 
Wife 40.5 40.5 47.6 35.7 26.2 16.7 19.0 
Both husband and 
wife 7.1 19.0 7.1 4.8 40.5 52.4 59.5 
Other  9.5 9.5 7.1 7.1 7.1 7.1 4.8 
No activity  7.1 2.4 7.1 26.2 2.4 4.8 7.1 
Male - headed 
household    
Husband  68.1 69.3 63.7 50.6 32.3 33.1 22.7 
Wife 14.3 6.8 11.2 9.6 3.2 1.2 3.2 
Both husband and 
wife 7.6 9.6 9.2 7.2 56.2 49.8 63.7 
Other  2.4 2.0 1.6 3.2 2.8 1.6 2.0 
No activity  7.6 12.4 14.3 29.5 5.6 14.3 8.4 
Source: WEIDAP socio - economic baseline household survey, 2017  
145. In addition, according to the baseline survey of the WEIDAP project, women also play an important 
role in making decisions about  some important aspects of  famil y life, for example, 26% of women make 
decision s on budgeting and financing, 17% make decisions  on production investment , and 19% make 
decision s on children ’s education. However, decision- making is different between male headed 
households and female headed households. Very few women in these households are able to make 
their own decisions in regard to  family finance, budgeting, production investment or children ’s 
education. Although the survey results show that both husband and wife together mak e decisions on  
activities, the husband still plays  the dominant role in the decision- making process.  
5.11 Household Liabilities  
146. The figures from the baseline survey of the WEIDAP project show that the proportion of surveyed 
households who reported having debt or liabilities was 75%. I ndebtedness of poor households  was less 
common than it was in non-  poor households (60% compared to 78%).  There was no significant 
difference in t he proportion of indebted households among ethnic minorities and female- head ed 
households . However , there was disparity in indebtedness among subproject  areas  (see table SA4.19).


---
*Page 181*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
39 
 
 I 
Indebtedness among households in areas where farmers cultivate high value crops  (coffee and 
pepper) , like Cu Jut, Dak Mil and Tra Tan subproject  areas,  was more common than in other subproject  
areas . The baseline survey of the WEIDAP project also showed that households mainly obtained loans 
from banks (Agribank and Social Policy Bank) and account for 79% of the total loan borrowers .  Kinh 
households , non-  poor households and fem ale-head ed households were able to obtain loans from more 
diversified sources than ethnic minorities and poor households .


---
*Page 182*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
40 
 
 I 
Table 11: Indebtedness by ethnicity and economic status  
 
  Number of 
HH By ethnicity  By economic status  
Female -
headed HH  Kinh  Indigenous 
EM Immigrant 
EM Poor  Non - poor  
Number of surveyed HH  293 189 53 51 55 238 42 
Number of indebted HH  220 141 38 41 33 187 34 
Percentage  75.1  74.6  71.7  80.4  60.0  78.6  81.0  
Sources of loan    
Relatives, friends, neighbors  12 3 2 7 3 9 0 
Money lender  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Credit fund/ People’s credit Cooperatives  19 10 0 9 0 19 3 
Agribank  104 77 18 9 13 91 14 
Social Policy Bank  48 26 12 10 11 37 7 
Fund for poverty  6 6 0 0 3 3 2 
Women Union/other Associations  3 3 0 0 0 3 2 
Others(specific)  28 16 6 6 3 25 6 
Purpose for borrowing    
Agricultural Activities  200 123 37 40 33 167 30 
Non -agricultural Activities  1 0 1 0 0 1 0 
Purchase of consumer durables  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Purchase/improvement of dwelling  4 4 0 0 4 4 0 
Household consumption needs  4 4 0 0 0 4 0 
Health treatment, injury, accident  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Other (specify)  11 10 0 1 0 11 4 
Formality of loan    
Loans without collateral or deposits  152 93 14 6 15 53 11 
Mortgage loans  68 48 24 35 18 134 23 
Source: WEIDAP socio - economic baseline household survey, 2017


---
*Page 183*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
41 
 
 I 
147. The baseline survey also showed that approximately 85% of households borrowed money 
for agricultural activities. Borrowing for agricultur al production purposes  is a common reason in 
all social groups but is especially common for poor and ethnic minority households with 100% 
and 97% respectively who had borrowed money citing agricultural activities as their main reason.  
5.12 Access to climate information  
148. Access to i nformation through television is the most popular means: In-depth interview s 
with local people showed that television is the most popular means  of access ing public 
information, including climate information. Both men and women access weather forecast 
information through this medium in order to adjust their daily production plans  such as watering, 
fertilizing or arranging other daily tasks. They also access so me market information through this 
channel, but not much.  
 149. There is another means of  provid ing information to local people, which is technical training  
conducted by seed or fertilizer companies. They sometime conduct technical training on 
agricultural production techniques , though this tends to be restricted to introduction of new seeds  
and use of fertilizers. Very limited information is made available to enable market access by local 
stakeholders .  
 
150. Every year, the Agriculture Extension Centre –  DARD - also provides  some short training 
courses for local farmers. They  provide them the knowledge and skills for planting and caring for 
coffee and peppers.  But these training courses are often limited in numbers of participants due 
to budget constraints . There are as yet no training courses  on adaptive agricultur al options in the 
context of climate change.  According to the baseline survey of the WEIDAP project, 37% 
respondents said they had never participated in any training courses on water -efficient practices. 
63% of those respondents said that there has been no such course in their  locality thus far.  
5.13 Migration and gender issues  
151. The gender analysis show s that men have more opportunities to work outside the community , 
while women are expected to stay at home to take care of children and implement domestic tasks.  
Due to the lack of job opportunities in the commune, local people are forced to look for work  in 
other provinces (e.g.  Lam Dong, Ho Chi Minh). Among those migrati ng, male migrants are the 
majority.  At the consultative meeting with Phuoc Khang commune, Thuan Bac District, Ninh 
Thuan province,  it was learned that this commune has approximately 200 labourers who have 
migrated temporari ly to other provinces , and 70% of them are men. In general,  the interview with 
local authorit ies in a number of target  project communes did not produce an exact number of 
migrant laborers , but qualitative assessment by the local authori ties and other stakeholders 
indicated  that migration is an important  issue  for most of the project communes.  
 
152. The interview s under the gender assessment with local authorit ies in target project 
communes also show that drought is an underlying factor  driving people to migrate to other 
provinces . In most target project communes, approximately 50- 60% of farmland could not be  
cultivated during drought. There are few adaptive solutions currently available. The common 
solution by local farmers is to pump water from nearby rivers or lakes . There is no easy solution 
for the remain ing farmland locat ed far from a water source.  
 
153. The gender assessment in the target project communes also showed that drought more 
seriously impact s female farmers than male farmers. As mentioned above, women are expected 
to stay at home to take care of children, while men easily  move to work in  other provinces. This


---
*Page 184*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
42 
 
 I 
gender norm block s women from opportunities and resources to perform their roles effectively , 
especially since  the livelihood s of women are completely dependent  on agriculture. Lack of water 
in the dry season  or during a drought and with no adaptive solutions available makes  it difficult 
for women to find stable income from agricultur al activities. If men move to other provinces , there 
is no support or shar ing by men in regard to agricultur al production and household work. In 
addition, lack of  knowledge and information about  climate change adaptation in general and 
drought -adaptive solutions in agriculture in particular  also make women more vulnerable than 
men.  Women are  limited in their access to climate information, learning opportunities  and 
participation in community  events.              
6. Ongoing initiatives addressing gender and ethnic minority issues in the 
target areas  
 
154. Ninh Thuan Province  has a total of 19 ODA projects, with total of 5, 480.48 bi llion VND  
(equal to  241,430,837 USD) . Among the  19 projects, there are 15 on- going projects and 04 new 
projects. The key donors are the World Bank, Government of Belgium, KOICA, JICA  and IFAD50. 
Ninh Thuan province has also received financial support from many INGOs, with key donors 
KOICA, SNV, UNICEF, and FAO for implementation of development projects. There are 11 on-
going projects and 26 new projects supported by INGOs in 2017, with a total budget of 3,460,493 
USD51. Among the new project s, SNV support s the provincial Ninh  Thuan Women’s  Union to 
implement livelihood options by strengthening market -based production and cooperative 
women’s groups.  Climate change is a part of the topics for awareness raising activities, but 
climate resilien ce is not a topic . There are no specific projects targeting e thnic minority or gender 
issues, but ethnic minorit ies in the project areas are included as one of the beneficiary groups.   
 
155. Dak Nong province  has issued permission to 17 INGOs to work , but up to December 2017 
only 7 INGOs have specific projects under implementation including Oxfam, Action Aid, World 
Vision, Fred Hollows Foundation, Maison Chance, EDE Consulting and PSI. Among th ee INGOs, 
only Oxfam has a specific project on ethnic empowerment in Dak Glong dist rict, and Action Aid 
has a livelihood project for poor people including ethnic minorit ies52. Information about number s 
of ODA projects implemented in Dak Nong province is not available.    
 
156. Dak Lak province, from 2013 – 2017, the People’s Committee approved 48 projects from 
INGOs, for a total of 7 ,700,000 USD. Th ese provide support for different areas including livelihood 
improvement. There is no specific project on gender equality , however, these project s considered 
ethnic minority people as one of the target groups  for project interventions .53  
 
157. Khanh Hoa province received support from approximat ely 60 INGOs of which there are 10 
with office s in Nha Trang city. The primary focus of these organizations has been charity and 
 
5050 Ninh Thuan Economic Development Office 
http://www.edoninhthuan.gov.vn/news.aspx?id=435&Newsid=2311&LangID=1   
51 Ibid.  
52 Dak Nong Department of Foreign affairs -  http://sngv.daknong.gov.vn/xemtintuc -1-88-374- Cac-to-chuc -phi-chinh- phu-
dang -hoat -dong -tren -dia-ban- tinh-Dak- Nong.sngv   
53 Dak Lak Provincial Unions of Friendship Organizations - 
http://www.lienhiephuunghi.daklak.gov.vn/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout=blog&id=127&Ite
mid=607


---
*Page 185*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
43 
 
 I 
relief. Information on development projects targeting gender equality and ethnic minorit ies is  not 
available54.     
   
158. Binh Thuan province: There are total of 14 projects supported by seven INGOs in some 
districts of the province, with a total budget about 14, 059,046 USD55. Information about project 
objectives on gender issues and ethnic minority  issues is not available.   
 
159. Through consultation meetings  with relevant department s of the provincial and district 
authorities a number of good lessons learned were identified that should be considered when 
implement ing projects in ethnic minority areas , e.g  Ninh Thuan province. The Provincial 
Committee for Ethnic Minorit ies shared that it uses a specific approach when working with the 
Raglai ethnic minority  in Ninh Thuan province,  because they have limited education,  therefore, 
when conduct ing communication activities, the project needs to  use simple messages and a  
visual methodology to deliver messages .   
 
160. The Women ’s and Farmer s Unions  are two organizations who have significant experience in 
maintaining farmers groups and women ’s groups. Lessons learned from t hese experiences will 
be useful for this project in term of strengthening those groups under this project.     
 161. Consultations  with representatives from FAO and IFAD show ed high potential for 
collaboration between this project and these two organizations. IFAD has work ed with the 
provinces of Dak Nong and Ninh Thuan for the last ten years since 2007- 2008. The key 
approaches used by IFAD includ e participatory communal/village development planning, farmer -
to-farmer approach/farmer groups rather than purely DARD/Agricultural Extens ion Services , 
given their workload at district/commune level. IFAD also has experience in  support  of common 
interest groups  under the guidance of Decree 151/QD -TTG on establishment and maintenance 
of collaborative groups of farmers and women.  IFAD also learned that access to credit is a key 
constraint for many small/poorer/ethnic farmers given the fact of their land entitlement. A critical 
issue is how to link farmers to existing credit services via collective mechanisms . Ninh Thuan has 
establi shed women’s development funds  supported by the project, which work well to support 
vulnerable groups to access bank credit.  IFAD also has experience in engaging private sector  
actors  in value chain development.   
 
162. In regard to FAO, the organization has a network of FFS in Viet Nam since 1994 through its 
IPM programme.  In each FFS,  a facilitator is critical, often via  the Sub Plant  Protection Division 
of DARD.  According to FAO ’s experience, the average cost of one FFS course will be about 
$1,000 for 30 peopl e. FAO also has cash transfer  and voucher system interventions to 
households participating in their projects  in the Central Highlands  and Ninh Thuan province in 
response to the 2005 – 2006 drought. Experience from this project could be useful for this project.  
7. Analysis  
 
163.  Stakeholder consultations , desk -top reviews and lessons amassed within UNDP  from its 
past support in this area offer critical insights for designing projects that are responsive to the 
unique needs of women and ethnic minorities. These insights inform specific recommendations 
that are presented in the following section.  
 
54 Khanh Hoa Department of Foreign affairs  http://sngv.khanhhoa.gov.vn/?ArticleId=71ad6496 -a2f5- 449f -8dfe-
cb72c647252b   
55 Binh Thuan Newspaper  accessible here:  http://www.ba obinhthuan.com.vn/vi -vn/print.aspx?id=83645.


---
*Page 186*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
44 
 
 I 
Needs unique to women and ethnic minorities  
164.  As presented in this document, FP and FS, and as widely recognized among development 
practitioners, vulnerable groups such as women and ethnic minorities require specialized support 
in building resilience to climate change. This is due to a combination of factors including: the 
higher  sensitivity  to climate risks due to their greater dependence on climate sensitive resources 
for their livelihoods; their lower adaptive capacity due to poverty, lack of capital (financial and 
human), and geographical disadvantages . Consultations with these groups, as part of the design 
of this project, as well as  UNDP’s  experiences in the past56, support this commonly held 
perspective.  
 
165.  An important gender -differentiated factor that contributes  to women’s vulnerability, but also 
a factor that is important in designing an effective adaptation intervention, is “time poverty” that 
prevent many women from attending community meetings or training events. This time poverty 
may even affect effective  reception of  climate /agricultural  advisories because they may not have 
the time to listen to radio or watch TV, which are the most common sources  of advisories for men 
(UN Women, 2016). Social /cultural  norms also work against many women, and particularly ethnic 
women,  as they feel less comfortable in participating in community activities , as presented earlier 
in this report . This is commonly the case despite the fact that women do share their views if 
circumstances force them to participate in these activities.   
 
166.  Consultations with women from ethnic minorit y groups during the design of this project 
revealed that lack of confi dence was an important factor that holds them back from participating 
in community meetings. This was particularly prominent among Raglai and Cham people. This is 
likely to be reinforced by the experiences they have had in meetings where technical agencies 
did not adequately encourage their participation or value their opinions or views .   
 
167.  Lastly, for effective participation of and delivery of development impact to ethnic minorities , 
it is important to recognize the language barrier that still exist s. While the Government of Viet 
Nam has made considerable efforts in making public services accessible to ethnic minorities by, 
for example, employing extension workers from ethnic groups and translating public information 
into diff erent languages, more is clearly  needed in this area. Furthermore, as presented earlier, 
statistics on educational attainment show that ethnic minorities, and particularly ethnic minority 
women, are much more disadvantaged than non-poor Kinh people (the majority) . This means 
that information, education and communication (IEC) materials used in the project must not only 
be translated into different languages, but also be developed for non- literate groups . As will be 
described below, to this end, effective engagement of  community champions  and local support 
groups will be important.    
Institutional limitations  
168.  Earlier  sections of this report indicate that most government institutions relevant for this 
project have gender mainstreaming policies and strategies in place,  yet many of them do have 
considerable capacity constraints in  identifying and impl ementing gender -responsive actions in 
 
56 For example, see UNDP’s Technical Brief “Opportunities to empower women with enhanced access to 
climate information services for transformative adaptation actions in Viet Nam’s agricultural sectors”


---
*Page 187*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
45 
 
 I 
the context of their institutional mandates.  In the context of this project, the following agencies 
are particularly important in ensuring gender and ethnic minorities’ empowerment :  
• People’s Committees  (provinc e, district and commune)  
• DARDs ( province and district)  
o Centres  for Agricultur al Extension  
o Irrigation Sub- departments  
• DOLISA ( province and district)  
• Central and Provincial  Committees  for E thnic Minorities   
• Farmers’ Union (central, province, district and commune)  
• Viet Nam Women’s Union (VWU) ( central, province, district  and commune)   
 
Among these agencies, VWU is considered the most significant supporter of  women’s 
empowerment , although they too still require capacity building support , especially at the district 
and commune level s, and internal capacit ies of district and commune branches vary across 
provinces . As will be shown below, the project will integrate a mentoring support mechanism with 
assistance f rom VWU at all levels.  
8. Recommendations  
 
169. The general objectives of th is gender assessment and action plan is to ensure that men and 
women have equal access to and control over the resources needed to implement climate-
resilient agricultural production in the face of climate- induced rainfall variability and droughts. The 
specific objectives of the G ender  Action Plan are as follow s: 
 
(1) To reduce all forms of gender -based discrimination against vulnerable male and female 
smallholder farmers in accessing water , climate information, credit and markets  for climate -
resilient agricultural production in the face of climate- induced rainfall variability and droughts ;  
(2) To create fa vourable conditions for both vulnerable male and female smallholder farmers to 
have equal participation, access to and control over resources to implement climate- resilient 
agricultural production;  
(3) To build capacity for local partners to identify and addr ess gender inequality issues when 
implement ing climate- resilient agricultural production activities.  
 
170. Preceding discussions point out not only the needs for targeted actions to design project 
activities that are responsive to the special requirements of women and ethnic minorities, but also clear capacity constraints among relevant agencies to implement such activities and achieve 
these objectives . The recommendations presented b elow are proposed with these constraints in 
mind  and with a view to enhance  the capacity of those agencies that are mandated to support 
empowerment of women and ethnic minorities.  
 
Recommendation 1: Undertak e systematic institutional capacity building activities to 
facilitate equal  access by men and women to water for irrigation, localized climate 
information, credit and markets  
171. Given the capacity constraints identified among those agencies that are mandated to facilitate 
women’s and ethnic minorities’ participation in the project, MARD and UNDP will jointly undertake 
a series of capacity building and awareness raising activities targeting different agencies 
responsible for different sets of project activities. The agencies and the tentative topics of 
training/awareness raising (to be refined during the inception phase of the project) include:


---
*Page 188*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
46 
 
 I 
Agencies  Topics on training and awareness raising  
Centre for Agriculture 
Extension  • Differentiated impact of climate change on men, women, 
ethnic minorities and other vulnerable groups  
• Review (and development , if needed)  of extension materials 
in different languages  
• Gender sensitive and inclusive facilitation skills   
• Collaboration with local champions and VWU members in 
delivering extension training including use of diagrams, 
pictorials for non- literate groups  
• Sex-disaggregated data collection and monitoring of the 
application of climate smart agriculture  practices   
Irrigation Sub -departments  • Gender sensitive and inclusive facilitation skill s for co-
design, costing and O&M of irrigation equipment and 
climate -resilient, water efficient technologies  
• Participatory gender -based analysis of market access 
requirements, bottlenecks and opportunities  
• Collaboration with local champions and VWU members in 
organizing community meetings and workshops that are 
conducive for participation by diverse members of s ociety  
FU, VWU  and Committee 
for Ethnic Minorities  • Development of a detailed strategy for participation of 
women and ethnic minorities  
• Participatory gender -based analysis of credit requirements, 
bottlenecks and opportunities  
• Development of a plan to monitor status and progress of 
women’s participation   
 
 
172. It is important to note that the purpose of these trainings  is not for raising awareness about 
general needs for women’s empowerment, a concept to which these agencies have been fully 
exposed in the past. But rather, the purpose is to identify and agree on specific tools, measures 
and approaches that they can use during the execution of project activities to ensure that women 
and ethnic minorities feel comfortable participating in project activities, voicing their views and 
concerns, and can readily access water for irrigation, localized climate information, credit and 
markets. At the same time, institutions like MARD, DARDs, People’s Committees  and DOLISA 
will be exposed to capacit y building/awareness raising activities so that they gain sufficient 
understanding and skills as oversight agencies.   
173. While the specific timing of these capacity building activities will be determined later, it is 
proposed that the first such activity take place during the inception workshop. The Gender and 
Safeguard Specialist, to be hired by the project, will co-design training materials with MARD with 
technical assistance from the UNDP Viet Nam Country Office, Bangkok Regional Hub and UNDP  
HQ. During initial discussion s in the inception workshop, the Gender Action Plan will be updated 
with the timeline and specific actions aiming at institutional capacity building. After the inception 
workshop, these training events will be organized according to the timing of specific activities. 
For example, before community consultations begin for the design of the irrigation and water 
saving technologies, relevant staff from the Irrigation Sub- departments will be trained. Similarly, 
before the commencement of Output 2, staff from the Centre for Agriculture Extension Office will 
be trained.  
 
174. Furthermore, UNDP is currently working with VWU in more than 10 ag riculture -related 
projects supported through the UNDP -GEF Small Grant s Programme in nearby provinces (in 
Binh Dinh, near the Binh Thuan project site) . Peer -to-peer learning exchanges  targeting VWU 
members will be facilitated throughout the lifecycle of the project.


---
*Page 189*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
47 
 
 I 
 
Recommendation 2: Assig n VWU staff members to provide handholding support to ethnic 
minority women  to enable effective access to water, climate information, credit and markets  
 
175. To ensure effective participation of women, but ethnic minority women in particular, additional 
and continuous hand- holding support  is thought to be needed. This support includes identifying 
local champions , who can play a leadership role among ethnic women; additional awareness 
sessions about specific purposes of community consultations or meetings expected so that they 
are clear about what benefits they can gain from par ticipation; identifying additional support 
needs ; and accompanying participants to provide general support. This is based on experience 
from UNDP Cambodia where officers from the  Provincial Department of Women’s Affair s 
provided similar general support  to encourage women to join project -related consultations and 
capacity building training  resulting in an increase in women’s participation in consultations which 
had otherwise been dominated by men.  
 
176. The Gender Specialist, with assistance from UNDP , will work with MARD, DARDs and VWU 
to agree on a simple workplan for this. The Specialist will also undertake capacity building 
activities targeting assigned VWU officers so that they are equipped with key skills, tools and 
measures . The Committee for Ethnic Minorities will be consulted and involved to provide specific 
inputs on refining the approach.  In addition, t owards mainstreaming of gender , the Gender 
specialist shall assess and identify developments in the existing institutional, po licy and legal 
frameworks of relevant sectors to ensur e that  strategic opportunities for gender equality in the 
project and other policies upstream are promoted. Focus of the Specialist shall also be on the 
documentation of the success stories and gender l essons for replication and policy dialogue in 
Viet Nam as well as for sharing good practices at the regional and global forums by UNDP and 
GCF. In terms of implementation, aside from capacity building initiatives the Specialist shall 
foremost assess, facil itate and monitor the gender sensitiveness of the project ’s outcomes , 
objectives, activities, indicators and targets. The specialist shall be actively engaged in developing the annual work planning and key project planning documents and provide suggestions  on specific gender -differentiated implementation strategies and actions in alignment 
with the Gender Action Plan.     
 
Recommendation 3: Tailo r materials and approaches to meet the unique needs of women and 
ethnic minorities  
177. To improve the effectiveness of project interventions  for women and ethnic minorities, the 
delivery mechanisms may need to be adjusted. For example, the preferred timing of consultations 
and FFS may be different between men and women, and these preferences must be incorporated 
before the work plan is finalized. To this end, the VWU support structure described above may 
be utilized to obtain needs of women. Similarly, t he teaching methods used during the FFS may 
need to be adjusted,  especially for ethnic minorities and non- literate groups. DARDs will work 
with VWUs and the Committee for Ethnic Minorities to identify special needs before finalizing the 
FFS designs , and neces sary training will be offered to relevant staff who will be delivering the 
FFS training. Setting up women- only classes and engaging women lead farmers and trainers  are 
two of  the additional measures that are currently considered.  
 
178. Opportunities and mechanisms to promote women’s participation in social groups and climate 
resilience- enhancing activities  include timing of events to make women’s participation more 
convenient; providing group mentors from the Women’s Union; providing materials in local 
languages and in accessible formats; structuring training and other groups in ways that make 
women feel comfortable in participating; and in general, training institutional staff at multiple levels 
to assist women to participate. These mechanisms are found in the recommendations in the GAP.


---
*Page 190*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
48 
 
 I 
GBV training will be integrated into the GAP with a first awareness -raising session at project 
inception followed by establishment of a grievance or reporting mechanism  
 
Recommendation 4: Promote equality in decision making  
179. At community level, the project will establish water users’ groups and pond management 
groups , and other mechanisms as appropriate,  that help to promote equality between men and 
women in making decisions in agricultur al production and investment. Within these groups, the 
project will promote women’s leadership in managing these groups . Specific mod els that ensure  
women’s leadership and agency  will be considered to create and strengthen an enabling 
environment and opportunities for women to promote their contributions around initiatives on 
climate -resilient agricultural production. At the community l evel, both men and women will have 
a space to learn and share experience and information through such groups or models. To ensure 
the sustainability of these groups, the project will consider existing groups or models that have 
been established and maintai ned by local organizations, such as the Women’s or Farmers 
Unions. While equality in decision making is undoubtedly not a simple prospect, the need for 
short and long- term plans will be assessed at project inception.  
 
180. At household level, the project will  support men and women to implement water efficient 
systems in agricultural production, as well as to access appropriate markets. These will be 
considered as a means to promote open discussion between men and women regarding 
household decision -making.   
 181. In addition, the project will support both men and women to access loan services by 
strengthening available lending mechanisms to ensure that women farmers can receive this 
service easily when needed. This can be considered an opportuni ty to promote confidence in 
women in discussion and negotiation with men in making decisions on loans and investment 
within their families . In addition, strengthening current revolving funds that have been provided 
and managed by the Women’s Unions and Far mers Unions can also be considered.  
 
182. These specific measures and approaches presented above will be discussed with relevant 
stakeholders  during the inception phase of the project, and particularly at the inception workshop . 
The Gender Action Plan will then be revised with more specific details and steps  to operationalize 
these actions . Moreover, simple check -up lists will be produced to support agencies to help them 
provide minimum support required. Gender and ethnic minority issues need to  be considered as 
cross cutting all aspects of  the design and implement ation of  the project , and thus gender and 
ethnic minority sensitivity will be required for all materials provided by this project. As described 
above, not only general a wareness raising about  gender equality and ethnic minority issues , 
tailored training on these issues will be provided to different agencies that have specific 
responsibilities in the project.  A focal point on gender and ethnic minorities from each of these 
agencies will b e selected for this project. The project will collaborate closely with the state 
agencies who are responsible for gender equality issues , as well as development actors who 
have experience on gender and ethnic minority mainstreaming such as Committee of Ethnic 
Minority at provincial and district level; Women’s Union at provincial and district level; Department of Labor , Invalids and Social Affairs; and NGOs who are working in the project provinces.  
9. Proposed gender action plan (GAP)  and budget  
 
The purpose of this Gender Action Plan is to operationalize the constraints and opportunities for 
women and men that were identified during the above gender analysis, towards fully integrating them 
into the project ’s design, providing the framework for a gender -responsive an d socially inclusive 
project. In the context of the project, within the beneficiary population , the concentration of women


---
*Page 191*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
49 
 
 I 
headed households at 55% is prominent. T he project as a whole, and the sub- activities therein are 
geared to address nuances encompass ing both males and females. Consequently , the project sub-
activities and the GAP activities are aligned. Within the project there are specific activities and sub-
activities, however, that are targeted primarily to  women in keeping with the assessment’s 
recommendations in the GAP, for example, in producing information in local languages (Activity 1.3), 
or scheduling of meetings (Activity 2.1) to enhance women’s participation.  In addition, specific 
indicators are also proposed to measure and track progress on these interventions at the activity 
level, which can be incorporated into the detailed M&E plan that will be developed at the start of 
implementation. The M&E plan proposes concrete actions to ensure that the degree of gender -
responsiveness and transformation (including collection of sex and age disaggregated data) 
continues to be measured throughout implementation.  Furthermore, it is recommended that the 
project take into consideration gender and social inclusion measures outlined above and tailored 
specifically for a Vietnamese context. In addition to the Gender Action Plan, a gender -specific budget 
has been allocated to ensure that women or households headed by women and ethnic minorit ies 
among total beneficiaries will receive support from the project as well as strengthen their participation 
in the project activities as mentioned in the table below.  The budget outlay has also been included in 
the total cost of the project and is in alignment with the activities undertaken within the projec t based 
on recommendation and considerations from the GAP.


---
*Page 192*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
50 
 
 I 
 
Activities  Inputs  Gender and Social 
Inclusion Actions  Targets and Indicators  Responsible 
institutions  Timeline  Budget (USD)  
Output 1 - Enhanced water security for agricultural production for vulnerable smallholder farmers in the face of climate -induced rainfall variability and 
droughts  
Activity 1.1: 
Establish large -
scale irrigation infrastructure to bring irrigation 
water to eight 
farming areas across the target regions in the five 
provinces  1.1.1  185 km of new 
pipe systems taking water from canals or reservoirs, and supplying hydrants 
located at a 
reasonable distance
57 
from a farmer’s field  
 
1.1.2 19,200 ha served 
through 
modernization of main system including canal lining, control 
structure, balancing 
storage and installation of flow control and measurement devices 
with remote 
monitoring  Each commune in the 
subproject area will be 
trained with two collaborators of whom at least 1 will be 
female , with particular 
attention to ethnic 
minority women  
 Invite and enable local 
Women's Union representatives to participate in 
stakeholder 
consultation meetings on the water fee collection framework  
 Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 50% of female 
participants and 20% of ethnic minority participants  from 
within the project area  
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  
 Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 35% female 
participants and 20% of ethnic 
minority participants  from 
within the project area . 
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic 
minority participants    
  
Baseline : 0  
Target : At least 35% of newly DARDs  
 
ADB  Q3/2020 – 
Q10/2021  N/A 
 
57 Typica lly, 63 mm in diameter, with flows of about 5 l/s and within a range of 500 to 1,000 m from a field


---
*Page 193*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
51 
 
 I 
1.1.3 Provision of new 
and improved weirs replacing farmer constructed temporary weirs, permanent 
ponds/storage for 
irrigating HVCs, and upgrades of upstream storage and supply 
systems.  recruited irrigation staff for the 
project command areas will be women.  
Indicator : % of newly rec ruited 
female staff in the project 
com mand areas    
 
Activity 1.2: 
Establish last -mile 
connections 
between WEIDAP 
irrigation 
infrastructure and 
the poor and near 
poor farmer lands 
to help cope with 
increasing rainfall 
variability and 
drought  
 
 
 
 1.2.1 Design and 
construct 4,765 
connection and distribution systems including installation and maintenance of irrigation equipment 
to cope with climate 
variability on 1,430 hectares  DARDs invite local 
women’s and ethnic minorities’ participation in publi c consultations 
on design of last -mile 
connections   
 
Develop information 
leaflets in ethnic 
languages to guide 
women and ethnic groups on the selection criteria of project beneficiaries, including the inclusive prioritisation for all 
female -headed 
househol ds to receive 
last-mile connection  
 Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 50% of female 
participants and 20% of ethnic 
minority participants in public consultation on design of last -
mile connections  
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in public 
consultations  
  Baseline : 55% of household 
headed by women in 60 project 
communes  from within the 
project area.  
Target : 100% of eligible female -
headed households receive 
essential support and are able 
to connect with an irrigation DARDs  Q2/2020 -
Q16/2023  50,000


---
*Page 194*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
52 
 
 I 
system  to cope with climate 
variability.       
Indicator : % of eligible women -
headed households having 
access to irrigation.  
1.2.2 Train 4,765 poor 
and near poor farmers 
(one 
connection/distributio
n system per farmer) 
on climate -risk 
informed utilization of irrigation equipment and system maintenance  
 DARDs, in collaboration 
with Irrigation 
Department and IMC’s 
technical staff,  will work 
closely with FU, Committee for Ethnic Minority (CEM) and VWU to design training modules to ensure that the materials are accessible to women and ethnic minorities; 
ensure bilingual 
materials and other support for the user 
groups  
 Baseline : 0 
Target: At least 50% of female 
participants and 20% of ethnic minority participants receive 
clear guidance on O&M of 
water efficient technologies  
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants in O&M  
training events   DARDs, Farmer’s 
Union, Women’s 
Union  
Committee for Ethnic Minority   
Q5/2021 -
Q10/2022  20,000  
 
  
1.2.3 Establish Water 
Users Groups for O&M 
of communal or shared systems, including structures 
and agreements on 
potential funding 
mechanisms  The training will be 
designed with inputs 
from poor, minority groups and VWU; training by DARDs will 
be accompanied by 
representatives from 
VWU and CEM to Baseline:  0 
Target: At least 35% of female 
participants and 20% of ethnic 
minority participants in the water users’ groups     
Indicator: % of female 
participants an d % of ethnic 
minority participants in water DARD, IMCs,  
VWU  
CEM  Q3-4/2020  20,000


---
*Page 195*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
53 
 
 I 
 
 provide additional 
support to women and minority groups.  
 Women will be 
encouraged to assume 
leaders hip of Water 
Users Groups, and 
WUGs will ensure participation of female -
headed households  
 user groups   
Activity 1.3: 
Enhance supplementary irrigation for rain fed smallholders to 
cope with rainfall 
variability and drought  1.3.1.  Construct or 
upgrade 1,159 climate -resilient ponds 
(based on site -specific 
designs construct 675 
new ponds and 
upgrade 484 existing ponds)  DARDs organise public 
consultation with local women and ethnic minorities on their needs in the context of 
rainfed agriculture   
 
Develop informa tion 
leaflets in ethnic languages to guide women and ethnic groups on the selection criteria of project 
beneficiaries, including 
prioritisation for all 
poor and nearly poor female headed 
households and poor Baseline : 55% of households 
headed by women among 16,463 target households  from 
within the project area .   
Target : At least 30% of the 
eligible poor and near poor households headed by women 
and 20% of the poor ethnic 
household s will receive 
essential support to access to climate change -resilient ponds     
Indicator : % of woman -headed 
households and % of ethnic minority -headed households 
receiving support to access 
climate resilient ponds  DARDs  Q5/2021 – 
Q10/2022  5,000


---
*Page 196*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
54 
 
 I 
ethnic households  to 
benefit from the project support to improve 
water storage  
 1.3.2. Train over 
16,000 poor and near -
poor farmer 
beneficiaries in 
climate -resilient water 
resource management 
to enhance supply  The training will be 
designed with inputs from poor, minority 
groups and VWU, FU 
and CEM; training by 
DARDs will be accompanie d by 
representatives from VWU, FU and CEM to provide additional support to women and 
minority groups.  Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 50% of female 
participants and 20% of ethnic 
minority participants are 
trained on climate change 
resilient water resource 
management  
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants in climate -resilient water 
resource management  training  DARDs  
VWU, FU, CEM  Q5/2021 – 
Q20/2024  10,000  
 1.3.3. Establish 185 
pond- management 
groups for O&M, 
including structures 
and agreements on 
potential funding 
mechanisms   
 Support women -led and 
ethnic -led initiatives in 
establishing and 
managing the local financing schemes for climate resilient water 
resource investment and O&M; (link to 1.2.3) . 
 
Women will be encouraged to assume 
leadership of Pond 
Management Groups, Baseline : 0 
Target : Ensure at least 50% of 
female participants an d 20% of 
ethnic minority members in 
pond management groups  
Indicator : % of female and % of 
ethnic minority members  in 
pond management groups  DARDs  Q5-7/2021  10,000


---
*Page 197*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
55 
 
 I 
and PMGs will ensure 
participation of female -
headed households  
 
Activity 1.4:  
Increase smallholder 
capacities to apply 
on-farm water 
efficient practices 
and technologies to 
maximize water productivity in coping with rainfall variability and 
drought  1.4.1 Train 30 DARD 
staff and champion farmers in 14 districts 
(one course in years 2, 
4 and 6) to support 
farmers’ groups in co -
design, costing and O&M of climate -
resilient, water efficient technologies  
 The training includes a 
module on gender - and 
EM-differentiated 
needs of water 
resources as well as a 
module on gender sensitive and inclusive facilitation skills  
 Increase the percentage of female and  ethnic 
minority among number of facilitators 
selected by the project 
to facilitate the farmer field school trainings  Baseline: 0  
Target: At least 35% and 20% 
of participants in training on 
design, costing and O&M of climate -resilient, water 
efficient technologies  are 
female and ethnic minorit y 
members, respectively  
Indicator: % of female and % of 
ethnic minority participants in 
training  
 
 
 DARDs  
Collaboration:  
o Farmer’s Union/  
o Women’s 
Union  Q3/2020 – 
Q20/2024  10,000 
 
 1.4.2 Train over 
21,200 farmers through 900 Farmer 
Field Schools on soil and biomass management to 
enhance moisture -
holding capacity, 
recharge of groundwater, and water productivity to cope with evolving 
climate risks on water 
security (in DARDs  
Collaboration: 
Farmer’s Union 
and Women’s 
Union  Q2/2020 – 
Q19/2024


---
*Page 198*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
56 
 
 I 
conjunction with 
Activ ity 2.1)  
 1.4.3 Install on -farm 
water efficiency systems for 8,621 poor/near -poor 
smallholders linked to 
performance -based 
vouchers (linked to 
Activity 2.1)  
 Linked to Activity 2.1, 
the performance of women and ethnic minority beneficiaries in the FFS is closely 
monitored to make sure 
they are able to complete the training; depending on the results, adaptive management will be introduced.  Baseline:0  
Target: At least 30% of the 
eligible woman -headed 
households a nd 20% of the 
poor ethnic households receive 
information on water efficie nt 
technology  
Indicator: % of  women -headed 
households and % of ethnic 
households among the 
recipients of water efficient 
technology  N/A Q7/2021 -
Q9/2022 10,000  
 1.4.4 Train smallholder 
farmers in five 
provinces on climate -
risk informed O&M of 
water efficiency technologies  The training on climate 
risks and water 
efficiency technology 
will be designed with inputs from poor, minority groups and 
VWU and CEM; training 
by DARDs will be accompanied by representatives from VWU to provide additional support to 
women and minority 
groups.  
 Baseline :  55% of women -
headed households among 
21,228 households in total  
from within the project area.  
Target : At least 30% and 20% 
of the recipient of  training on 
O&M for water efficient 
technologies  are woman -
headed households and ethnic minorit y households, 
respectively  
Indicator : % of woman -headed 
households and % of ethnic minority households in training  DARDs  
Collaboration:  
Farmer’s Union/  
Women’s Union  Q9/2022 – 
Q16/2023  10,000


---
*Page 199*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
57 
 
 I 
Output 2. Increased resilience of smallholder farmer livelihoods through climate -resilient agriculture and access to climate information, finance, and markets  
Activity 2.1. 
Investments in inputs and capacities to scale up climate -resilient 
cropping systems 
and practices (soil, 
crop, land management) among s mallholders 
through Farmer 
Field Schools  2.1.1 Sensitize 
smallholders to 
establish/re -activate 
900 Farmer Field Schools  Identify specific training 
needs for women and ethnic groups in application of innovative climate 
smart agriculture 
practices with specific 
focus on agricultural commodities that they typically grow (i.e. bananas, cashews, chili, 
onion, garlic, etc) and 
other livelihood adaptation alternatives  
 Tailor the training 
packages to address 
these needs via hands -
on training in Farmer 
Field Schoo ls 
 
DARD to work with VWU , village elderly, 
CEM, DOLISA, etc. to ensure maximum 
participation of women and ethnic groups in 
the farmer field schools  Baseline : 0 
Target : All guideline and 
training materials on FFS are gender sensitive.  
Indicator : Availability of gender 
sensitive guidelines  
 Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 35% of 
participants will be women and at least 20% of participants are 
ethnic minority.     
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic 
minority participants in FFS  DARD, CEM, 
DOLISA, VWUs  Q1-Q4/2020  35,000


---
*Page 200*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
58 
 
 I 
 2.1.2 Train DARD 
personnel and lead farmers, as well as other interested parties (NGOs, 
Farmers and Women’s 
Unions, etc.) to build a cadre of farmer champions to galvanize adoption and application of CRA packages (15 
provincial level 
workshops for 30 DARD staff in years 2, 
4 and 6; 28 district and 
120 commune level trainings for 30 lead farmers in years 2 and 
6) The training includes a 
module on gender - and 
EM-differentiated 
needs of water resources as well as a 
module on gender 
sensitive and inclusive facilitation skills.  
 Increase the number of women and ethnic trainers as the resource persons for the provinces  
 Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 35% of 
participants are women and at least 20% of participants are ethnic minority.     
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in training  DARD  Q2/2020 -
Q6/2021; 
Q19 -20/2024  10,000  
 
 
 2.1.3 Train over 
21,200 farmers and 
value chain actors – 
particularly private sector input providers, buyers, processors, 
transporters - through 
900 FFS on scaling up 
of climate resilient 
cropping systems and Women and ethnic 
minority trainers (from 
2.1.2) will receive additional coaching from agriculture extension trainers 
(DARD), VWU and CEM 
in the early part of the rollout of the training; 
the training will target Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 50% of 
participants are women and 
20% of participants are ethnic minority.   
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in 
training   DARD, VWU and 
CEM  Q3/2020 – 
Q22/2025  25,000


---
*Page 201*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
59 
 
 I 
practices. (Each FFS 
will conduct 1 -day 
trainings twice per 
year)  specifically crops that 
are commonly grown 
by ethnic minorities.  
 
 2.1.4 investment 
support to 8,621targeted 
poor/near poor 
smallholders to 
acquire inputs and technologies for implementation of the CRA packages through performance -based 
vouchers.  
 Introduce voucher 
incentive schemes for poor and near poor 
ethnic women and 
household -headed 
women participation in 
applying innovative technologies and climate resilient farming practices  Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 30% and 20% of 
the recipient of investment 
support are woman -headed 
households  and ethnic minority 
households, respectively    
Indicator : % of woman -headed 
household and % of ethnic minority  household 
beneficiaries  among 
investment support 
beneficiaries  DARDs  
 
Collaboration:  
Farmer’s Union/  
Women’s Union  Q5/2021 – 
Q20/2024  20,000  
 2.1.5 Participatory 
auditing of 
implementation of 
voucher systems for climate resilient cropping systems and 
practices (One 1 -day 
meeting for 100 
participants in each of the 60 communes in Years 2, 4 and 6)  
 The timing of meeting s 
will be determined by 
inputs from women and 
ethnic minorities so that they  do not 
interfere with their 
other economic and 
social commitments  Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 30% and 20% of 
the participants in auditing exercises are women and 
ethnic minority m embers , 
respectively   
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in 
participatory auditing  DARD  Q9/2022 – 
Q22/2025  10,000


---
*Page 202*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
60 
 
 I 
Activity 2.2 
Technical assistance for enhancing access to markets and credit for 
sustained climate -
resilient agricultural 
investments by smallholders and value chain actors  2.2.1 Establish and 
operationalize multi -
stakeholder Climate Innovation Platforms (CIP) in each province 
and at the level of 
agro -ecological zones 
(Annual stakeholder meeting s organized 
once every two years in each of the 5 provinces)   Operational documents 
that guide the functioning of the CIPs will include a reference and requirement for 
the CIP to pay attention 
to the special needs of women and ethnic minorities;  
 
The pro ject team 
provides DARD chairpersons and a representative number 
of district CIP members 
a training session on 
gender - and EM -
responsive agriculture and value chains at least twice in the course 
of the project  Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 50% and 20% of 
the participants in CIPs  are 
women and ethnic minority members, respectively    
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in CIPs   DARD  Q2/2020 – 
Q23/2025  5,000 
 
 
 2.2.2 Provide technical 
assistance and 
training to enable market linkages with input, information and 
technology providers 
and buyers for climate -resilient 
agricultural VWU to be part of the 
training to ensure that women’s and ethnic minorities’ needs are reflected in the training  Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 50% and 20% of 
the participants in training events  are women and ethnic 
minority members, respectively  
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in training 
on market linkages    DARD and VWU  Q5/2021 – 
Q22/2025  5,000


---
*Page 203*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
61 
 
 I 
production (two 
trainings, two networking workshops and three trade fairs in each of the 14 districts 
over four years)  
 2.2.3 Provide technical 
assistance and train farmers to  enable 
access to credit through financial 
intermediaries (One 
workshop in each of the 60 communes in years 2 and 4)  LienVietPostBank, CEM 
and VWU to present their ‘Vi Viet’ e -wallet 
services for improved access to small credit 
for poor and near -poor 
women in the target 
areas , as well as ethnic 
minoritites ; 
 
VWU  in the provinces 
will organise 
investment forums for 
women and ethnic 
minority entrepreneurs  Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 50% and 20% of 
the participants in training 
events are women  and ethnic 
minority members, respectively  
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in training 
on credit access  DARD, in 
collaboration 
with VWU, CEM, 
commercial 
banks  Q5/2021 – 
Q22/2025  15,000 
Activity 2.3 Co-
development and 
use of localized agro -climate 
advisories by 
smallholders to 
enhance climate -
resilient agricultural 
production  2.3.1 Train 50 
hydromet and DARD staff on generating and interpreting down- scaled forecasts 
for use in agricultural planning (e ight 
training over four Provide gender 
sensitive training for hydromet and agriculture extension cadres  
 
Develop gender -
sensitive and user -
friendly training tools to Baseline : 0  
Target : At least 40% of 
hydromet/DARD staff to complete this training courses  
are women   
Indicator : % of female 
participants in technical 
training    DARD, 
Hydromets  Q4/2020 – 
Q16/2023  10,000


---
*Page 204*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
62 
 
 I 
years for 50 
participants)  develop local agro -
climate advisories for the hydromet and agriculture extension staff  
 
 2.3.2. Provide 
technical assistance for the formation ACIS technical groups and training of 420 
participants at district 
level (1 -day workshops 
for 30 participants in each of the 14 
districts)  Training of ACIS also 
includes a module on gender - and EM -
sensitive agricultural activities  
 Baseline : 0 
Target : At least 35% of 
participants  in ACIS -related 
training are women . 
Indicator : % of female 
participants in technical training  DARD, Hydromet 
services, NGOs, 
FFS 
representatives  Q4/2020 – 
Q5/2021 25,000 
 2.3.3 Co-develop, 
through Participatory, 
Scenario Planning 
(PSP) of seasonal and 10-day/15 -day agro -
climate advisories with 
smallholder farmers 
(20 provincial level trainings for 30 staff and 56 district level trainings for 60 participants over four 
years)  DARDs  to work with 
VWU and FU to provide 
support to local women 
and ethnic champions in producing agro -
climate advisory 
services in the regions 
(for both seasonal scenario planning and medium range advisories)  
  Baseline : 0  
Target: At least 50% and 20% of 
the participants in sce nario 
planning events are women 
and ethnic minority members, respectively  
Indicator : % of female 
participants and % of ethnic minority participants  in 
scenario planning events  DARD, VWU, FU  Q3/2020 – 
Q20/2024  20,000


---
*Page 205*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
63 
 
 I 
 2.3.4 Disseminate 
advisories to 139,416 households in the 60 communes.  DARDs to undertake 
periodic monitoring of the receipts of advisories especially focusing on women and 
ethnic minority 
beneficiaries and apply adaptive management based on the results  
  Baseli ne: 0 
Target: At least 50% and 20% of 
the recipient of climate 
advisories  are women and 
ethnic minority members, 
respectively   
Indicator: % of female and % of 
ethnic minority members  
among the recipient of climate 
advisories  DARDs  Q7/2021 – 
Q24/2025  20,000  
Project 
management and 
capacity building  -  CPO, DARDs, and UNDP 
to work together to apply a strict screening process to make sure 
that 30% of PMUs and 
CPMU staff positions 
are women.  
 
Conduct annual in -
depth consultation with 
stakeholders and Viet Nam Women ’s Union, 
Farmer Union and 
Council for Et hnic 
Minorit ies in the 
provinces to identify strategic interventions to improve women ’s 
roles in climate actions Baseline : 0 
Target : 30% of PMUs and 
CPMU staff are women  
Indicator(s): % of female in 
PMUs CPO, DARDs   50,000  
 
(lump sum 
estimation for 
training 
courses workshops on 
gender and 
ethnic 
minority)


---
*Page 206*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND F UNDING PROPOSAL  
 
64 
 
 I 
and related NDC and 
NAP policies in Viet Nam  
 Document good 
practices to share at the 
relevant national and 
regional policy dialogues on climat e 
change, gender and ethnic inclusiv ity, and 
integrated water management  
Total estimate budget:   
Of which, output 1: US$ 145,000 (excluding ADB budget)  
Output 2: US$ US$ 250,000  395,000


---
*Page 207*
---

Annex XIII (c) – GENDER ASSESSMENT AN D ACTION PLAN  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  
65 I
Annex A: Bibliography 
Beyond Words - Advancing Gender Equality in Climate Change Policy and Programming in Viet Nam. 
The joint products of the organisations supported under the Community Based Climate Change 
Action Grants, funded by the Australian Government, Care International , SNV, Oxfam, Save the 
Children, Australian Red Cross, and DEF  
Decision 1059/QD -UBND dated 4 May 2016 – Ninh Thuan People Committee on approval of the 
action plan to implement national action plan on gender equality for period 2016 – 2020.   
D
ecision 59/ 2015/ND -CP on 19 November 2011 on approval of standards for multi -dimension poor 
for period 2016 – 2020. 
G
overnment of Viet Nam, Constitution 2013 - approved by National Assembly, on 28 November 2013.  
G
overnment of Viet Nam - Law on Gender – Decision N o 73/2006/QH11, dated 29 November  2006  
G
overnment of Viet Nam – Law on Natural Disaster Prevention and Control – Decision 33/2013/QH13 
–dated 19 June 2013.
G
overnment of Viet Nam – Land Law 2013 – Decision No 45/2013/QH13 dated 29 November 2013 
G
eneral Statistic Organization (GSOs), Viet Nam Household Living Standard Survey 2014  
G
SO 2010, National survey on domestic violence report 2010  
G
SO 2015, Results from Population change and family planning as of 1/4/2014 and Survey on socio-
economic situation of 53 EM groups 2015.  
G
SO, Results from Population change and family planning as of 1/4/2014 and Survey on socio-
economic situation of 53 EM groups 2015  
O
xfam 2017, Even it up: how to tackle inequality in Viet Nam - Briefing Paper , Oxfam 2017  
U
N Vietnam, 2011. Policy Brief Gender Equality in Climate Change Adaptation and disaster risk 
reduction in Viet Nam. http://www.un.org.vn/en/publications/cat_view/130- un-vietnam-  joint-
publications/209- climate -change- joint-un publications.html [accessed 04. April 2012].  
U
N Women, 2010, Capacity Assessment of the State Management Agencies and Other Concerned 
Agencies to Implement the Gender Equality Law and the Domestic Violence Law 
U
NDP 2016, Human Development Report 2016  
U
N Women, Figures on ethnic minority men and women in Viet Nam 2015 
U
NFPA 2014: From domestic violence to gender -based violence: connecting the dots in Vietnam – 
an UN discussion paper. 
W
orld Bank, Viet Nam Country Gender Assessment, 2011  
__________