=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: hahn
/CreationDate: D:20191022170535+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.21.20048
/ModDate: D:20191022170535+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.21.20048
/Title: Microsoft Word - 0) B.24_02_Add.08_Funding_proposal_package_for_FP122.docm


---
*Page 1*
---

 
	
	
	
 
 
 Meeting	of	the	Board	
12 – 14 November 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea Provisional agenda item 14  GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
22 October 2019 	
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum VIII 
Funding proposal package for FP122 	
Summary 		
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled “Blue Action Fund (BAF): GCF Ecosystem Based 
Adaptation Programme in the Western Indian Ocean”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technica l Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
		 	 	 	 	 	 GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page b 
 
 
Table	of	Contents 	
Funding proposal submitted  by the accredited entity 	 3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority (ies) or focal point(s) 	 64 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 	 70 
Secretariat’s assessmen t	 73 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessmen t 	 84 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technica l Advisory Panel's 
assessmen t	92 
Gender documentation 	 94


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme title: Blue Action Fund (BAF):  GCF E cosystem Based Adaptation 
Programme in the Western Indian Ocean  
Country(ies): 
Accredited Entity: 
Date of first submission: Countries in the Western I ndian Ocean (Madagascar, 
Mozambique, Tanzania, South Africa) 
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW)
17.06.2019  
Date of current submission  25.09.2019  
Version number V.2.3


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 |  
 
Contents 
 
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G  GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
 
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
 Accredited Entities should pr ovide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action  plan, term sheet, etc. 
 Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are co nsistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding propos al and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescri bed length will not be assesse d within the usual 
service standard time. 
 The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
 Under the  GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF webs ite, simultaneous with the sub mission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be dis closed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to  fill out information on disclo sure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the co mpleted proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name c onvention for the file name: 
“FP-KfW-Countries of the Wester n Indian Ocean 2019/07/31-V.2.0”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.2 PAGE 1 OF 59  
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
Programme Programme A.2. Public or private 
sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) Not applicable   
A.4. Result area(s)  
 
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ Energy access and power generation:    
☐ Low-emission transport:     
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ Forestry and land use:     
  
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:   
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☒ Infrastructure and built environment:     
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:  GCF contribution:  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
   
20% 
10% 
10% 
60%  
A.5. Expected 
mitigation impact  Not applicable  A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  200.000 
5 – 10 % of the population of 
the project areas (indicative)  
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co-finance)  55 million Euros  
 (+ mandatory NGO 
contributions of 25% of 
direct costs of sub-projects; for information only)  
A.9. Project size Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)  
A.8. Total GCF 
funding requested  30 million Euros 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding  
☒ Grant 30 million Euros  
☐ Loan  Enter number  
☐ Guarantee Enter number  ☐ Equity   Enter number  
☐ Results-based    
     payment  Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period 7 years  A.12. Total lifespan 25 years  
A.13. Expected date 
of AE internal 
approval  
 A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and  GCF ESS 
Standards  to assess your FP 
category.  
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP 
been submitted as a 
CN before? Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entit y Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the countr y Yes ☐       No ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.2 PAGE 2 OF 59  
 
 work programme? programme? Not applicable  
A.19. 
Complementarity and 
coherence  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information Blue Action Fund, foundation registered in Germany, according t o German law for 
foundations.  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 7 50 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
Oceans and their coastal regions are most severely exposed to t he impacts of climate change. Around 50% of the 
world’s population lives in coastal areas and is dependent on h ealthy oceans and intact marine and coastal 
ecosystems, particularly in developing countries. Mangrove fore sts and coral reefs protect coastal areas against 
the effects of climate change, such as enhanced storm surges, c yclones and coastal erosion. They also serve as 
spawning grounds for fish, which are an essential source of pro tein and income for the local population. In 
addition, mangroves, seagrass and coral reefs absorb and store huge amounts of CO 2 and their protection and 
restoration contributes to climate mitigation. 
This GCF Funded Activity (hereafter referred to as the “Program me” or “GCF Programme”) will be established as 
a special funding window under the Blue Action Fund (BAF). It c oncentrates on the promotion of Ecosystem-
based Adaptation approaches (EbA) in one of the most vulnerable  regions affected by sea level rise, enhanced 
storm intensity, recurrent storm surges and coastal erosion: th e Mozambique Channel / West Indian Ocean 
(WIO). Country selection (Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania and South Africa) is guided by criteria such as 
vulnerability to climate effects,  urgent need for implementatio n of climate adaptation measures, and the relevance 
to coastal populations of ecosystem services from coastal, mari ne and freshwater ecosystems. Special attention 
is given to the alignment between the Programme approach and na tional priorities as well as existing strategies 
and policy frameworks.  
The Programme’s objective is to enhance, through a coastal zone  management based on the conservation and 
sustainable use of coastal ecosystems, ecosystem services that contribute to reducing climate change-related 
risks for vulnerable coastal communities. The outcome will incr ease the resilience of vulnerable coastal 
populations to climate change.  
The Blue Action Fund (BAF) is an independent non-profit foundat ion and currently the only global institution 
exclusively funding local level initiatives in the marine/coast al conservation and sustainable fisheries sectors. It  
funds NGOs to strengthen the resilience of coastal populations against climate change.  
The Programme approach is to use the structure, specific know-h ow and execution capacities of the BAF in order 
to fund NGOs with suitable and promising sub-projects, based on  EbA to climate change in the Programme 
region, and with considerable engagement of stakeholders (local  population and national authorities) during sub-
project preparation and implementation.   
The BAF will launch one or two specific calls for proposals to be financed with GCF funding as within the scope of 
the Programme. These calls will be aligned with GCF result area s and have a specific focus on EbA and related 
requirements. Sub-projects will be  selected by application of s pecific adaptation and EbA-related criteria (e.g. 
quality of climate rationale, coherence with national and/or re gional adaptation plans; see section B.3. for 
complete list). In addition, general BAF selection criteria wil l be applied as specified in the Grant Procedures 
Manual (Annex 22). Every single sub-project will have to demons trate the location-specific adaptation impact of 
the intervention. Targeted key ach ievements of implemented sub- projects are: 
 Vulnerable coastal populations will be able to reduce or avoid  negative impacts of climate change through 
a stabilized provision of ecosystem services; 
 Important marine and coastal ecosystems will be protected and sustainably managed to ensure 
adaptation-relevant ecosystem services for vulnerable coastal c ommunities; 
 Enhanced knowledge, expertise and capacity of relevant nationa l agencies in using Ecosystem-based 
Adaptation (EbA) approaches for a climate-resilient coastal zon e management. 
Total costs of the GCF Funded Activity will amount to EUR 55 mi llion, comprised of EUR 30 million applied for 
from the GCF, and EUR 25 million in co-financing contributions by the German Government. In addition, 
mandatory contributions of at least 25% of the costs of the res pective sub-projects must be committed by the 
supported NGOs (precondition for approval of project proposals,  equaling EUR 12.5 mi llion; see Annex 4 for 
details). 
 
In addition to these contributions for the EbA focused GCF Fund ed Activit y in the West Indian Ocean, there are


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.2 PAGE 3 OF 59  
 
 additional contributions to the global BAF portfolio (no dedica ted focus on EbA; also beyond West Indian Ocean) 
which currently stand at EUR 68.1 million from the Governments of Germany (EUR 55.1 million), Sweden (EUR 
8.0 million), and France (EUR 5 million), plus mandatory 25% co ntributions from implementing NGOs to direct 
costs for sub-projects. While these contributions are not forma lly part of the GCF-Programme, there will be 
considerable synergy effects with the GCF Funded Activity and s ubstantial additional adaptation results. 
The GCF Programme focus is on Climate Change Adaptation through  EbA. GCF-funded BAF c alls will specifically 
focus on the EbA approaches to strengthen the resilience of vul nerable coastal populations to climate change 
effects, such as floods, cyclones and heavy rainfalls. The GCF result areas addressed by the proposed 
Programme are to: 
 Increase the resilience and enhance the livelihood of the most  vulnerable people, communities and 
regions;  
 Increase the health and well-being and food security;  
 Advance the infrastructure and built environment, and 
 Improve and secure ecosystem services of increasingly threaten ed coastal ecosystems. 
In addition, significant co-benefits for Climate Change Mitigat ion are to be expected, particularly related to the 
protection of highly relevant carbon stocks, such as mangroves,  coral reefs, coastal marshes and seagrass beds, 
and their carbon sequestration potential (e.g. mangroves store around 1000 t of carbon per hectare in biomass 
and soil).


---
*Page 8*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 4 OF 59 
 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate rationale and context (max. 1000 words, approximat ely 2 pages)  
Coastal regions of the Mozambique Channel / West Indian Ocean ( WIO) are facing severe impacts from extreme 
weather events, particularly recurrent cyclones and their subse quent storm surges, flooding and coastal erosion, 
which lead to the loss of lives, valuable land and infrastructu re. These damages are not only the consequence of 
extreme weather situations, which most likely are already enhan ced by climate change, but of the large number of 
p e o p l e  l i v i n g  i n  c o a s t a l  r e g i o n s  ( i n  M a d a g a s c a r  6 6  %  o f  t h e  p o p ulation, in Mozambique 60 %) and their high 
vulnerability. Particularly Madagascar (ranked 169th out of 181  countries in the Notre Dame-Gain-Index, which 
reflects countries’ climate vulnerability and readiness), Mozam bique (159th) and Tanzania (149th) are considered to 
be amongst the most vulnerable countries for negative impacts o f climate change. As sea levels in the region are 
projected to rise (0.4 to 1.0 m until 2090, high confidence) an d storm intensities are expected to increase (mainly due 
to increasing water temperature), damages are likely to increas e considerably in the years to come. 
Some coastal ecosystems, such as coral reefs, mangroves and sea  grass beds, reduce the force of wave action on 
the coast and subsequent damages to coastal populations (Ecosys tem-based Adaption - EbA). In addition to their 
relevance for climate change adaptation, these ecosystems play a vital role for the livelihoods of coastal populations 
in the region. Mangroves are an important source of firewood an d timber; mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass beds 
are important spawning and breeding grounds for fish, supportin g the livelihoods of a large number of fishermen. In 
addition, coral reefs are increasingly important for the touris m sector. Last but not least, mangroves, coral reefs, sea 
grass beds and coastal wetlands are highly relevant carbon sink s, urgently needed for climate change mitigation. 
In the WIO region, these adaptation-relevant ecosystems are sti ll quite abundant, but rapidly degrading and 
diminishing in size. On the one hand, this is due to increased population pressure and unsustainable use of these 
ecosystems. On the other hand, climate change is contributing t o this degradation. Increasing sea water 
temperatures and acidity are severely damaging coral reefs, and  extreme storm events are physically damaging or 
even destroying coral reefs, mangroves and sea grass beds. 
The Programme aims to protect and restore adaptation-relevant c oastal ecosystems, thus ensuring and enhancing 
their capacity to reduce climate change related negative impact s, particularly related to storm surges and coastal 
erosion. In order to minimize the pressure on these ecosystems and to ensure the sustainability of the interventions, 
management options will be developed, taking the interests and needs of relevant stakeholders into account. 
The intervention not only focusses on individual EbA measures, but also intends to make EbA an integral part of the 
coastal management strategies of the participating countries, t aking the most effective and cost-efficient combination 
of green and grey adaptation measures into account. This transf ormative approach goes beyond single projects and 
constitutes a strategic intervention on a large-scale regional level. 
Without the proposed interventions, it is very likely that dama ges from storm surges and co astal erosion will increase 
significantly, as the above-mentioned ecosystems are degrading rapidly. Alternative measures, such as the 
construction of grey infrastructure (sea walls, etc.) would be far more expensive than the EbA interventions, and 
would not directly support the livelihoods of the vulnerable co astal population. Therefore, we consider the full 
integration of EbA measures into the coastal zone management st rategies of the partner countries to be by far the 
most cost-efficient and socially acceptable approach to reduce climate-related physical risks for coastal populations. 
The Programme focuses on Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania and S outh Africa, because these countries have a 
particular need for adaptation measures given the respective ra nks in the ND-Gain-Index. At the same time, they 
have a huge potential for EbA me asures and still have large ada ptation-relevant ecosystems which are rapidly 
degrading and diminishing in siz e. The threats to these ecosyst ems must be addressed by targeted interventions.  
 
1. The Selection of the Programme Region  
This Programme concentrates on one of the most vulnerable regio ns affected by adverse effects of climate change, 
such as sea level rise, enhanced storm intensity, recurrent sto rm surges and coastal erosion. The Programme region 
is one of the world’s most significant marine and terrestrial b iodiversity areas and a biological gene pool for coastal 
south-eastern and East Africa. Its biological and conservation values are of global importance, and this includes the 
value of the inland coasts of lakes as well as the marine coast . At the same time, the coastal population, including the 
coasts of the Central Africa Lakes, is highly vulnerable to cli mate change. The selection of the countries for the GCF-
funded Programme is based on the vulnerability of their coastal  population to climate change and their specific 
potential for ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) concepts (e.g. importance of mangroves and coral reef area, and 
coastline/land area ratio). For this purpose, an internationall y widely accepted approach - the University of Notre 
Dame Global Adaptation Index (GAIN ) - has been used (see Annex 8 for more details ). GAIN summarizes a countr y's


---
*Page 9*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 5 OF 59 
 
 
  
1 Marrakech Partnership, Oceans’ Action Day at COP 23 Report Nov ember 2017.  vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges in comparison to its readiness to improve resilience. 
According to this tool, the targeted countries (excepting South  Africa) are among the world’s top 25% most vulnerable 
and least-prepared countries. In addition to a high rank on the  GAIN index, key selection criteria included a clear 
commitment to climate change adaptation policies, the countries ’ ownership of and a commitment to international 
conventions, and a potential portfolio of concrete, EbA-based s ub-projects. Using these criteria, Madagascar, 
Mozambique and Tanzania  have been chosen for the GCF-supported Programme. South Africa  will also be 
considered, especially because there is a significant opportuni ty for transboundary projects with Mozambique (see 
Map in Annex 5). In addition, all sub-projects are expected to be in line with the respective national strategies and 
priorities. Therefore, satisfactory evidence on the endorsement  of the respective country is required  for all sub-
projects.  
2. The Political and Institutional Context for Climate Change i n the Programme Region 
The proposed GCF funding for the Programme aims to address the accelerating degradation of the world’s oceans 
and coastal areas through the sustainable management and use of  the marine and coastal environments. This is in 
line with an increasing focus on ocean issues in international and national priorities as well as the climate change and 
adaptation policies of the selected countries. In this context,  the EbA-focused measures in the coastal areas will be 
supported in principle by the participating countries: The Prog ramme measures will complement already planned or 
implemented measures in the countries and will contribute to th e achievement of national climate change adaptation 
strategies, including Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs ) and National Adapt ation Plans (NAPs). 
2.1 International Cont ext and Priorities 
Rising concerns about deteriorating living conditions of coasta l populations due to climate change and the 
degradation of ocean and coastal ecosystems have led the intern ational community to focus increasingly on these 
habitats. Recognizing the importance of coasts and oceans for s ustainable human development, the international 
community has committed itself through Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14 to “conserve and sustainably use 
the oceans, seas and marine resources”. In addition, EbA concep ts in coastal regions are recognized as contributing 
significantly to SDG 13 (“Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts”), especially addressing 
Indicator 13.1 (“Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to  climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all 
countries”), as well as SDG 15 („Protect, restore and promote s ustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems ... and halt 
biodiversity loss“). Consequently, the international climate po licy debate focuses increasingly on the impact of climate 
change on the livelihoods of coastal populations and the marine  environment. In this context, the Ocean Action Day 
at COP 231 set short-term and medium-term priorities in order to enhance t he role that the oceans play in climate 
change mitigation and adaptation: 
 Support countries in the development and implementation of nat ure-based adaptation and mitigation actions 
addressing coastal and oceans-related matters, with a focus on SIDS (Small Islands Developing States), low-
lying areas and developing countries; 
 Support mainstreaming ecosystem-based management in coastal an d marine natural resources policies as 
part of countries’ climate action plans and revise existing Nat ionally Determined Contributions (NDCs) 
accordingly; 
 Develop investment plans for a climate-resilient blue economy,  with emphasis on low-carbon solutions and 
ensuring economic benefits to developing countries and SIDS; an d 
 Promote the sustainable and effective use of marine resources by promoting ‘blue economies’ in SIDS and 
developing countries. 
COP 25 in Chile 2019 is intended to focus attention on the ocea ns, and the proposed Programme would thus ideally 
be able to support the implementation of the international clim ate change agenda.  
The international community commi tted itself through Aichi Targ et 11 of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) 
to conserve and sustainably use at least 10% of coastal marine ecosystems by 2020. In addition, the recent global 
assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the  Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) stresses the fundam ental importance of expanding, connecting and 
effectively managing marine protected area networks, and promot ing the conservation and/or restoration of marine 
ecosystems to achieve the transformative change needed to conse rve and sustainably use nature and achieve 
sustainability. Lastly, internati onal political initiatives on the reforestation of coastal forests, such as the Global 
Mangrove Alliance (GMA), which targets increasing mangrove cove rage by 20% above current extent by 2030, will 
have significant impacts on the mitigation of Greenhouse Gas (G HG) emissions. In addition, the recently published 
IPBES report on the state of biodiversit y in Africa (2018 ) focused on the hi gh importance of biodiversit y alon g the


---
*Page 10*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 6 OF 59 
 
 
  
2 This increase in absorption of 61 MtCO 2 in 2030 in the LULUCF sector is in addition to the  envisaged  reduction of approximately 30 
MtCO 2 of its emissions of GHG in all other sectors.  Southern African coastline, as well as that of its freshwater c oasts. 
All targeted countries have signed the Nairobi Convention , which entered into force in 1996 as part of UN 
Environment’s Regional Seas Programme. The Convention is a part nership between governments, civil society and 
the private sector, working towards a prosperous Western Indian Ocean (WIO)  Region with healthy lakes, coasts 
and oceans. It provides a mechanism for regional cooperation, c oordination and collaborative actions.  Article 10 of 
the Convention refers to Specially Protected Areas and the nece ssity for the Contracting Parties to establish 
protected areas, such as marine parks and reserves. Furthermore , all countries signed and ratified the following 
conventions and protocols:  
 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate (UNFCCC),  
 Montreal Protocol, and 
 Convention on Biological Diversity. 
With its mission and funding criteria, BAF directly addresses t hese international priorities, and therefore contributes to 
the achievement of the respective goals on a global scale. With  its funding resources, GCF would directly support the 
countries in the Programme region  in their pursuit of climate c hange and adaptation policies and contribute to the 
achievement of the objectives of international climate change p olicies and conventions.  
2.2 National Climate Change Policies and Priorities, and National Adaptation Strategies 
All WIO countries have a strong focus on and commitment to coas tal and/or marine conservation within their national 
strategies, including their Nationally Determined Contributions  (NDCs), and Climate Strategies and Action Plans. 
Additionally, they all show en gagement with programmes focusing  on climate change adaptation and management of 
coastal ecosystems - freshwater as well as oceanic. All Program me countries are part of the World Bank’s Pilot 
Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR). The measures of the prop osed GCF-Programme will complement the efforts 
already in place and supported by other donors.  
Given its significant role in climate adaptation, its wide biod iversity, and its support of sustainable livelihoods, the 
references to ‘marine’ in the proposal include freshwater of re gional importance, namely the Central African Lakes. 
a) Madagascar 
The Republic of Madagascar ratified the UNFCCC and became a Par ty in 1998. Madagascar spends a substantial 
amount of its annual budget on social services and infrastructu re in response to the adverse effects of climate 
change. Between 2010 and 2015, losses and damages associated wi th floods and cyclone events are estimated at 
about 470-940 million  USD per year (INDC; 2016, p.9). To cope with climate change ri sks and adapt climate-sensitive 
sectors and regions, Madagascar has set up an ambitious policy framework (National Adaptation Programme of 
Action [NAPA] - 2006; National Climate Change Policy – 2010; in tended NDC 2015; turned into NDC – 2016), and 
three National Communications (NCs) to the UNFCCC. 
The National Climate Change Policy, the NDC and the NCs are sti ll based on the actions of the NAPA related to EbA 
in coastal and marine areas formulated in 2006:  
 Reinforcement of natural protection and reduction of the vulne rability of coastal, inshore and marine 
areas affected by coastal erosion and receding shorelines;  
 Application of Resilient Agriculture Integrated Models in majo r agricultural centres, cash crop zones, 
extensive livestock farming areas, priority areas for fisheries , and mangroves, as well as drought 
hotspots; 
 Restoration of natural habitats (forests and mangroves: 45,000  ha; lakes, streams, etc.); 
 Identification and sustainable management of climate refuge ar eas inside and outside protected areas; 
 Early warning systems that monitor for cyclones, floods and dr ought, and public health surveillance. 
In Madagascar’s Third National Communication to UNFCCC (from Oc t 2017), the protection of coastal areas through 
EbA measures is considered an eff ective way of reducing negativ e impacts of climate change and, at the same time, 
improving the livelihoods of p oor coastal populations. 
The destruction of coastal ecosystems, such as mangroves, also affects Madagascar’s GHG emissions. According to 
its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC; 2016), M adagascar aims to increase absorption in the Land 
Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector up to 61 MtCO 2 by 2030 (equal to an expected increase of 
32%2 in GHG absorption, compared to the business-as-usual scenario) . However, as mangroves currently represent 
only 2% of the forest cover in Madagascar, the absorption of GH G through better conservation of mangroves is only a 
co-benefit.


---
*Page 11*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 7 OF 59 
 
 
  
b) Mozambique 
Mozambique ratified the UNFCCC in 1994 and became a Party in Au gust 1995. In its NAPA (2007), Mozambique 
defines the coastal zones as a priority sector. Accompanying ac tions proposed includestrengthening the capacity of 
agricultural producers in order to cope with climate change, th e restoration of forest, the rehabilitation of dunes and 
mangroves, and actions to sensitize and disseminate good practi ces in coastal communities, as well as 
improvements in local fisheries.  
In 2012, Mozambique launched its National Climate Change Adapta tion and Mitigation Strategy (NCCAMS; 2012). 
The key objectives focus on ma king Mozambique resilient to the impacts of climate change, whereby coastal erosion, 
habitat destruction of mangroves, seagrass beds and reefs, biod iversity loss, and depletion of fish stocks are all 
major perceived risks. The strategy presents actions for coasta l and marine ecosystems, such as:  
 Establishing sustainable management of coastal ecosystems, and  introducing regeneration and protection 
programmes for the mangroves, algae and seaweeds associated wit h potential carbon capture and storage;  
 Increasing the resilience of fisheries, e.g. regenerating mang roves and implementing protective measures for 
algae and seagrass, corals and other zones used by fish for spa wning and feeding, and improving the quality 
of information availability and skills for small-scale fisherie s;  
 Increasing people’s adaptive capacity through innovative commu nity-based adaptation approaches; and 
 Assessing the climate risk to areas of touristic interest; bui lding the resilience of the sector and the 
conservation of ecosystems; conserving coastal areas and improv ing protection practices. 
The National Environmental Management Programme established int egrated coastal zone management, based on 
coordination between relevant stakeholders, including communiti es. The main issues are: (i) fisheries, (ii) coastal and 
marine ecosystem management, (iii) coastal and marine protectio n, (iv) marine parks, and (v) tourism.  
These climate change policies and strategies highlight the prio rity given by Mozambique to adaptation measures in 
coastal regions. Approaches are in line with the EbA concept of  the proposed Programme, specifically regarding the 
ecosystem services of mangroves, seagrass and coral reefs as we ll as cooperation between relevant stakeholders. 
The severely destructive cyclones (see C.2.1) in 2019 also high lighted the importance of adaptation measures in 
coastal regions for the Government of Mozambique.  
In addition, the destruction of coastal ecosystems such as mang roves affects Mozambique’s GHG emissions. 
According to its INDC (2015), Mozambique aims to reduce its emi ssions by a total of about 76.5 MtCO 2eq in the 
period from 2020 to 2030, with 23.0 MtCO 2eq by 2024. Reductions would come from the sectors of energy, l and use, 
land use change, and forestry, including mangroves.  
c) Tanzania  
The United Republic of Tanzania ratified the UNFCCC in 1996. Ac cording to its NAPA (2007), Tanzania is already 
implementing marine and coastal environment management programm es, including mangrove reforestation and the 
conservation of coastal resources, creating and maintaining var ious marine reserves. Additional measures  include:  
 Enhancing conservation and fishery resource management; 
 Reduction of non-climate stress and monitoring, e.g. eliminati on of destructive fishing practices and 
overfishing, reduction of pollution and damaging extraction, pr oper management of salt production and 
seaweed farming, and coastal ecosystem monitoring; 
 Restoration of degraded habitats e.g., beach nourishment, veti ver grass planting, mangrove replanting, and 
stimulation of coral reefs growth; 
 Establishment of marine protected areas;  
 Promoting livelihood diversification for coastal communities. 
 
The NAPA also highlights the importance of inland waters such a s Lake Victoria, which are also highly affected by 
climate change: “The extreme drop of water levels of Lake Victo ria, Lake Tanganyika and Lake Jipe in recent years 
and the dramatic recession of 7 km of Lake Rukwa in about 50 ye ars, are associated, at le ast in part, with climate 
change, and are threatening economic and social activities” (NA PA; 2007, p.V).  
The Second National Communication to UNFCCC (2014) highlights: “The management of coastal and marine 
resources is key for minimizing impacts caused by climate chang e and also safeguard the tourism sector and life of 
coastal communities”. Tanzania signing the CBD is of global imp ortance, as the wildlife of Tanzania is one of the 
richest and most diversified in Africa. The country has a diver se spectrum of fauna and flora including a wide variety 
of endemic species and sub-species, among them fish, with many endemic in Lakes Victoria, Tanganyika and Nyasa 
and other small lakes and rivers.


---
*Page 12*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 8 OF 59 
 
 
  
3Mangrove Action Project 2018 (mangroveactionproject.org/mangrov e-loss/) In addition, the destruction of coastal ecosystems such as mang roves impacts Tanzania’s GHG emissions. Its INDC 
to the UNFCCC indicates that total national GHG emissions were 76,766.5 Gg CO 2eq (base year 2000). Tanzania will 
reduce GHG emissions by between 10 and 20% by 2030, relative to  the business-as-usual scenario of 138-153 Mt 
CO 2eq. As Tanzania has 48.1 million ha of forested land with a cur rent estimated total of 9.032 trillion tons of carbon 
stock, forests contribute significantly to the country’s carbon  balance. However, as mangroves only cover 98,028 ha, 
the absorption of GHG through better conservation of mangroves represents a co-benefit.  
d) South Africa  
South Africa ratified the UNF CCC in August 1997. Its INDC (2015 ), National Development Plan (2012) and National 
Climate Change Response White Paper (Dept. of Environmental Aff airs; 2011) together provide the strategy for 
South Africa’s transition to a lower carbon and climate-resilie nt society.  
In South Africa, changes are being observed in the marine and c oastal environment and have already had significant 
impacts on the fisheries sector and on the local economy. There fore, the National Climate Change Adaptation 
Strategy (DEA; 2016; draft) includes EbA, community-based adapt ation, conservation agriculture, and climate-smart 
agriculture (including fisheries). With the concept of EbA, “bi odiversity and ecosystem services shall be used as part 
of an overall adaptation strategy to help people adapt to the e ffects of climate change”. The strategy includes coastal 
management guidelines on climate adaptation resilience actions for municipalities, as well as investment in disaster 
risk reduction, including restor ation/rehabilitat ion of coastal  ecosystems.  
EbA in fisheries management is designed to build greater resili ence in the fisheries sector, assisting the recovery of 
impacted resources and whole ecosystems. Priorities are to enfo rce action against illegal harvesting of coastal and 
offshore fishery resources, to increase the resilience of natur al fish populations to climate change, and to introduce 
decision-making guidelines for municipal planning around coasta l measures, especially within 200 metres of the 
coastline to ensure nursery habitats essential for prawns and e stuarine fish are maintained and coastal ecosystems 
are protected to buffer against impacts of storm surges (NAP; 2 016).  
The destruction of coastal ecosystems such as mangroves does no t seriously affect South Africa’s GHG emissions, 
as its mangrove area is only marginal (1,742 ha).  
Conclusion :  
The importance of themes related to climate change risks for co astal and marine areas, a highly vulnerable 
population, the loss of marine and coastal ecosystem services, and the need for urgent adaptation measures in 
coastal and marine areas, is recognized in the selected countri es in numerous national policies and strategies, 
including climate adaptation plans. Protection of coastal and m arine ecosystems combined with the strengthening of 
the resilience of the population affected by adverse climate ch ange effects are important elements. Increasing priority 
is given to these in the national climate change adaptation str ategies. There is therefore a high commitment from the 
countries to introducing adaptation measures, including measure s related to EbA in coastal and marine ecosystems. 
The countries, however, often lack the financial and technical resources for the actual implementation of their 
adaptation strategies and planned measures, including expertise  on EbA concepts. This issue can be addressed by 
the proposed Programme. 
 
3. Baselines for climate vulnerabilities and impact on the Prog ramme Region: 
Coasts and the oceans are recognized as the ecosystems that are  most severely exposed to the impacts of climate 
change. Since the 1970s, more than 93% of the temperature incre ase due to the greenhouse effect and other human 
activities has been absorbed by the oceans, and data show a sus tained and accelerating upward trend in ocean 
warming. In addition, it is proje cted that sea levels will rise  significantly in the future, an d that there will be an increas e 
in extreme weather events, particularly high-intensity tropical  storms. Due to increased releases of CO 2 from human 
activities, ocean acidification has increased by ~26% since pre -industrial times, and will decrease to an average pH 
of 7.8 – 7.9 (currently 8.1) by the end of the century, posing risks to many marine species. At current rates of 
temperature rise, oceans will become too warm for coral reefs b y  2 0 5 0 ,  r e s u l t i n g  i n  t h e  l o s s  o f  t h e  w o r l d ’ s  m o s t  
biologically diverse marine ecosystem. In addition, the defores tation of mangrove forests significantly changes the 
ecology of coastal ecosystems: over the last 100 years, the glo bal mangrove area has lost 32 million ha, while the 
current rate of mangrove loss is approximately 150,000 ha or 1%  per annum (FAO – Food and Agriculture 
Organization)3. Inland waters such as freshwater lakes are also highly affect ed by climate change. 
Populations living in coastal regions are among those populatio ns affected most strongly by climate change globally. 
Around 40% of the global population lives within 100 km of the ocean. Coastal floods, cyclones, sea-level rise, and 
salt-water intrusion in coastal aquifers all have devastatin g effects on local communities and their livelihoods. The


---
*Page 13*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 9 OF 59 
 
 
  
4 PPCR, Worldbank, 2017. 
5 National Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy (IN DC; Nov. 2012).  
6 Mozambique Country Climate Risk Assessment Report, Irish Aid, 2018. disappearance of natural coastal barriers against floods and st orms has severe economic, social and health 
consequences. Furthermore, continued loss and degradation of ma ngrove forests and coral reefs increases 
vulnerability to coastal flooding, and therefore endangers huma n safety and shoreline development. In addition to the 
tourism sector, important industries are also often located in coastal regions and thus directly threatened by floods 
and sea-level rise. Poorer populations along marine and freshwa ter coasts in developing countries are especially 
affected, as poorer populations are dependent on agriculture, a quaculture and fisheries for sustaining their livelihood. 
In addition, due to a low income and lack of insurance, they ar e often not able to protect themselves against climate 
risks, and are therefore especially vulnerable to the impacts o f climate change.  
This also applies to the population of the coastal regions in t he Programme region, where people suffer from 
increasing extreme weather events, cyclones, rising sea levels and the destruction of valuable ecosystems. The 
targeted countries in the WIO region include almost 50 million people living in coastal areas. In addition, Mozambique 
and Tanzania have a significant coastline along the Central Afr ican Lakes. The following sections provide baseline 
data on climate change  and vulnerabilities of the peopl e living  at the WIO coasts and lakes. 
a) Madagascar 
Madagascar is the fourth largest island in the world, with an a rea of 592,800 km2, and has a wealth of natural 
resources and biodiversity. The total population of Madagascar is 26.9 million in 2019 
www.worldpopulationreview.com , accessed 07.06.2019). The country’s development potential ste ms from its natural 
resources (biodiversity, marine resources, arable land, and min eral ores).4 
Madagascar is among the top ten countries in the world for impo rtant and extensive coastal zones (4,828 km 
coastline), and is one of the countries most vulnerable to extr eme weather events (ranked e ighth in the gl obal Climate 
Risk Index and fourth amongst all African countries). Climate c hange impacts are: (1) extended drought periods; (2) 
increased volatility of  rainfall patterns; (3) intensification of cyclones; (4) more frequent cyclones and floods in the 
coastal regions. All of the above-mentioned impacts would serio usly hinder the country’s economic development and 
its achievement of sustainable development goals, especially gi ven the country’s low level of human development 
and adaptive capacity. With two-thirds of its population living  in coastal areas, the majority of its people are exposed 
t o  t h e  e f f e c t s  o f  r i s i n g  s e a  l e v e l s  a n d  t r o p i c a l  c y c l o n e s ,  w h i c h already occur three to four times a year, affecting 
250,000 people and causing about 50 million USD in damages annually (UNDP; 2019). Some observed impacts are: 
 Average sea-level rise of 7 to 8 mm/year, leading to coastal e rosion and receding shorelines; 
 Medium to high number of direct fatalities associated with cyc lone events; 
 Mangrove forest destruction due to floods, and destruction of coral reefs, habitats, and associated species; 
 Destruction of agriculture crops and fields due to heavy rains , floods, and stormy winds; and 
 Water stress (irregular rainfall patterns; drought and deficit  in some areas). 
 
b) Mozambique  
Mozambique has 13,000 km2 of coastal area, with a shoreline stretching 2,700 km, and an estimated population of 
31.3 million in 2019 ( www.worldpopulationreview.com ; accessed on 07.06.2019). The National Statistics Institute 
indicates that by 2030, the cou ntry will have about 36 million inhabitants.5 Sixty percent of the population lives in 
coastal areas.6  
Mozambique is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its ge ographic location, high temperatures, aridness, 
infertile soils, many endemic diseases, and a high dependence o f the population on natural resources that also 
depend on precipitation (NAPA; 2007). Its coastline is the third longest in Africa and is characteriz ed by a diversity of 
physical features such as sandy beaches, sand dunes, coral reef s, estuarine systems, bays, mangroves and 
seagrass beds.  
Climate change adds additional stress to the development contex t in Mozambique and threatens to undermine 
advancements made to date. The mean annual temperature has incr eased by an average of 0.13°C per  decade from 
1960 to 2006 , while the mean annual rainfall has decreased by an average ra te of 2.5 mm per decade. Since the 
1950s, the occurrence of extreme weather events, including drou ght, heavy rainfall events, hurricanes, and cyclones, 
has increased. Some of the tropical cyclones and depressions formed in the Ind ian Ocean cross the Mozambique 
Channel and affect the coastal zone. The number of cyclones des troying the coasts has increased significantly, as 
demonstrated in Figure 1 below (INDC; Mozambique; 2015). The latest cyclones in 2019 were disastrous. Tropical 
Cyclone Idai is reported to have been the strongest cyclone in Mozambique since 2008, according to the death toll, 
and was one o f the three c yclones with the most victims since the be gin of weather records in the Southern


---
*Page 14*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 10 OF 59 
 
 
  
7 Tanzania, State of the Coast, USAID, 2001. hemisphere(Masters; 2019).  
Future projections indicate that mean annual temperatures in Mo zambique are likely to rise by 1.0-2.8°C by the 
2060s. The proportion of rainfall that falls in heavy events wi ll also increase. With these projections, droughts and 
floods are likely to become more frequent, and cyclones more in tense. Sea-level rise in the region is projected to 
range from 0.18-0.59 m by the 2090s. 
Agriculture, livestock and fisheries are the most important sec tors of the economy, representing 80% of the labour 
force (INC Report; 2003). Due to a lack of effective adaptation  mechanisms, a cumulative number of people could be 
forced to migrate away from the coast. The cost of disaster res ponse is already high, and an economic analysis of 
climate change in Mozambique reveals that climate change may ca use the GDP to fall 4-14%, with significant 
declines in national welfare by 2050 (INDC; 2015). These estima tions should be adapted since Cyclone Idai is 
reported to be the costliest tropical cyclone in the South-West  Indian Ocean (≥ 2 billion USD, Wood; 2019). 
 
c) Tanzania  
Tanzania has a total area of 945,087 km2 and i ts coastline is 1,424 km in length. In addition, the three larg est lakes 
(Victoria, Nyasa, Tanganyika) have a coastline of around 3,300 km; all lakes in the country cover 6% of the total 
national area. The country has a population of about 60.8 million people (; ac cessed 07.06.2019).  The adverse 
impacts of climate change are already taking a toll on the live lihoods of people and on the economy. The effects of 
frequent and severe droughts in many parts of the country are b eing felt, with their associated consequences on food 
production and water scarcity, among others. The coast is chara cterized by a wide diversity of biotopes and species, 
and the population utilizes a variety of its coastal and marine  resources. Its highly productive ecosystems play a 
substantial role in the economic and social development of the country. One-quarter of the population lives in coastal 
regions and depends on the income from these sectors.7 
The average annual temperature in Tanzania has increased by 1.0oC since 1960 and is projected to increase by 
1.0oC to 2.7oC by the 2060s (Climate Action Report, Irish Aid; 2016). There will also be an increas e in rainfall in some 
parts, while other areas will experience decreased rainfall. Ra infall in some parts will increase (both short and long 
rain seasons ), especiall y t h o s e  a r e a s  getting bimodal rainfall, includin g in particular the Lake Victoria basin (e.g. 
Figure 1 (left):  
Map of Cyclone-Prone Areas (Irish Aid; 2018) Figure 2 (right):  
Increase in the number of cyclones (INDC; Mozambique; 2015).  Note: the tendency follows on beyond 2013 - 2019 with 
3 c
yclones alone in 2018 and 2019.


---
*Page 15*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 11 OF 59 
 
 
  
8 NAPA, Draft, 2016; Strategic Framework and Overarching Impleme ntation Plan for EbA. 
9 Assessment of Ecologically or Biologically Significant Marine Areas - EBSAs 2012, IPBES 2018.  Bukoba, Kagera) and Northern parts of the coastal belt as outli ned in the Disaster Vulnerability Assessment Report 
for Tanzania (NAPA; 2007, p.16). A sea-level rise brings the ri sk of land losses, coastal erosion, damage to coastal 
structure and properties and loss of coastal and marine habitat s, saline intrusion in freshwater bodies, inundation of 
low-lying coastal areas, and coral bleaching. Estuarine and lag oon fisheries are the basis for livelihoods in many 
communities. The mangroves, in addition to providing physical p rotection against erosion, are used as firewood, for 
building poles, boat building and fish smoking (NAPA; 2017). Th e climate-related changes will lead to increased 
vulnerability of the communities, affecting sectors of the econ omy such as agriculture, water, energy, health, and 
forestry, and leading to a reduced provision of ecosystem servi ces. 
d) South Africa  
The land area of the country is 1,219,602 km2 And its coastline is 3,000 km long. The total population in 20 19 was 
approximately 58 millio n (http://worldpopula tionreview.com; acc essed 07.06.2019). 
Mean annual temperatures have increased by at least 1.5°C above  the observed global average of 0.65°C since the 
1930s. Regarding rainfall, there is a tendency towards a decrea se in the number of rain days and there has been an 
increase in the intensity of rainfall events and increased dry spell durations (IPCC, 2007; TNC Report, 2018). A key 
feature of the projected climate change future of South Africa is that temperatures are forecasted to increase 
drastically under a low mitigation scenario. Ecosystems are neg atively impacted by existing pressures, such as land 
use change and degradation, and climate change is also exacerba ting these pressures (TNC; 2018). The levels of 
vulnerability across the country are detailed in Figure 3, whic h shows that the entire eastern coast is prone to a 
‘Medium - High’ vulnerability level, which is the highest level  of vulnerability.  
 
 
 
The coastline is generally exposed to moderate to strong wave a ction. Natural buffers against storm surges and rising 
seas have been degraded along parts of the coastline. With clim ate change expected to increase the frequency and 
intensity of storms, t he coastline will beco me increasingly vul nerable to storm surges, coastal erosion, sea-level rise 
and extreme weather events (White Paper; 2011). Loss of biodive rsity and ecosystem services will affect all sectors, 
particularly agriculture, tourism, and subsistence livelihoods.  All coastal fisheries are susceptible to increased sea 
storminess, especially small-scale artisanal fisheries. Apart f rom commercial fisheries, subsistence fishing is 
important for the livelihoods of coastal communities as they at tempt to meet their basic needs.8 
 
4. Baseline for ecosystem services from mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass in the Programme 
countries 
The biological and conservation values of the Programme area ar e of global importance.9 The provision of the coastal 
population with services from marine and coastal ecos ystems in the countries of the WIO in the Pro gramme re gion is 
Figure 3:  
Level of vulnerability to climate change in South Africa (Source: South Africa’s Third 
National Communication, UNFCCC; 
Department of Environmental Affairs, March 2018, p.49
).


---
*Page 16*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 12 OF 59 
 
 
  
10 Herr, D., T. Agardy, D. Benzaken, F. Hicks, J. Howard, E. Land is, A. Soles and T. Vegh (2015). Coastal “blue” carbon. A revis ed guide to 
supporting coastal wetland programs and projects using climate finance and other financial mechanisms. Gland,Switzerland: IUCN , p.10. 
11 Green Payments for Blue Carbon, Nicholas Institute, 2011. 
12 https://www.biodiversityfinance.net/mozambique 
13 Fifth National Report on the Implementation of Convention on B iological Diversity (2015). 
14 Data on Mangrove Coverage differ between sources. Source here:  https://gma-panda.opendata.arcgis.com  (6.6.2019). increasingly endangered, as many coastal communities are facing  growing economic hardship from the degradation 
of their resource base due to growing pressure from infrastruct ure development, population growth and climate 
change. Coral reefs and mangroves are in decline due to the com bined impacts of local use and global threats. 
Important fish stocks are under threat from overfishing and ina dequate management. Unsustainable human activities 
are enhancing the negative effects of climate change on coastal  zones and their populations. 
Fisheries traditionally provide the global population with food , as fish is an important source of animal protein, 
vitamins, minerals and fatty acids. Aquaculture is a growing se ctor that currently provides almost half of the fish 
products consumed by humans. Both sectors are a vital source of  food security and livelihoods, particularly for poor 
coastal communities who depend upon the ecosystem services of m arine and coastal resources, as they often live far 
from social services and markets and are hampered by local reso urce degradation.  
Coral reefs provide food and shelter to fish. Mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass serve as nursery grounds for young 
commercial fish and are home to hundreds of species, therefore providing important ecosystem services for fish 
stock. All three ecosystems are crucial for the livelihood of c oastal communities, especially for regions outside cities, 
where subsistence fishery and ag riculture are often the sole in come source.  
The following sections provide baseline information about mangr oves, coral reefs and seagrass in the countries of the 
WIO Programme region. 
Mangroves 
Mangrove forests are on e of the Earth’s mos t climate-resilient,  productive and biodiverse ecosystems. Mangroves are 
salt-tolerant plants and the forests create one of the most spe cies-rich habitats worldwide. Their high nutrition supply 
and the protective character of their root system makes mangrov es an important spawning ground for fish and 
crustaceans. Through the exchange of nutrients and the migratio n of species, mangroves are strongly intertwined 
with other coastal and marine ecosystems such as coral reefs an d seagrass beds.  
Intact mangrove ecosystems have remarkable climate change adaptation as well as mitigation capacities . 
Mangroves are ecologically and economically highly important fo rests, and provide a wide range of ecosystem 
services. Mangrove resources are used directly by processing ma ngrove wood to charcoal, while a large share of the 
global fishery depends directly or indirectly on food chains in  mangrove forests. Mangroves provide coastal protection 
and play a crucial role in disaster risk reduction by shelterin g and buffering coasts from possible hazards. By reducing 
wave height by 13–66% per 100 m and storm surge water depth by 5–50 cm per km, mangroves can significantly 
reduce the impacts of flooding in coastal areas. They absorb an d scatter wave energy and their stems, and also slow 
down water flow and waves, which makes them a natural barrier a gainst floods or cyclones.   
In addition, these trees play a vital role in the sequestration  of blue carbon. The carbon storage capacity of mangrove 
forests is 3 to 5 times higher than that of terrestrial forests . The destruction of mangrove forests is responsible for 
about 10% of global emissions ca used by deforestation – 240 mil lion tons of CO 2 per year.10 Soil organic carbon is by 
far the biggest carbon pool for coastal habitats. In the first metre of sediment alone, soil organic carbon averages 
nearly 1,800 t CO 2eq/ha for oceanic mangroves.11 
The unsustainable use of and increasing economic development pr essure on mangroves has led to an alarming loss 
of mangrove cover. Main causes are the logging of mangroves for  timber and charcoal production and the extension 
of usable areas for settlements, agriculture and aquaculture (G lobal Mangrove Alliance).   
Mozambique harbours the largest mangrove area in the Programme region, and  the second longest extension of 
mangroves in Africa.12 It ranks 19th amongst countries globally in terms of mangrove coverage. Mangroves occur in 
many places along the coast - in sheltered shorelines, bays, la goons and river estuaries. The total mangrove area 
size has shrunk over the past three decades and a nationwide de crease from 408,000 ha in 1972 to 357,000 ha was 
noted in 2004.13 14 
Agricultural (landside) encroachment with slash-and-burn practi ces, urban development and infrastructure projects, 
and woodcutting – including both legal, but unmanaged, and ille gal – for construction, firewood, and charcoal 
production have been responsible for most of the mangrove degra dation in the past. The threats to mangroves and 
other coastal ecosystems are expected to worsen with increased coastal economic development, exacerbated by the 
effects of climate change.  
The economic and biodiversit y value, ecos ystem services and potential for climate miti gation and adaptation of the


---
*Page 17*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 13 OF 59 
 
 
  
15 5th NATIONAL REPORT TO THE CONFERENCE OF PARTIES TO THE CONVEN TION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, 2015. 
16 Ecological Variability and Carbon Stock Estimates of Mangrove Ecosystems in Northwestern Madagascar. Trevor G. Jones 1,2,*, H arifidy 
Rakoto Ratsimba 3, Lalao Ravaoarinorotsihoarana 1, Garth Cripps  1 and Adia Bey. 
17 Global Mangrove Alliance Data Portal - https://gma-panda.opend ata.arcgis.com (based on “Status and distribution of mangrove f orests of 
the world using earth observation satellite data”, Giri et. al,  2011 [data base: 2000]).  
18 Main contents taken from: Burke/ Reytar/ Spalding/ Perry; Reef s at Risk Revisited; World Resources Institute; 2011.  mangrove forests, as well as the threats mangroves are exposed to and the trend of decline of coverage, also apply 
to the other countries of the Programme region.  
In Tanzania , all mangrove forests are gazetted as forest reserves and occu py about 0.3% of the forest cover in the 
country. Available information indicates that Tanzania has lost  about 44,000 ha of mangroves over the last 30 years 
(1980-2010) (or equivalent to about 28.9% of the 1980 area cove rage). Apart from a decrease in the area coverage 
of mangroves, there has been a considerable decrease in the den sity, height and canopy cover of the mangroves 
within the forests.15 
In Madagascar , mangrove forests are found mainly on the west coast, and orig inally occupied 25% of the 4,000 km 
coastline of Madagascar (Giri/Mulhausen; 2008). Madagascar mang roves are included in the WWF's Global 200 list 
of most outstanding ecoregions. More than 20% of mangroves have  been deforested since 1990 due to reasons 
ranging from increased extraction for charcoal and timber and c onversion, to small to large-scale agriculture and 
aquaculture.16 The main factors responsible for this increase include conversi on to agriculture (35%), logging (16%), 
conversion to aquaculture (3%), and urban development (1%). 
According to the Gl obal Mangrove Alliance Da ta Portal,  mangrove  forest cover in the four countries is as follows:17  
Country Area (ha) 
Mozambique 294,105 
Madagascar 236,412 
Tanzania  98,028  
South Africa  1,742 
TOTAL  630,287 
 
Coral reefs18 
Coral reefs support the highest marine biodiversity in the worl d and provide valuable ecosystem services. The 
ecological value of coral reefs is crucial for ecosystem health  and for climate change adaptation. Despite covering 
less than 0.1% (284,300 km2) of the ocean floor, reefs host more than one-quarter of all m arine fish species. Coral 
reefs function as a spawning and nursery ground and are crucial  to the thriving of economically important fish 
populations. While coral reefs give shelter and provide food, t hey also filter water, by feeding off particulate matter 
suspended in the water column, and therefore provide high water  quality. In addition, coral r eefs break the intensity of 
waves and protect the land from storm surges.  
Because of ocean warming and acidification, reefs around the wo rld have suffered from mass coral bleaching events 
over recent years (IUCN.org). At current rates of temperature r ise, oceans will become too  warm for coral reefs by 
2050. Changes in storm patterns are leading to more destructive  and more frequent storms that can also cause the 
loss of coral reefs. Human-induced changes to marine biodiversi ty and coastal habitat further exacerbate the impact 
of ocean warming and acidification.  
The WIO contains 16% of the world’s coral reefs, and the region  is thought to host the second peak of coral reef 
biodiversity globally. Coral reef ecosystems underpin the econo mies of the countries in the region, particularly the 
fishery and tourism sectors, and provide livelihood opportuniti es and income for local communities. Figure 4 
demonstrates the threat level for coral reefs in each world reg ion.


---
*Page 18*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 14 OF 59 
 
 
  
19 Source: Western Indian Ocean Coral Reef status, 2017; Global C oral Reef Monitoring Network (GCRMN).  
  
Figures 4 & 5: Threat level for coral reefs (Burke/ Reytar/ Spalding/ Perry; Reefs at Risk Revisited; WRI 2011). 
In the Indian Ocean, approximately 35% of reefs are under a “Ve ry High” and “High” threat (higher than global 
average). Figure 5 shows that o n a global scale, only 27% of co ral reefs are within marine protected areas (MPAs) 
and only 6% within MPAs are rated as effective. The overall eff ective protection level for coral reefs is therefore 
extremely low (see also Section 2.4, below, on th e status of MP As in the Programme region). 
The following map (Figure 6) demonstrates that Madagascar, Tanz ania and Mozambique are countries with coral 
reefs categorized as having high and very high threat levels.  
 
 
Figure 6: Threat Level of coral reefs (Source: Burke et al; Reefs at Risk Revisited; World Resources Institute; 2011). 
 
Regarding the baseline for coral reef cover, data from the Glob al Coral Reef Monitoring Network (GCRMN) is being 
used, which is based on a dense and widespread net of monitorin g stations in the WIO (see Annex 5).19 Across the 
WIO region (mainly Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania and South Africa), coral cover declined by about 
25% durin g pre-1998 and 1999-2015 time periods. On going climate chan ge is alread y inducin g more frequent ma jor


---
*Page 19*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 15 OF 59 
 
 
  
20Green Payments for Blue Carbon”, Nicholas Institute, 2011. coral bleaching and disease eve nts, and acidification will incr easingly undermine the ability of corals to resist other 
threats. According to data from the GCRMN (2017), the situation  in the Programme countries is as follows:  
Madagascar: The country’s coastline shelters one of the most important cora l reef areas in the WIO, with a surface 
area estimated at 2,330 km2. The monitoring of the state of coral reefs shows a decline in  coral cover for the whole 
country and only 60% of the known coral cover of Madagascar rem ains when compared to the 1998 levels. The 
degradation of reefs is exacerbated by global warming, which ca uses coral bleaching. Mortality due to severe coral 
bleaching caused noticeable declines in coral in 1998 and 2004,  and most recently in 2016. 
Mozambique: The country has an area of 1,890 km2 of coral reefs (Fifth report on the implementation of the CBD;  
2014). Coral cover has declined profusely across the country, f rom a mean of 30-60% in 1999 to about 20-30% in 
2016, under pressure from mass bleaching events, flooding from terrestrial runoff from cyclones and heavy fishing. 
Due to very little continuity in monitoring over the full time period, only broad patterns can be inferred. With climate 
change, local climatic anomalies could become stronger, more fr equent and less predictable, with implication for coral 
reefs as well.  
Tanzania: With a total area of 3,580 km2, Tanzania has the greatest reef area among the countries of th e region 
(Spalding et al.; 2001). The coral reef health has fallen sligh tly over the last 30 years. Coral cover had been stable at 
around 35 to 45% until 2015. An increase in the coastal populat ion and a poor economy, as well as unplanned 
coastal tourism and coastal development have all been implicate d in coral reef degradation. Fishing is a very 
important activity and a vital source of food, employment, recr eation and economic well-being for the coastal 
population (NAPA; 2017). Coral reefs support 70% of artisanal f ish production and are the main driver for coastal 
tourism. However, destructive fishing is a major pressure on Ta nzanian reefs, specifically dynamite fishing, dragnets 
and ring nets.   
South Africa: South Africa has a relatively small area (40 km2) of coral reefs, located in the extreme North-Eastern 
part of the coast (WIO), but its corals are rich in diversity. Coral bleaching has occurred, including in the 2016 global 
bleaching event, but with no recorded mortality of corals. Sinc e the reefs’ discovery in 1970, there has been a good 
history of sound conservation management, as their biodiversity  value and tourism potential were realised early on. In 
general, the reefs and the MPA are well managed.  
According to estimates from the GCRMN (see above; for Mozambiqu e: 5th Report to CBN), the coral reef area of the 
Programme region is as follows:  
Country  Area  
Mozambique 1,890 km2  
Madagascar 2,330 km2 
Tanzania 3,580 km2 
South Africa  40 km2 
TOTAL  7,840 km2 
 
Seagrass  
Seagrass beds are one of the few habitats that provide multiple  benefits to the environment, and are therefore one of 
the most valuable ecosystems on Earth. Seagrass provides huge e cosystem services, absorbing and storing huge 
amounts of carbon, reducing coastal erosion, serving as nursery  grounds for young commercial fish, and is home to 
hundreds of species (Brochure: UK “National Marine Aquarium/NMA ”; 2019). 
Soil organic carbon is by far the biggest carbon pool for the f ocal coastal habitats. In the f irst metre of sediment alone, 
soil organic carbon averages 500 t CO 2eq/ha for seagrasses. In relative terms, about 95% to 99% of to tal carbon 
stocks of salt marshes and seagrasses are stored in the soils b eneath them.20


---
*Page 20*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 16 OF 59 
 
 
  
21National Blue Carbon Policy Assessment Mozambique; WWF; IUCN; 2 016. 
22 Green E.P and Short F.t 120031 World Atlas of Seagrasses. Prep ared by the UIMEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre. Univers ity 
of California Press, Berkeley, USA.   Mozambique  is estimated to have a total of 43,900 ha o f
seagrass meadows. The total known historical loss of seagrass i n
Mozambique is estimated at 2,755 ha.21 
The seagrass in southeast South Africa  g r o w s  i n  1 7  e s t u a r i e s .  
Individual beds are small - generally only a few hectares - and  the 
total area covered by seagrass is about 7 km2.  
Regarding Madagascar, Tanzania and Kenya, some information 
exists on seagrass species,22 but data on coverage  by seagrass 
beds is not available. However, literature refers to indication s of 
declining trends in coverage area. Globally, since the 1920’s 9 0% 
of seagrass meadows has been lost and IUCN estimates that 
seagrass coverage is declining at an average of 7% annually. 
Seagrass beds have been negatively affected by the dredging of channels, shipping and other coastal activities. They are under  
imminent threat of erosion, sedimentation and nutrient-loading 
pollution from onshore activities, pollution from untreated sew age 
discharge and destructive fishing practices. 
Figure 7: Seagrass distribution in the WIO   
(Source: http://data.unep-wcmc.org  ) 
 
 
Status of conservation of coastal ecosystems 
The countries targeted by the Programme represent about 6,300 km2 of mangrove, 7,840 km2 of coral reef area  
and significant areas of seagrass, providing direct ecosystem s ervices to millions of coastal community members. 
In order to cope with the likely reduced health of coastal and marine ecosystems in the future, the scaling up of 
coastal management efforts needs to be sufficient to meet the e xtent of well-managed areas envisaged in SDG 14 
and Aichi Target 11 (“by 2020, at least 10% of coastal and mari ne areas are protected”). The table in Figure 8 
summarizes the area under management in MPAs and Locally Manage d Marine Areas (LMMA) in the Programme 
countries. The table also indicates the gap to achieving Aichi Target 11.


---
*Page 21*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 17 OF 59 
 
 
  
23 Coral reef status report for the Western Indian Ocean (2017) ; from Obura et al., 2017, with data derived from the World Dat abase on 
Protected Areas.  
Figure 8: Current status of MPAs and LMMAs in the Programme region (incl. Kenya for information) (2015) 23 
 
Conclusion: High importance of Eb A to reduce vulnerability of coastal communities in the WIO 
Climate change-related risks pose a great threat to marine flor a and fauna, and therefore to their services for the 
livelihoods of coastal communities. In turn, the protection of these livelihoods is strongly l inked to coastal and marine 
ecosystems and their preservation. Without mangroves and coral reefs, coastlines are more exposed to erosion and 
destruction of infrastructure following storm surges and sea-le vel rise. Dead coral reefs have a direct negative impact 
on income opportunities from tourism. Mangroves, coral reefs an d seagrass beds are important, as spawning and 
breeding habitat for fish and therefore as a source of income a nd protein.  
If the present trend of climate change persists, it is expected  that in years to come, vulnerability of coastal 
communities due to climate cha nge events will continue to incre ase due to the decrease in available ecosystem 
services. As income and subsistence of coastal communities are mainly based on the services from coastal and 
marine ecosystems, the livelihood of the coastal population, it s health and well-being, will be increasingly at risk.  
While strategies and objectives for climate adaptation in marin e and coastal ecosystems already exist in all countries 
targeted by the proposed Programme, and the countries show comm itment to and ownership of related adaptation 
measures, their implementation still lags behind. Transfer of t hose strategies into concrete action is urgently required 
to improve the climate resilience of coastal communities, but t he countries face considerable institutional, financial 
and technical barriers regarding adaptation measures. Climate a daptation actions are urgently needed in the 
Programme region, as climate change related risks seem to grow in intensity. The cyclones, heavy rainfalls and 
floods in Mozambique in 2019 and their disastrous consequences for the population demonstrate the negative 
impacts these extreme weather events cause.   
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000  words, approximately 2 pages p lus diagram) 
 
Description of the Theory of Change  
The proposed Programme supports a more sustainable development pathway towards more climate resilience for 
vulnerable coastal communities  as its long-term vision for imp roved coastal protection, more effective use of marine 
biodiversity and a diversification of livelihoods (see “Paradig m Shift”, section D.2.). This can be achieved through 
strategic investments into EbA approaches, especially focusing on ecosystem services for coastal and marine-based 
communities. These investments include the measures described i n section B.3. By using the funds of the GCF-
Programme, stakeholders (NGOs, public institutions, research or ganizations, private sector, and coastal 
communities) collaborate across sectors at a local and sub-nati onal level. Stakeholders w ill identify and implement 
viable sub-projects to reduce anthropogenic stressors, contribu te to the rehabilitation, p rotection and sustainable 
management of mangrove and coral reefs, and generate meaningful  management information that informs policy and 
strategic decision makers.  
The Programme concept is specifically tailored by the BAF to ad dress the identified local barriers (see below) for a 
higher resilience of vulnerable coastal populations with respec t to climate change. It is focused on (1) EbA measures 
implemented on the ground with stron g participation of local stakeholders, also promotin g the roles of women in sub-


---
*Page 22*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 18 OF 59 
 
 
 project planning and implementation, (2) expertise from interna tional NGOs that are well-experienced in climate 
change adaptation projects and “state of the art”-EbA approache s in coastal and marine ecosystems, (3) the use of 
the BAF grant-funding mechanism in order to catalyze impacts be yond a one-off project investment.  
Successful EbA approaches will be  disseminated through the BAF within the region, which brings them to scale. Best 
practices and innovative EbA concepts will be spread further to  other regions and developing countries with similar 
climate change adaptation needs. The demand driven and open cha racter of the Programme, using the well-
established grant-funding mechanism of BAF and the internationa l network of NGOs and their experiences, brings a 
significant value added to the GC F funds for Climate Adaptation .  
The proposed Programme aims to increase the climate resilience of coastal populations in the WIO region using EbA 
services, particularly addressing risks related to storm surges  and coastal erosion. This is done at two levels: (a) 
Through the participatory implem entation of local, strategic Eb A sub-projects with experienced implementing partners 
and (b) by providing key national stakeholders with the necessa ry skills and tools needed to integrate EbA 
approaches into their national / regional strategies for climat e-resilient coastal zone management. Significant co-
benefits will be obtain ed with regard to cli mate change mitigat ion, biodiversity conservation and income generation. 
Local EbA sub-projects will be based on a sound climate risk as sessment and will focus on the protection, the 
improved management and the restoration of ecosystems, which ar e particularly relevant for reducing climate-related 
risks, such as mangroves, coral reefs and sea grass beds. In or der to make the interventions sustainable, key local 
stakeholders will be involved in the planning, implementation a nd evaluation of the measures, which will put particular 
emphasis on improving the livelihoods of the local vulnerable p opulation. 
These concrete local practical e xperiences will be the entry po int for raising awareness and developing capacities 
amongst key national / regional stakeholders to integrate EbA a pproaches in national / regional strategies for climate-
resilient coastal zone managemen t. The Programme will provide i mportant tools and methodologies needed for this 
mainstreaming process. Finally, a regional exchange of experien ces and best practices will enhance mutual learning 
on how to best use EbA approaches in coastal zones of the WIO r egion. 
The well-established grant funding mechanism of the BAF will pr ovide opportunities for future implementation of EbA 
measures in the region, thus scaling-up the outcomes of the Pro gramme. 
DIAGRAM: Theory of Change


---
*Page 23*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 19 OF 59 
 
 
 Main barriers / root causes that must be addressed   
As climate change effects in the Programme region are increasin g in extent and frequency, climate adaptation 
measures  regarding coastal and marine ecosystems are urgently required.  However, effective climate change 
adaptation policies are hampered by financial gaps as well as w eak institutional capacities and insufficient expertise 
at the national and local levels. Although climate change adapt ation is part of the development strategies of all 
selected countries, weak and fragmented institutional structure s restrain an effective implementation of national 
strategies. In addition, low economic growth rates and high pub l i c  d e b t s  l i m i t  t h e  f u n d i n g  f o r  p u b l i c  i n v e s t m e n t  i n  
climate change adaptation.  
Most of the countries in the developing world are not geared to  respond adequately to the challenge of climate 
change and the destruction of coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs, mangroves and seagrass. These main 
barriers apply to the selected Programme region in the WIO and require urgent attention. Barriers include:  
 The relevance of coastal ecosystems and ecosystem services for  climate change adaptation: their 
effectiveness and economic and social benefits are still not we ll understood, and consequently, often not 
adequately reflected in existing management plans of coastal an d marine protected areas in the targeted 
Programme countries. 
 Programme countries lack technical and financial capacities to  integrate aspects of sustainable use of fishing 
grounds, as well as coral reef and mangrove protection into pla nning and development concepts, and to 
implement coastal development measures.  
 Technical and financial capacities on the ground are lacking i n Programme countries to identify solutions, 
adjust to local conditions and scale up measures. This particul arly concerns the management of MPAs, 
locally managed areas for fish stock rehabilitation, measures t o rehabilitate corals and mangroves, as well as 
measures for sustainable aquaculture and small-scale fisheries in the WIO region.  
 Although there are technical innovations and concepts availabl e around the globe for the sustainable 
management, protection and rehabilitation of coral reefs, mangr oves and fish stocks, the dissemination of 
concepts and experiences in the Programme countries is difficul t. 
 Insufficient capacities for spatial and integrated planning ap proaches and cross-sector as well as cross-
country collaboration lead to a lack of coordination in the WIO  region. Thereby, the critical mass of 
investments and measures that would make a difference along coa stlines cannot be achieved.   
 Mainstreaming ecosystem-based approaches represents additional  costs and an investment risk. Especially 
in the least developed countries of the WIO region – just as in  other LDCs –, it is crucial to support the EbA 
approaches with appropriate financial instruments. 
 The knowledge, information and data to understand and deal wit h the complexities of EbA approaches 
across sectors and countries, as well as the management of mari ne habitats and the scaling up of climate-
smart technologies, is scarce in the Programme countries. 
 Ecosystem connectivity is crucial for enhanced resilience of c oral reefs and mangroves. However, the 
institutional set-up for the management of protected areas is o ften fragmented within and in-between 
countries of the WIO region.  
 At the local level, communities in the targeted countries have  ample knowledge of their resources. However, 
they lack the capacity and access to finance, technology and ma rkets that would enable them to use their 
resources in a climate-smart way.  
 The fish value chain is complex, often informal, and requires the collaboration of loca l communities with the 
private sector and regulatory authorities. Globally, more than 30% of the catch from small-scale fisheries is 
lost due to inefficient and unhygienic handling of fish after t he harvest. Data for the WIO region is missing, but 
it can be expected that a similar scale of fish is lost post-ha rvest. A lack of knowledge, difficult market access, 
and a lack of funding for climate-smart, cold-chain technology represent barriers to the reduction of post-
harvest losses and more sustainable fisheries.  
In different scales, these barriers are relevant for all select ed countries of the proposed Programme region. To 
overcome the barriers, the GCF-funded Programme would provide f inancial means and technical support for the 
implementation of local and sub-re gional adaptation measures. The Pro gramme is cent red on an ecos ystem-based


---
*Page 24*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 20 OF 59 
 
 
  
24 Resilience of ecosystems is understood as the capacity of a sy stem to recover from stress and disturbance while retaining its  essential 
functions, structure, feedbacks and identity; IUCN, https://www.iucn.org/commissions/commission-ecosystem-managemen t/our-work/cems-
thematic-groups/resilience.  approach to climate change adaptation and involves a wide range  of ecosystem management measures to increase 
resilience and reduce the vulnerability of people and the vulne rability of the environment to climate change.24  
To ensure sufficient implementation capacities, the measures wi ll be implemented by capable and experienced 
international and local NGOs, in  close coordination with local communities and the responsible local and national 
governmental institutions. NGOs will specify how the identified  barriers will be addressed by the proposed project 
measures in every sub-project proposal. The eligibility criteri a in the GCF-specific calls for proposals will explicitly 
refer to the six GCF Investment Criteria and NGOs will explain how these criteria will be fulfilled.  
Knowledge transfer between key stakeholders, as well as capacit y building on the ground will help to strengthen 
technical and financial capacities and the understanding of EbA  approaches at a local level.  
Programme objectives against baseline:  Against the baseline scenario of increasing community vulnerab ility due 
to increasingly threatened ecosystems in the Programme region a nd potential risk elevation due to climate change, 
the outcome will be: To enhance ecosystem s ervices that contrib ute to reducing climate change-related risks for 
vulnerable coastal communities through the conservation and sustainable use of particularly re levant coastal 
ecosystems . The outcome contributes to increasing the resilience of vulne rable coastal populations with respect to 
climate change (Programme impact). 
B.3. Project/Programme description (max. 2000 words, approximat ely 4 pages)  
The Programme builds on a comprehensive Ecosystem-based Adaptat ion (EbA) approach involving the 
conservation, sustainable management and restoration of marine and coastal ecosystems that can help people adapt 
to the impacts of climate change. EbA is a nature-based solutio n that harnesses biodiversity and ecosystem services 
to reduce vulnerability and build resilience to climate change.  Successful EbA approaches will be disseminated 
through BAF within the region and bring them to scale. In addit ion, through the global action of BAF, best practices 
and innovative EbA co ncepts will be spread further to other reg ions and developing countries with similar climate 
change adaptation needs. 
The proposed Programme responds t o the challenges, vulnerabilit ies and barriers described in section B.2., 
specifically addressing the following ecosystem services, which  are relevant for climate change adaptation: 
 Mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds, and shore and beach veg etation protect the shoreline from 
increasing coastal erosion  (and subsequent damages to infrastructure, loss of agricultura l land, etc.); 
 Mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass beds reduce the impacts of  storm surges  on people and coastal 
infrastructure by dissipating wave energy; 
 Coral reefs (which are seriously affected by increasing sea wa ter temperature and acidity) are an important 
asset for tourism , particularly diving tourism;  
 Coral reefs and mangroves are important spawning and breeding grounds for fish, therefore the livelihood 
basis  for many poor fishers. 
In order to arrive at the expected outcome, the following three  outputs are planned:  
 Coastal ecosystems in the Programme region, which are particul arly relevant for climate change adaptation, 
are better protected and managed in a more sustainable way (Out put 1); 
 Degraded coastal ecosystems in the Programme region, which are  particularly relevant for climate change 
adaptation, are rehabilitated (Output 2); 
 Enhanced knowledge, expertise and capacity of relevant nationa l agencies to use Ecosystem-based 
Adaptation (EbA) appr oaches for a climate -resilient coastal zon e management (Output 3). 
For the GCF Programme, BAF will use its grant making mechanism (see B.4) and will launch a specific open calls for 
proposals, with the regional focus on the target countries of t h e  W I O  P r o g r a m m e  r e g i o n .  T h e  t h e m a t i c  f o c u s  i s  
Climate Change Adaptation through EbA measures. For this purpos e, the following specific selection criteria for the 
proposed GCF-Programme (EbA wi ndow of the BAF) are applied:  
- Evidence that the project primarily addresses climate-related impacts and not only development-related impacts 
(climate rationale); 
- Evidence that the project is in line with national and/or regi onal climate change adaptation plans, particularly NDCs 
and NAPs. 
- Contribution of the pro ject to awareness raisin g and capacit y buildin g of national / re gional a gencies on the


---
*Page 25*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 21 OF 59 
 
 
 relevance and options of using EbA measures for climate-resilie nt coastal zone management; 
- Contribution of the project to capacity building of national /  regional agencies on climate risk assessment and how 
to include EbA measures in climate-resilient coastal zone manag ement; 
- Contribution to a regional exchange of experiences and lessons  learnt from the implemen tation of EbA measures 
and on how to make EbA an integral part of climate-resilient co astal zone management. 
- Contribution of the project to climate change mitigation (prov iding mechanisms for mitigation and estimates on 
expected GHG reduction as supplementary criterion). 
 
Each proposal will clearly expla in its contribution to the GCF objectives and six investment criteria for climate change 
adaptation. For more details, reference is made to the draft ap praisal matrix for proposals in Annex 23. With the GCF 
contribution, the BAF could transform its current conservation- oriented portfolio into a clearly climate change-focused 
initiative for marine and coastal ecosystems, implemented by ci vil society organizations and local stakeholders. The 
call for proposals for the GCF- funded Programme will be designe d to focus sub-projects on climate adaptation 
through EbA.  
The call for proposals for the sub-projects are designed in a g ender-sensitive way. Sub-project proponents will 
provide stakeholder analysis with special reference to women. T he concepts of sub-projects shall demonstrate how 
women will be involved in planning and implementation and how t hey will benefit from project  results. In addition, 
proponents are invited to design women-specific measures, where  women are the main stakeholders and mainly 
benefit from the results.  
Once a sub-project has been approved for funding, BAF will ente r into an Implementation Agreement with the 
respective NGO. The log-frame, budget and implementation plan w ill be binding elements of the agreement. Upon 
signing of the Agreement, the NGOs will prepare a disbursement request for actual implementation. BAF will check 
the requests against the agreed budget and implementation plan and, if approved, disburse the requested funds to a 
special account opened for the purposes of the sub-project  or to a separate and internally tracked and traceable 
bookkeeping entry in NGO’s financial management system, opened or created and used solely for these funds. The 
agreed budget and implementation plan will also serve as the re ference for progress reporting of the NGO and 
implementation monitoring of the BAF.    
Proposals are required to cover measures from the three compone nts presented below. The type of measures  that 
should be implemented under an approved sub-project are defined  in the signed Agreement (see above). Changes to 
the agreed concept / implementation plan of sub-projects are su bject to prior written agreements between the BAF 
and the respective NGO. :  
Component 1:  
Funding window for protection and sustainable management of coa stal resources relevant for EbA 
(mangroves, coral reefs seagrass) 
BAF will on-grant funds for the i mplementation of this componen t on the basis of the agreed project 
implementation plans and budgets of the approved sub-projects ( see above).  The eligible grant-funding recipients 
(NGOs) will carry out the actual implementation of agreed measu res. Measures financed under this component 
may comprise the identification, planning, financing and implem entation of coastal management and protection 
measures such as: 
I. Improved management of marine , coastal and freshwater protected areas and Locally Managed 
Marine Areas and Management of Coastal Ecosystems (coral reefs, mangroves and seagrass)  
The development, establishment and improvement of management of  marine protected area (MPA) networks 
and Locally Managed Marine Areas (LMMAs) with a substantial pro portion of sizeable and well-placed no-
take zones within MPAs will lead to tangible benefits for vulne rable local communities, notably through the 
spill-over effects (disp ersal of adult fish)  and reserve effect s (dispersal of eggs). The same holds true for 
freshwater protected areas . Protecting especially herbivorous fish can particularly contri bute to improving the 
ecological resilience of coral reefs. Support measures to local  communities managing protected areas may 
include: 
(i) infrastructure (offices, visitor centres, IT), (ii) boats and other equipment for guards,  
(iii) defining area boundaries through demarc ation (buoys), 
(iv) introduction of participator y co-mana gement, the update of mana gement plans to make sites more resilient to


---
*Page 26*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 22 OF 59 
 
 
 climate change impacts, and furt her enforcement of implementati on of measures outlined in management 
plans; 
(v) more local value addition through reduction of post-harvest  losses (up to 40% globally) and improved 
processing. 
Healthy mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds and shore vegetat ion provide the above-mentioned services 
relevant for climate change adaptation. Effectively managed MPA s allow for the protection and restoration of 
key habitats and the replenishment of fish stocks. These effect s increase ecosystem service provision, e.g. 
by providing opportunities for nutrition and subsistence income , recreation and tourism, coastal protection 
and carbon sequestration. Protected marine areas and sustainabl e artisanal fisheries have a huge potential 
for positive effects on the livelihood of coastal communities. Integration of the local communities and other 
relevant stakeholders in planning and implementation of measure s as well as management of protected 
areas is crucial for success and  for the sustainability of resu lts and therefore a condition for proposed sub-
projects. The measures will be implemented in cooperation with local communities and MPA Administrations.  
 
II. Measures to reduce physical damage to coastal and marine ecosystems, e.g.:  
(i) Mooring-buoys for minimizing damage of coral reefs by ancho rs,  
(ii) Demarcation and signalling of relevant ecosystems,  
(iii) Installation of breakwaters  to protect parts  of reefs fro m wave action, and 
(iv) Boardwalks for the protection of beach vegetation. 
These physical and visual measures can protect ecosystems from human and natural damage and allows 
them to use their own potential for natural rehabilitation. Mea sures will be implemented in cooperation with 
local communities and local governments. 
III. Measures to reduce pressure and land-bas ed stressors on coasta l marine ecosystems :  
Coral reefs, mangroves, seagrass beds and beach vegetation are threatened by unsustainable land use 
patterns in aquaculture, rice farming and fishing, deforestatio n, drainage, sedimentation and excessive 
nutrient influx. Unplanned and unregulated shrimp farming is on e of the main causes of mangrove 
deforestation, as well as unplan ned logging e.g. for consumptiv e uses. As these practices are often carried 
out by the local communities, alternatives have to be identifie d and implemented in cooperation with the local 
stakeholders. Promoted measures will be implemented within as w ell as outside protected areas and will 
reduce pressures on coastal ecosystems, through e.g.:  
(I) Promotion of alternative fuel wood sources where mangroves are used; 
(II) Promotion of participatory land use planning for improved protection of coastal ecosystems from 
damaging human impacts (to minim ize negative impacts of land us e on e.g. mangroves);  
(III) Enhancing the production of fish through the promotion of  sustainable fisheries management, as well 
as aquaculture. Such approaches include co-management approache s with local communities, 
promotion of Integrated Multi-Trophic Aquaculture (IMTA), pond- based Integrated Agriculture-
Aquaculture as well as seaweed farming; and  
(IV) Reduction of sedimentation fr om land-based erosion (e.g. r eforestation, slope stabilization). 
The measures of Component 1  contribute to the protection and conservation of the coastal a nd marine ecosystems 
through improved and more effective management of protected are as, physical protection and signalling of relevant 
areas and their borders, and reduction of erosion, as well as t he creation of sustainable production and income 
alternatives for local communities. Experiences from other BAF- financed sub-projects in the region will be 
incorporated (see map in Annex 16). 
Component 2:  
Funding window for rehabilitation of degraded coastal ecosystem s relevant for EbA  
As for Component 1,  BAF will on-grant funds for the implementa tion of this component on the basis of the agreed 
project implementation plans and budgets of the approved sub-pr ojects, while actual i mplementation will be 
carried out by the eligible NGOs.  Eligible measures comprise re storation of ecosystems, complementing 
measures under Component 1, such as


---
*Page 27*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 23 OF 59 
 
 
 (I) Mangrove reforestation,  
(II) Seagrass re habilitation, 
(III) Rehabilitation of beach vegetation, and  (IV) Coral reef restoration where applicable, e. g. with more t emperature-resilient species. 
Successful approaches to mangrove rehabilit ation mostly include  community-based management of the selection of 
suitable sites and re habilitation measures, as well as a combin ation of physical and biological measures to control 
site conditions. This includes careful fact-finding on the ecol ogically and socio-economically favourable site selection, 
alongside comprehensive planning of modalities for nursery mana gement and seedling production, transplanting and 
maintenance. The challenges of c oral reef rehabilitation includ e proper site management and avoidance of stressors 
that cause coral reef damage. Coral reef r ehabilitation include s re-stabilization of damaged reefs and corals, as well 
as propagation and transplantation of corals to new sites. Cora l transplantation is one option available to rehabilitate 
coral reefs, however, it is more expensive. Active rehabilitati on of degraded coral reef is likely to require tens of 
thousands of coral transplants per hectare. Simple in situ  coral nurseries can be constructed from readily available 
and inexpensive materials, and with some guidance, operated by NGOs or local communities. Good site selection is 
crucial to the success of a coral nursery. Passive restoration via good management of reef resources is an option and 
should be considered as an alternative. Seagrass rehabilitation  involves germination and cultivation of seagrass and 
its transplantation to sites with suitable conditions.  
In all cases, effective and sustainable management structures m ust be put in place before active restoration occurs. 
 
Component 3: Support for knowledge exchange and capacity buildi ng regarding appropriate and feasible 
EbA approaches  
All projects supported by the Blue Action fund are expected to also contribute to and support the knowledge 
exchange and capacity building regarding appropriate and feasib le EbA approaches. In fact, knowledge exchange 
related to changes in habitats and ecosystems, as well as best practices and lessons learned, are key for enhancing 
EbA. This knowledge can only be obtained through regular, stand ardized observation of defined aspects of habitat 
and ecosystems, as well as practical on-the-ground experience a nd its evaluation. The existing expertise, research, 
practical experiences and evaluation within renowned internatio nal NGOs will be crucial for this component. Eligible 
measures include  
(I) Awareness raising and capacit y building of national / regio nal agencies on the relevance and options of using 
EbA measures for climate-resilient coastal zone management 
(II) Capacity building of national / regional agencies on clima te risk assessment and how to include EbA 
measures in climate-resilient coa stal zone management (instrume nts, methodologies, incentive schemes, 
etc.) 
(III) Regional exchange of experiences and lessons learnt from the implementation of EbA measures and on how 
to make EbA an integral part of climate-resilient coastal zone management.  
BAF will on-grant funds for these measures based on the agreed project implementation plans and budgets of the 
approved sub-projects,  while the eligible NGOs will carry out t heir actual implementation.  
At sub-project level, technology transfer and dissemination of lessons learned is ensured in various ways, depending 
on the focus of the sub-project.  
1. Cooperation and exchange between NGOs working in the same re gion or on similar issues is encouraged 
through consortia. In addition, the sharing of expertise beyond  the projects is supported through workshops, 
conferences and trainings.  
2. Sub-projects also include communication budgets to ensure su fficient media coverage and other PR work (such 
as websites and social media) to inform and disseminate knowled ge on project outcomes. 
3. At programme level, meta analyses are carried out in order t o draw conclusions at subordinate levels. This 
proves to be especially useful for overarching processes or str ategies.  
4. Relevant events at the international level provide the oppor tunity to disseminate insights and lessons learned 
among a larger audience, also across different sectors. 
5. Technology transfer can take place through opportunities to fund capital expenditures, e.g. on solar panels, 
patrolling equipment, or equipment to reduce post-harvest losse s. In this case, it is pivotal to ensure 
dissemination of knowledge on the technology is disseminated as  well. 
 
Appraisal, Evaluation, Lessons Learned: In addition,  high-level expert services for the appraisal, monitorin g and


---
*Page 28*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 24 OF 59 
 
 
 evaluation of sub-projects, including identification of best pr actices and dissemination of l essons learnt will be part of 
the Component.   
This measure will be d irectly contracted a nd financed by BAF. 
 
Gender strengthening:  All capacity building measures will be gender sensitive. In ad dition, NGOs will be requested 
by the call of proposals to include in their proposals measures  to enhance the role of women in EbA and/or to 
improve income opportunities for women and/or other means to pr omote the participation of women in planning, 
implementation and sharing of project benefits. The financing v olume for this gender specific measures depends on 
the proposals, and the BAF will report on this in its mid-term review. Based on the approved proposals, the BAF will 
provide financing to eligible N GOs for the implementation of su ch measures. 
 A highly qualified consultant with specific social and gender r elated expertise in development and climate finance will 
be engaged to propose concrete gender strengthening criteria an d measures to be included in calls for proposals, 
evaluation criteria, reporting, monitoring and evaluation.  The consultant will develop a Guide to Gender 
Mainstreaming prior to the launch of calls for funding applications, which wi ll support further gender assessment and 
analysis, as well as the development of project-specific gender  action plans. The BAF will be directly in charge of 
selection and the contracting of the consultant and ensure the quality of his/her outputs.  
 
Further Information on the definition of eligible and non-eligi ble measures and eligibility requirements f or funding 
proposals can be found in the BAF Grant Procedures Manual (see Annex 22; therein: Chapter 2 and Annex 
2).Submitted proposals will include selected measures from all three components. In Annex 24 the log frame (Annex 
24.a) and implementation plan (Annex 24.b) of a theoretical mod el sub-project is presented. Main emphasis of field 
measures is on improved management of protected areas and on  r ehabilitation and sustainable management of 
mangrove forests, a very likely combination for the Programme a rea.  
 
All described measures and activities enhance the conservation and sustainable use of coastal ecosystems, address 
the root causes for vulnerabilit y, and support the resilience o f ecosystem services, all which contribute to reducing 
climate change-related risks for vulnerable coastal population.  The exact set of sub-proj ects and measures will be 
defined during the calls for proposals.   
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximatel y 3 pages plus  diagrams) 
 
The Blue Action Fund is the Programme Executing Entity and sele cts NGOs as project implementers according to a 
specific selection mechanism and criteria. The KfW, as Accredit ed Entity has developed the funding proposal, 
supervises and monitors the implementation of the funded measur es, and reports regularly to the GCF. The KfW also 
evaluates the outcomes of the Programme in accordance with the AMA (details below).  
 
Blue Action Fund (Progra mme Executing Entity) 
The BAF was established in 2016 by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(BMZ) and the KfW Development Bank (KfW). The BAF conducts its business based on rules applicable to it as a 
German foundation that receives funding mainly from different p ublic sources. In June 2017, the Swedish Ministry for 
Foreign Affairs joined as a donor. The Agence Française de Déve loppement (AFD) became a donor in October 2018. 
Further funding from other donors is envisaged. Main governing documents are the foundation’s charter, by-laws, 
investment policy, the Grant Procedures Manual and the Environm ental and Social Management System (ESMS), 
which are available on the BAF’s website (https://www.blueactio nfund.org/documents-and-publications/). The BAF 
communicates with utmost transparency, in particular in relatio n to governance, governing documents, grants and 
measures, studies and research, and financial information, as w ell as its auditor’s reports.  
In 2016, the BAF began with 24  million EUR in capital from the German BMZ. In 2017, the BAF doubled its assets 
thanks to the fu nding contributions of S weden (5.2 million EUR)  and additional funding from the BMZ (20 million 
EUR), and also further increased its assets in 2018 thanks to a dditional contributions from Sweden (3 million EUR), 
the BMZ (11.1 million EUR) and t he AFD (2.5 million EUR). Total  contributions in 2019 amounted to approximately 
68.1 million EUR (including an additional 2.5 m illion EUR from AFD).  
The governance structure of the BAF respects the basic principl es of good governance, particularly in regard to the 
rules laid out in the Public Corporate Governance Codex and the  “Guiding Principles of Good Practice for 
Foundations” issued by the Bundesverband Deutscher Stiftungen  (Association of German Foundations ). In order to 
compl y with these rules, the BAF is structured as a two-tier board mo del with a Mana gement Board (MB) t h a t


---
*Page 29*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 25 OF 59 
 
 
 conducts day-to-day business and a Supervisory Board (SB) that oversees all activities and provides strategic 
guidance. While the SB approves funding decisions and determine s the strategic directions of the BAF portfolio, the 
MB, through its Executive Director, is responsible for the gene ral representation and administration of BAF, the 
implementation of its grant-making mechanism, and the day-to da y management of the foundation.  
The BAF is operates in accordance with the procedures and stand ards of the KfW, which have been assessed and 
approved by the European Union in its six-pillar assessment. Th e SB of the BAF is currently comprised of three 
members: the BMZ, Sweden, and KfW. The French AFD and IUCN have  been invited as observers. The members of 
the MB and SB are highly experienced professionals in their rel evant fields of action, with development financing, as 
well as environmental and climate financing backgrounds. 
The Supervisory Board conferred sole power of attorney on the M anaging Executive Director. The Management 
Board acts as Trustee of the BAF and represents the Foundation in court and out of court action by at least two of its 
members.  
 
Figure 9: Blue Action Fund organizational structure 
The BAF’s mission is to provide grants to NGOs working in offic ial development assistance (ODA) countries in order 
to conserve marine biodiversity and improve the lives of the lo cal population, to contribute to the 2030 Agenda, and 
also to support climate change mitigation and adaptation. Its w o rkin g a s sump ti on is t hat NGOs  are k ey  dri ver s of  
change and innovative approaches, have the necessary expertise,  are present in the regions for the long term, have 
working experience with national and local stakeholders, and ca n bring additional technical and financial resources to 
the sub-projects.   
The BAF provides individual grants to selected sub-projects in MPAs and their buffer zones, focusing on the most 
sensitive coastal waters of Africa, Latin America and Asia/Paci fic. The goal is to contribute to reducing the dramatic 
loss of marine biodiversity and to advance local development, s tabilize incomes in coastal  communities or enhance 
coastal protection. The BAF supports sub-projects that contribu te to SDG 14 and Aichi target 11 (see B.1.2.), support 
marine conservation and sustainable livelihood of the populatio n, are embedded in regional policies and contribute to 
their implementation, and are endorsed by national governments.   
The BAF concentrates on sub-projects that result in measurable outcomes, including:  
 Newly established or better ma naged MPAs of regional importanc e or networks of MPAs; 
 Conservation of biodiversity and recovery of fish stocks; and 
 Enhanced livelihood conditions and food security. 
These are the main eligibility criteria for sub-projects funded  under the BAF. With the GCF contribution, the BAF 
could transform its current conservation-oriented portfolio int o a clearly climate change-focused initiative for marine 
and coastal ecosystems, implemented by civil society organizati ons and local stakeholders. The call for proposals for 
the GCF-funded Programme will be designed to focus on sub-proje cts related to climate adaptation through EbA (see 
B.3.).


---
*Page 30*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 26 OF 59 
 
 
 In order to reduce the share of management costs, the BAF is co nstantly aiming to increase its working efficiency. It 
estimates to achieve an efficiency ratio (administrative expens es / total expenses) of less than 5% by full operation in 
the long-term, which would be well below international standard s for nature conservation foundations. Currently, the 
BAF’s Project Management Costs for implementing the new GCF con tribution will not exceed 5%.  
The BAF successfully established the funding mechanism. Within its first year, it began to implement projects from 
one closed and two open calls for proposals, and is currently s electing proposals for a third call. Currently, out of 
more than 90 concept notes, seven sub-projects have begun imple mentation and 18 sub-projects are in the pipeline.  
Since the start of the BAF in early 2018, 20.2 EUR Million was committed to sub-projects, and 5.7 EUR Mill. (28%) 
disbursed.  Up to two additional calls are planned for a GCF-funded Program me in 2019/2020. 
 
KfW Development Bank  
The Accredited Entity, KfW Development Bank, is in charge of de veloping and submitting the funding proposal to 
GCF. In the case that the proposal is successful and subject to  satisfactory FAA documentation, the KfW will 
negotiate a Financing Agreement with the BAF, supplemented by s o-called Separate Agreements, in which technical 
and procedural details for the Programme are agreed upon. The K fW will be responsible for ensuring that the GCF 
funds are disbursed and utilized in accordance with the terms o f the applicable documentation, while also observing 
the implementation schedule of the Programme. In addition to re gular monitoring by KfW, and to ensure the quality of 
implementation, independent evaluation reports will be commissi oned at regular intervals. This includes mid-term 
reviews of the BAF-funded sub-projects and final evaluations at  the end of project implementation for all sub-projects 
(costs included in the operational costs of the Programme).   
International Union for Conservat ion of Nature and Natural Reso urces (IUCN) 
The IUCN is working as a partner to the BAF. It supports the su b-project appraisal process, provides strategic advice 
for the further development of, or changes to, the strategic di rection of the BAF’s funding and open calls for proposals 
(it usually attends SB Meetings as an observer), and leads the external monitoring and evaluation of sub-projects. 
This input of technical expertise will also be provided in the case of the GCF-funded Programme. The IUCN has 
essential knowledge, access to networks of researchers on marin e and coastal ecosystems, and significant 
capacities for targeted communication and knowledge exchange an d can therefore bring a significant added value to 
the Programme. 
Sub-project implementers: intern ational and regi onal / local NG Os  
International or regional NGOs are invited to respond to the ca lls for proposals. Once selected, they take on 
responsibility for implementing the sub-project in accordance w ith the requirements of the Programme. The NGOs 
are to act as partners for the implementation of the Programme on a sub-project level, and are thus responsible and 
accountable towards the BAF for the proper delivery of funds an d/or services, the financial and administrative 
management of the sub-projects, reporting to BAF, and monitorin g at sub-project level. Only NGOs with a proven 
record in the implementation of projects in coastal and marine ecosystems and the participation of local and national 
stakeholders will be accepted (see next item – BAF funding mech anism).   
The BAF will implement the GCF funded Programme: The KfW will m o n i t o r  t h e  B A F ´ s  p e r f o r m a n c e  a s  
Executing Entity in line with its rules, policies and procedure s. The BAF will conclude grant agreements with 
NGOs implementing the sub-projec ts, according to the following procedure:  
BAF’s funding mechanism: Selection process for sub-projects fin anced through the Programme 
The already well-established and proven funding mechanism of th e BAF is based on an open call for proposals. For 
implementing the GCF-funded Programme, specific thematic calls for proposals will be launched for participating 
countries in the Programme region, focusing on EbA concepts. Th e calls will be announced internationally and will 
refer to the BAF Grant Procedures Manual and BAF’s eligibility criteria (see Annex 22). Respective minimum 
thresholds/benchmarks for expec ted impacts will be expected fro m the sub-project concepts, i.e. a minimum of 5,000 
direct beneficiaries and a minimum of 100,000 ha protected area  (see D.1.). Furthermore, specific quality criteria 
related to the EbA approach will be applied (notably (i) qualit y of the climate rationale and (ii) coherence with national 
and/or regional adaptat ion plans (see whole list of EbA-specifi c selection criteria above, section B.3). 
Eligible sub-project proponents will be international and natio nal NGOs with a proven track record in the thematic 
area of ecosystems and ecosystem services in coastal and marine  areas and that have regional long-term 
experience in working with countries in the WIO region. NGOs mu st also demonstrate sufficient implementation and 
absorption capacity, implementation experience in sub-projects with local communities and authorities, as well as a 
demonstration of necessar y s a f e guards, especiall y w i t h  r e gard to Environmental and Social Safe guard


---
*Page 31*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 27 OF 59 
 
 
 Requirements. They must also demonstrate a sufficient financial  strength and fund at least 25% of the total project 
costs (“match funding”). The BAF funding mechanism is demonstra ted in the following graphic:  
 
  Figure 10: BAF funding mechanism (see BAF’s Grant Procedures Manual, Annex 4) 
After a call for proposals for the GCF Programme, NGOs can subm it Concept Notes using the Concept Note 
Template from the BAF, adapted to specific GCF requirements. Co ncept Notes and applicant organizations are 
evaluated by the MB with the technical support of IUCN. Propose d sub-projects are screened for basic eligibility, and 
subsequently evaluated. The evaluation includes the assessment of the Theory of Change, underlying assumptions 
and expected outcomes. The Theory of Change must demonstrate ho w measures intend to achieve outcomes and 
impacts, and their contribution to the objectives of the GCF-fu nded Programme. In addition, the capacities of the 
proponents to deliver the sub-project’s results are being analy zed. Regarding the GCF Programme, the specific EbA 
approach will be analyzed.  
Ultimately, the MB prepares a shortlist of Concept Notes for ap proval by the SB. Upon the SB’s decision about which 
projects to pursue, the MB invites the proponents to present th eir Full Proposals, using the BAF template. BAF can 
offer NGOs the option to request special funds for sub-project preparation from BAF.  
With the Full Proposal, the NGOs must submit an environmental a nd social safeguards report. The project must also 
have the endorsement of the authorized body  of the country, with a signe d letter of consent . The concepts 
proposed will be derived from a broad range of stakeholder cons ultations with national and international key experts 
from the marine and fisheries realm, and therefore in close coo peration with relevant national governmental 
authorities, as well as the local population, in order to adapt  to the needs of the vulnerable target coastal 
communities. This is to ensure that the project measures are in  line with national and local priorities and existing 
adaptation strategies, as well as to ensure ownership of the co untry and/or local authority right from the beginning. 
The cooperation between NGOs and local stakeholders and the con tribution of different sta keholders will be outlined 
in the proposal.  
The Full Proposals will be evaluat ed by the MB, again with supp ort from the IUCN. The evaluation includes the 
enhanced assessment of the partner and governance structure of the project, as well as the assessment of the EbA-
focused sub-project concept, the sub-project logframe, its cont ribution to the Results Matrix of the BAF, the 
mechanisms to reach the promised impacts, and the suitability o f the proposed budget. For the GCF-funded 
Programme, special attention will be given to the logical frame work and the contribution of the sub-projects to climate 
adaptation and increased ecosystems services for vulnerable peo ple and communities. The MB agrees which project 
proposals to recommend for funding and presents them to the SB.  The SB makes the final funding decision. 
 Project implementation and monitoring BAF supervises and provides support to the NGOs. Within the BAF , a designated staff member coordinates the work 
and is the main point of contact for the NGOs. At the beginning  of the project, NGOs  are required to submit a detailed 
sub-pro
ject work plan. Ever y s i x  m o n t h s ,  t h e  s u b - p r o ject work plan is updated to reflect actions and deliverables


---
*Page 32*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 28 OF 59 
 
 
  
25 Swiss Re, 2014. Economics of Climate Adaptation – Shaping clim ate-resilient development: 
http://www.swissre.com/library/A_global_overview_of_case_studie s__infrastructure.html . Cases included US Gulf Coast, New York, 
Florida, Jamaica, Guyana, Hull (UK), China, India, Tanzania, Ma li and Samoa.  achieved, and important changes. The work plan and its updated versions will be the basis for funding requests. 
Procurement of goods, works and related services within the sub -projects must be based on strict ethical principles 
and best international procurement practices for NGOs, and shal l  confo rm to BA F’s proc urement  polic y.  The BA F 
policy for procurement of Goods and Services is in accordance w ith KfW procurement guidelines (see G.3. and 
Annex 10 and 19).   
Monitoring of the grant measures is considered essential for an  effective funding mechanism. NGOs have the main 
responsibility for setting up a progress and impact monitoring system at sub-project level. BAF’s monitoring, internal 
evaluation and reporting will mainly be done through bi-annual funding advance requests, the annual reports and on-
the ground monitoring / project progress review visits. These m onitoring visits are partly executed jointly with KfW. In 
addition, the IUCN will conduct mid-term and final review missi ons. The BAF also contributes to monitoring 
implementation of sub-projects at field level and ensures, in c lose collaboration with National Designated Authorities 
(NDAs) and relevant local authorities, that GCF performance ind icators and eligibility criter ia are met. Each project 
requires Mid-term and Final Financial Audits, as well as Techni cal Reviews (Project Audits). Internationally renowned 
auditors will conduct the Finan cial Audits (Monitoring of Progr amme Level, section E.7.). 
Implementation of sub-projects is coordinated by the respective  NGOs at an operational level. NGOs will work 
through their established cross-sectoral networks, ensure that relevant financial and technical capacities will be 
available, and engage with stakeholders on grass-root and sub-n ational levels.  
In close consultation with the relevant national authorities an d vulnerable communities, NGOs will facilitate the 
access to approaches and technologies available at internationa l scale and adapt them to local circumstances by 
using their experience from imp lemented pilot projects. Through  coordination and knowledge exchange, supported by 
the BAF, stakeholders will share experiences across regions and  come up with viable solutions for the scaling up and 
dissemination of successfully tested pilots. 
The BAF’s unique strength of implementation is the direct, fast , non-bureaucratic financing of EbA measures, 
implemented by civil society organizations with great expertise  in maritime and coastal conservation, in co-operation 
with target populations. The BAF team has extensive experience working with NGOs in development cooperation, 
even in countries with low implem entation capacities. The BAF w ill coordinate with all rele vant stakeholders across 
countries and sectors in order to foster experience exchange, k nowledge transfer and dissemination of successfully 
tested approaches and technologies.  
B.5. Justificati on for GCF funding reques t (max. 1000 words, ap proximately 2 pages)  
The GCF was created in response to developing countries’ concer ns that they would be the most affected by climate 
change and the least capable of financing the cost of adaptatio n. This is particularly the case with the countries of the 
Programme region. The countries are (with the exception of Sout h Africa) least developed countries (LDCs), and the 
populations of the coastal regions are already observing the im pact that climate change has on their daily lives and 
on the services from ecosystems on which they depend. Despite t he respective governments’ efforts to put in place 
the necessary policies and strategies for climate adaptation, i t i s a big challenge t o t ransl at e t hese pla ns int o t he 
necessary actions. GCF involvem ent in the BAF will complement t he ongoing efforts in these countries and enable 
the respective governments, local authorities and communities t o address these challenges and implement concrete 
actions to increase the resilience of affected communities and ecosystems.  
Financial needs for securing ecosystem services for vulnerable target populations in coastal and marine regions 
prone to significant climate ch ange risks are in principle high , and far exceed the available funding, and this holds 
true for the proposed Programme region.  
Regarding the cost of climate change risks, a mainstream approa ch used by global reinsurers (Swiss RE and others) 
quantifies total costs by annual expected losses resulting from  calculated climate risks. These are comprised of risks 
due to existing climate patterns plus an additional risk result ing from climate change. Using this methodology, 
national and local economies studied (11 cases worldwide) are p rojected to lose bet ween 1 and 20% of GDP (or 
between 47 million and 26 billion  USD) annually as a result of existing climate patterns (with current development 
continuing until 2030). Climate change could worsen this pictur e significantly: an extreme climate change scenario 
would lead to annual losses from flood, drought, salt water int rusion in coastal aquifers, heatwaves, and tropical 
storms of between 77 million and 33 billion USD.  Available prev ention and mitigation measures can address a large 
part of the identified climate risks. Climate adaptation measur es in the 11 studied cases can avert between 15 and 
80% of the total climate risk, accordin g to Swiss Re.25 Up to 65% of future climate losses can be averted usin g cost-


---
*Page 33*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 29 OF 59 
 
 
 effective adaptation measures.  
For the public sector of the countries targeted by the proposed  Programme, the only financing alternatives would be 
to secure funding for the planned measures from extremely tight  government budgets or other donors. In practice, the 
governments are unable to provide the financial means needed an d often lack the necessary technical capacities for 
funding and implementing projects at scale and in a time- and c ost-efficient way. The Programme countries (apart 
from South Africa) are considered high-risk for private investm ent. Most communities are not able to access private 
funds and the identified necessary adaptation measures do not g enerate revenues and returns on investment. 
Therefore, the proposed measures are not attractive for private  financing. With the GCF-funded Programme, the BAF 
will be able to address specifically the financial needs of cou ntries and communities that are particularly vulnerable to 
the effects of climate change in the WIO. Envisaged GCF funding  is required to establish a specific EbA funding 
window under the BAF, with EbA as the main approach to be pursu ed. Currently, there are not sufficient alternative 
funding sources for a Programme of a similar size linking susta inable, climate-smart developments in small-scale 
fisheries and aquaculture with ecosystem-based approaches to th e management of critical coastal habitats. 
Considering the huge financial gap for projects improving coast al and marine conservation and relevant EbA 
approaches, the scope of needed funds is so significant that su bstantial funding from the GCF is necessary to 
leverage public funds from Germany, Sweden, France and other po tential donors as well as private funds provided by 
NGOs.  
Therefore, the GCF, as the central entity of International Clim ate Finance, is in a unique position to provide financing 
for the successful implementation of the Programme. By providin g and leveraging necessary amounts of funding from 
international climate finance sources to the Programme, the Pro gramme is expected to: 
 Strengthen ownership and country drivenness through the suppor t of national policies and cooperation with 
the responsible authorities; 
 Promote cross-sectoral broad approaches that promote a long-la sting paradigm shift towards a climate-
resilient development path for t he countries of the Programme r egion; and 
 Promote a sustainable develop ment benefit, which is expected f rom the EbA measures and activities.  
GCF funding will ensure that peopl e in one of the most vulnerab le regions significantly improve their resilience to 
manmade climate-related shocks and climate-induced diminishing of ecosystem services. I t will furthermore ensure 
that lessons learned from the Programme are replicated througho ut the region, and, using the BAF network of 
international NGOs and think tanks, even beyond the region on a  global scale. 
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approxim ately 1 page) 
 
Sustainability of sub-projects funded by the BAF has been an ov er-riding consideration during its design stage, 
especially for the definition o f eligibility criteria. Througho ut the entire BAF grant financing mechanism, long-term 
sustainability of sub-projects is one of the main points to be evaluated and is key to the approval of a sub-project.  
For this purpose, applicants must provide details on the exit s trategy of their proposed project, i.e. how the 
sustainable operations of all assets created and processes init iated by/under the project will be ensured upon 
completion of the project; detailing how and by whom the projec t measures will be continued after the end of the 
project, and also how they will be  funded. Regarding MPA manage ment, the applicant must ensure that potential 
funding gaps for effective MPA ma nagement will be closed in ord er to ensure financing of operation and maintenance 
(O&M). For all sub-projects and measures, budgets for O&M, as w ell as the sustainability of the participating 
institutions must be ensured. The question of how local capacit y is built in the context of the project is an important 
aspect of the methodology of sub-projects to be funded under th e proposed GCF Programme.  
Most of the measures eligible for funding are specifically targ eted to increase the sustai nability of the EbA, such as 
improved management of MPAs and LMMAs (see Output 1), which lea ds to tangible benefits for the vulnerable local 
communities through improvement of fish resources and more valu e added through a reduction in post-harvest 
losses as well as through improved processing. These benefits c ontribute to the creation of an enabling environment 
enhancing the willingness of the local communities to continue the sustainable management of the coastal and 
marine areas and EbA concepts.  
In addition, knowledge exchange,  a s  w e l l  a s  best practices and lessons learned about successful EbA and 
capacity building for local partners and communities to impleme nt EbA through their own capacities in the future 
(Output 3) will be included in the sub-project concepts. This o utput will support a consistent knowledge exchange at 
regional level, with the greater goal of supporting the diffusi on and use of experiences and lessons learned from 
implementation practice of the supported NGO sub-pro jects. This diffusion will be supported e. g. by p e r i o d i c a l


---
*Page 34*
---

B  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2. | PAGE 30 OF 59 
 
 
  
 regional workshops, as well as capacity building for partners t o overcome the capacity barriers for EbA. This 
knowledge exchange, which integrates the exchange between diffe rent local communities and their experiences with 
the EbA concepts, generally finds broad acceptance and is a pro ven and rich instrument to support continuity and 
dissemination of best practices.  
The active participation of the b enefiting communities  in the design of project measures as well as the 
Programme’s strategy to demand tangible beneficiary contributio ns (in cash or in kind) within their financial means 
will enhance the beneficiaries’ ownership, sense of responsibil ity and capacities for the sustainable use and 
maintenance of the funded investments. Therefore, a plan for th e roles and responsibilities of O&M and user right 
management is required as part of the project concepts.  
Private sector involvement  will be welcome, as the concepts of the sub-projects require a  strategy to ensure the 
sustainability of the sub-project interventions. Depending on t he project concept, possible options for tourism and 
support for small-scale private enterprises will be explored if  applicable. As an option, the involvement of the private 
sector (such as private fisheries, processing of marine product s, tourism) can be integrated into the calls for sub-
projects. 
On the national levels, the integration of the local adaptation  measures into the national adaptation strategies and 
adaptation action plans  will enhance the support of the l ocal initiatives. The support ed sub-projects will not be one-
off/ad hoc projects, as their integration into the national pol icies and strategies must be clearly demonstrated in the 
respective proposals, through support letters by the respective  authorities, and a clear explanation of how the project 
concepts are embedded into the national framework. In addition,  NGOs must demonstrate in their proposals if and 
how the sub-project interventions will influence local land use  policies and strategies as well as local investment 
planning and planning for MPAs and coastal management. Through close coordination between sub-projects and 
national authorities, best practices and lessons learned from m anagement of MPAs, LMMAs, and freshwater protect 
areas, EbA, rehabilitation of coastal ecosystems and sustainabl e fishery concepts will be fed back into national policy 
development and can be integrated into future national adaptati on action plans and thereby encourage replication.  
Regarding implementation of the sub-projects and monitoring of sustainability aspects , starting with the last year 
of the investment phase the beneficiaries typically have to cov er 100% of the O&M costs of the investment. To 
ensure proper operation of inves tments, the project will contin ue to provide management and  technical support during 
the first year of operation (one-year consolidation phase). Thi s phase also serves to start preparations for handing 
over O&M to user groups and MPA management authorities as well as public and private sector entities in charge of 
its management.  
The BAF will monitor sub-project implementation during project funding in line with its Operational and Grant 
Procedures Manuals. With the planned approach of the proposed G CF Programme, in combination with the BAF 
Grant Procedures and eligibility and evaluation criteria, finan cial and economic sustainability will be ensured through 
a rigorous selection procedure during grant-making and through capacity support to proponents for the elaboration of 
business plans, budgets and bankable documents. Non-objections for investment measures are only given based on 
a proof of concept for the techni cal and financial feasibility.


---
*Page 35*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 59 
   
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii)  Total amount  Currency  
30 million euro (€)  
GCF financial instrument Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing 
(i) Senior loans Enter amount  Enter  years Enter  years Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans Enter amount  Enter  years Enter  years Enter  % 
(iii) Equity Enter amount    Enter  % equity 
return 
 
(iv) Guarantees Enter amount  Enter  years   
(v) Reimbursable grants Enter amount     
(vi) Grants 30     
(vii) Result-based payments Enter amount    
(b) Co-financing information  
 Total amount  Currency  
25  million euro (€)  
Name of institution Financial 
instrument Amount Currency Tenor & 
grace Pricing Seniority 
Germany (BMZ via KfW)  Grant 25 million 
euro (€)  Enter  years 
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
      Options  Enter amount  Options  Enter  years 
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years 
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Click here to enter text.  Options  Enter amount  Options   Enter  years 
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
(not including  NGO 
contribution )  Amount Currency 
55 million euro (€)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) The GCF Programme will be embedded into the overall BAF-portfol io. Current 
contributions to the BAF amount to EUR 68.1 million with contri butions by the 
governments of Germany (EUR 55 .1 million), France (5 million EU R) and Sweden 
(EUR 8 million). Hence, the EUR 55 million GCF Programme will i ncrease the total 
B A F  v o l u m e  t o  a n  o v e r a l l  a m o u n t  o f  E U R  1 2 3 . 1  m i l l i o n ,  e x c l u d i n g  t h e  a d d i t i o n a l  
mandatory 25% contributions to the costs of sub-projects by sup ported NGOs.  
Contributions by NGOs are a requirement of the calls for propos als, as documented 
in the BAF Grant Procedures Manua l; a NGO’s minimum contributio n is 25% of total 
sub-project cost, either in kind or as direct co-financing. Thr ough matching funding 
for already committed donor funds for BAF sub-projects, NGOs ar e expected to 
contribute approximately 15.0 mi llion EUR to the current BAF-Po rtfolio. The GCF 
Programme would leverage additional NGO contributions to the am ount of EUR 
12.5 million (refer to Annex 4), t hereby increasing the total c ontributions by NGOs 
under the entire BAF to EUR 27.5 million.    
Commitment letters from NGOs cannot be provided at this stage, as the sub-
projects are still to be selected . However, without 25% NGO con tributions to the 
overall costs, sub-projects would not be elibible for approval.   
NGO contributions  provided through input of human resources, o ffice structures 
and technical input, but also as financial contributions, throu gh donation as well as 
from other donor contributions. These donations and donor contr ibutions to the 
NGOs foster the financial sustainability of the partners and th e overall sustainability 
of the sub-projects beyond the timeframe of the execution of BA F funds.


---
*Page 36*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 59 
   
 
 In kind contributions are expected from local communities, from  l o c a l  
administrations as well as from the population participating in  the sub-projects. 
Local administrations participate actively in the planning and implementation of 
protection measures and the sustainable management of coastal r esources. 
Depending on the specific sub-project measures, they provide wo rking time and 
infrastructure (for workshops; trainings etc., consultation pro cess with the local 
population); The local population provides labour inputs for pr otection measures, 
rehabilitation of ecosystems and management of locally managed protection areas 
(e.g. mangrove restoration is more suited to in-kind contributi ons from local 
populations than coral reef restoration, which is difficult to execute). 
Regarding disbursement, usually the disposition fund procedure applies at the BAF 
level. This implies advance payments from the BAF to the NGOs b ased on 4 – 6 
months forecasts of expenditures. To allow the BAF to fund thes e payments, it is 
proposed that GCF will disburse funds to the KfW in two tranche s (call by call) to 
the tune of 15 million EUR each . The funds will  be on-channeled  to the BAF 
accordin gly. 
C.2. Financing by component  
The following financing table by component includes GCF funding  (30 million EUR) and commitments from the BMZ 
via the AE (KfW) in the amount of 25 million EUR. Total Program me Cost amount to 55 million EUR. NGOs 
contributions amount to a total of 12.5 million EUR are reporte d in the last column to the right for information purposes 
only.   (see also Annex 4).  
Currency: million EUR 
Component Output Indicative 
cost 
million 
euro (€)  GCF financing Co-financing BMZ via 
KfW (AE)  Other 
Contributions 
from NGOs 
Amount 
million 
euro (€)  Financial 
Instrument Amount 
million euro 
(€) Financial 
Instrument  Grants  
million euro 
(€) 
Component 1: 
Funding 
window for 
protection and 
sustainable 
management of coastal resources 
relevant for EbA 
(mangroves, 
coral reefs, 
seagrass)  Protection 
and 
sustainable 
management of coastal resources 
relevant for 
EbA (mangroves, 
coral reefs 
seagrass) 30.0 16,0 Grants 14.0 Grants  
7.5 
Component 2: 
Funding 
window for 
rehabilitation of 
degraded 
coastal 
ecosystems 
relevant for EbA  Rehabilitation of 
degraded coastal 
ecosystems 
relevant for EbA  14.0 8.0 Grants 6.0 Grants  
3.5 
Component 3: 
Support to knowledge 
exchange and 
capacity building regarding 
appropriate and 
feasible EbA 
approaches*  Knowledge 
exchange and capacity 
building 
regarding appropriate and feasible EbA 
approaches  7.5 4.5 Grants 3.0 Grants  
1.5


---
*Page 37*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 59 
   
 
 Programme 
Management 
Cost (GCF: 
limited to 5% of 
GCF funding)  Click here to 
enter text.  
3.5 1.5 Grants 2.0 Grants  
      
Indicative total cost  (EUR) 55.0 30.0 25.0  12.5 
The Programme will fund three components, which are described i n detail in section B.3. The components are based 
on an EbA approach and mainly comprise the protection, sustaina ble management and re habilitation of coastal 
ecosystems (mangroves, coral reefs, and seagrass), related know ledge exchange, and capacity building. The total 
cost is indicatively split across the different components as f ollows:  
The final distribution of the funds for the three components de pends on the sub-projects selected in line with the 
criteria of specific calls for the Programme. Therefore, the di stribution of Programme funds to the three components is 
indicative at the current stage of preparation. During monitori ng and reporting to the GCF, the BAF will update and 
specify the cost structure further. However, the idea is to bal ance the budget between the components; hence 
deviations between the budget lines as presented above are not expected to exceed +/- 10%. 
The funding allocation by country is a very rough estimate as a n indication, made on the basis of potential for EbA 
sub-projects and ongoing measures of NGOs; the numbers will be reviewed on the basis of the final selection of sub-
projects, their location and funding volume (see Annex 17). The  following table mirrors an indicative estimation of a 
possible allocation of the project budget to the four countries  (GCF-Funding (EUR 30 Mio) plus co-funding (EUR 25 
million) minus a total of EUR 5 million for BAF management cost s and cross-cutting measures at Programme level 
which cannot be directly attributed to individual countries (bu dget line 3.4):   
 
 
  
 
   Total Costs GCF Contribution 
Mada gascar  11.8 million  6.49 million 
Mozambique  14.7 million  8.12 million 
South Africa  14.7 million 8.12 million 
Tanzania  8.8 million 4.87 million 
Total costs of sub-pro jects 50.0 million 27,6 million 
C.3 Capacity bui lding and technology dev elopment/transfer (max.  250 words, approx imately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer ? Yes ☒      No ☐ 
Capacity building and transfer of best practices regarding EbA measures form a crucial part of the Programme and 
are included as component 3.  
Capacity Building is carried out as an integral component of su b-projects, and  is therefore mainly implemented by 
the grantees (internationally recognized NGOs with regional and  local partners). Normally, CB is organized in the 
following ways:  
a. in-country tailor-made training courses (in-service training ) that address individuals or groups on specific 
topics; 
b. on-the-job training through twinning arrangements (among the  NGOs and with government partners) to 
provide institutional learning and sharing of best practices. I n the past, some NGOs included capacity 
building action plans of their partners as one element of their  overall project; 
c. Co-operation between larger international NGOs, providing ex pertise in knowledge transfer and 
management, and other NGOs, possibly acting at a regional / loc al level, in order to make sure that the 
required expertise is provided.  
Measures regarding capacity build ing will allow national and lo cal partners to overcome existing capacity barriers to 
EbA and to implement EbA on the local level through their own c apacities in future. Moreover, the  BAF requests 
cooperation among different sectors namely, environmental and s ocial organisations, which supports work across 
sectors and fields and encourages further co-operation Also, na tional authorities will benefit from capacity building 
activities and knowledge exchange The integration of relevant g overnment agencies in activities of component 3 will 
assure that best practices for EbA concepts will be shared on a  higher governmental level and can be considered in 
national climate adaptation strategies and action plans. 
The exchan ge of experiences and lessons learned from implementation practi ce by NGOs and similar local initiatives


---
*Page 38*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 59 
   
 
 at international, national and r egional level, e.g. periodical regional workshops, exchange visi ts, will foster the transfer 
of EbA concepts and technologies (e.g. regarding rehabilitation /restoration of mangroves and coral reefs). This will be 
ensured by international NGOs, which are integrated in internat ional research networks where suitable techniques 
are being discussed. Best practices resulting of the Programme can provide very valuable inputs and can be 
disseminated on a regional and global scale. 
In general,  trainings are guided by the following cycle: 1) pre-studies to identify most prevalent training needs among 
the respective target groups; 2) training schedules are tailore d to the needs of specific target groups with a view to 
provide support to and increase resilience of especially vulner able groups. 3) local trainings either implemented by 
staff of the project or qualified consultants. 4) evaluation of  training impact. Gender-specific needs are considered in 
all aspects of the design of the trainings. 
Capacity building, as part of Component 3, will also include sp ecific measures in order to enhance the role of women 
in the funded sub-projects (see Component 3) 
The estimated GCF funding amount for capacity building is 1.5 m illion EUR.  
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500  words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Climate Change Adaptation impacts:   
The Programme will deliver signifi cant impacts r egarding climat e change adaptation, thereby reducing the 
vulnerability of the coastal popu lations in the Programme regio n to climate change. GCF-funded BAF calls will 
specifically focus on the proposed EbA approaches, which aim to  strengthen the resilience of vulnerable coastal 
populations to climate change effects, such as floods, cyclones  and heavy rainfalls. With the given approach, the 
result areas addressed by the proposed Programme are: 
 Increase the resilience and enhance the livelihood of the most  vulnerable people, communities and regions;  
 Increase health and well-being and food security; and 
 Improve and secure ecosystem services from increasingly threat ened coastal ecosystems. 
Key achievements of the proposed GCF Programme implemented thro ugh BAF will be: 
 Vulnerable coastal populations will be able to reduce or avoid negative impacts of climate change through a 
stabilized provision of ecosystem services. Mangroves, salt mar shes, coral reefs, seagrass beds and beach 
vegetation are providing crucial services for EbA to climate ch ange.  
 Ecosystem services include coastal protection against floods an d soil erosion, and against potential weather 
hazards, maintaining water quality through nutrient cycling. In  addition, mangrove forests ensuring breeding 
and feeding habitats for fish stocks are a source of fodder, fo od, fuel, fibre, timber and medicines. Coral reefs 
host more than one-quarter of all marine fish species, while fi ltering water and providing high water quality.  
 Important marine and coastal areas will be protected and bette r managed, e.g. by supporting the adaptation 
of MPA management plans to climate change and by improving impl ementation of respective adaptation and 
conservation measures with a view to maintaining ecosystem serv ices for vulnerable coastal communities.  
 Development of value chains for sustainable use of coastal/mar itime resources to enhance resilience of the 
livelihoods of poor coastal populations, e.g. through supportin g sustainable integrated aquaculture, seaweed 
farming and other measures.  
The range of direct beneficiaries of ongoing sub-projects with a funding amount of EUR 2-4 million is between 5,000 
and 52,000 people, with an average of about 20,000. For the GCF  Programme a minimum threshold of 5,000 is 
proposed. Assuming the implementation of approximately 17 sub-p rojects with an average funding volume of close to 
EUR 3 million, that would result in a minimum of 85,000 direct beneficiaries. However, if the average number of 
beneficiaries turns out to be similar as for the existing BAF p ortfolio a total number of 340,000 direct beneficiaries can 
be expected. 50% of the direct beneficiaries are expected to be  women.  
Relative to the total population of the respective sub-project regions, the direct beneficiaries of the sub-projects will 
usually cover 5-10% of the total sub-project area population, d epending on sub-project area size and project 
circumstances (equal to approx. 0.4 % of the total coastal popu lation of the four countries). Indirect beneficiaries 
comprise the total coastal population dependent on ecos ystem services in the pro ject areas, which diffe rs significantl y


---
*Page 39*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 59 
   
 
 between the sub-projects. These indirect beneficiaries will ben efit from improved or secured ecosystem services. The 
exact number of direct and indirect beneficiaries will be known  after selection of sub-projects and be reported in 
annual progress reports to the GCF.  
The percentage of coastal population in the selected countries is reported in the national documentation to be 
between 25% and 66% of total population. According to this perc entage, we assume a total population living in 
coastal areas of the Programme  region of around 50 million peop le. The total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries in absolute terms and relative to the total coast al population of the project areas can only be specified 
after selection of the specific NGO proposals. The specific cli mate change impacts and direct and indirect 
beneficiaries will be clearly de scribed and substantiated in ev ery NGO proposal to the BAF. At this stage, therefore, 
only rough estimates based on similar projects in the region ar e possible. The BAF will report within the regular 
progress monitoring as well as w ith final impact monitoring on the indicator for the Programme.  
The selected countries represent four out of the ten contractin g parties to the Nairobi Convention for the Protection, 
Management and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environmen t of the WIO Region. Priorities for the 
programme of work for the Nairobi Convention include integrated  ecosystem-based management of marine and 
coastal ecosystems as well as adaptation to climate change to r educe vulnerability and build resilience26. The 
region’s significance with respect to conservation is especiall y notable for the Mozambique Channel, which has the 
highest diversity of corals in the Central, Northern and Wester n Indian Ocean.27  
Climate Change Mitigation impacts :  
The EbA focus of the GCF-funded BAF sub-projects implies the se lection of coastal and marine conservation sub-
projects with high potential for carbon sequestration. While th e Programme focus is on EbA, impacts on climate 
change mitigation may arise as significant co-benefits. They wi ll include:  
 The sequestration rate of important carbon sinks such as mangr oves and seagrass beds is estimated as 
two to four times higher than that of tropical forests. The glo bal annual blue carbon sequestration rate is 
about 53 million tons, of which 30% is generated by mangroves.28 Mangroves store, although this varies 
with geomorphology and coastal conditions,  around 1023 t of blu e carbon per ha in their biomass and in the 
soil. Even though the total land area of mangroves, coastal mar shes, and seagrasses is small compared to 
land in agriculture or forests, the carbon beneath these habita ts is substantial.  
 The savings of GHG emissions through improvements in subsisten ce fisheries of coastal communities e.g. 
support for methods for reducing “post-catch losses” through en ergy-efficient cooling chains. 
As with the adaptation impact, th e mitigation impact of every s ingle project (in tCO 2eq) will be est imated after 
selection of the specific NGO proposals, and communicated to GC F within the regular reporting activities. 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Potential for scaling up and replication  
The GCF-funded Programme through the BAF would – as a first ste p – shift the paradigm to sustainable practices 
regarding coastal and marine ecosystems in the geographic exten t of the financed sub-projects. Additionally, the 
Programme already includes, as one of its three outputs, the ex change of experiences and lessons learned from the 
implementation practice of NGOs and communities, which will fac ilitate upscaling of successful concepts and 
techniques throughout the entire region. With the proposed regi onal concentration of the envisaged GCF-funded BAF 
call, synergies will be generated  by coordinating the sub-proje cts to systematically cover the Programme region. The 
focus of the Programme on four countries in the WIO with simila r  m a r i n e  a n d  c o a s t a l  e c o s y s t e m s  a n d  c l i m a t e  
adaptation needs as well as similar socioeconomic structures wi ll make replication of experiences and best practices 
more realistic and feasible within the region.  
In addition, through its global scope of action and its collabo ration with international NGOs, the BAF is demonstrating 
a proven record of accomplishment in project implementation in the marine and coastal realm, including good 
partnership and collaboration with national governments, region al platforms and international research organizations. 
This asset facilitates replicability even on a global scale by linking local initiatives t o international NGOs and 
governmental and transboundary organizations. It thus promotes coordination across sectors, countries and regions 
and catal yzes a shift of the development pathwa ys of participatin g countries towards increased climate resilience in 
 
26 P. 2 of Progress report of the Executive Director of the ninth COP, 30 and 31 August 2018: 
http://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/25770/CP9. 4_Report_Executive_Director_EN.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y  
27 https://phys.org/news/2012-09-species-mozambique-channel-home-d iverse.html   
28 Blue Climate Solutions, 2014.


---
*Page 40*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 59 
   
 
 coastal zones and lower carbon emissions on a broader geographi c scale.  
As the BAF is designed to fund replication and scaling up of su ccessfully tested initiative s, it will use lessons learned 
from the tested EbA approaches to generate and disseminate know ledge.  
The GCF-funded Programme, with the  use of the BAF grant-funding  mechanism, can catalyze impacts beyond a one-
off project investment by:  
 Developing a high quality project pipeline and aggregating sma ll-scale budgets to larger requests for 
funding, thereby significantly reducing transaction costs for g lobal funding mechanisms;  
 Complementing multilateral projects by funding initiatives fro m local and regional civil society 
organizations, which are mainly small-scale initiatives without  sufficient structures to achieve funding and 
which would otherwise not be reached; and 
 Significantly leveraging funding from bilateral, multilateral and civil society development partners. 
In summary, all of the proposed measures are EbA-related. Altho ugh these will often be innovative within the specific 
project area, most are not, in principle, new. The main innovat ion leading to the paradigm shift is the grant funding 
mechanism itself, which allows the addressing and bundling of o n-the ground measures by local NGOs through the 
BAF as a global financial mechanism. Using a programmatic appro ach with an open call for proposals, the proposed 
Programme brings the intervention to scale, while at the same t ime drawing upon the experiences of highly capable, 
international and national implementing partners. NGOs supporti ng exchanges of lessons learned between project 
stakeholders allow the upscaling of innovative project approach es. Project proponents who demonstrated synergies 
with their own interventions or those from other stakeholders w ill be preferentially consi dered during sub-project 
selection. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
The GCF-funded Programme would shift the paradigm towards clima te-focused marine and coastal conservation 
projects creating awareness of the benefits of EbA approaches o n national and local levels. The BAF concept of 
partnership with NGOs helps to identify the potential for EbA w ithin marine and coastal conservation projects as well 
as the implementation of expedient measures (with co-benefits f or mitigation). Furthermore, it builds on the 
knowledge and experience of international NGOs in EbA approache s  i n  t h e  r e g i o n ,  w o r k i n g  w i t h  t h e  r e l e v a n t  
stakeholders on different levels.  
Therefore, the BAF provides an outstanding community of practic e, with a global network to exchange knowledge, 
innovative concepts and experiences across priority marine regi ons for EbA of mangroves, reefs and seagrass and 
sustainable approaches for coastal planning and management. In addition, the BAF collaborates with the IUCN as a 
technical advisor that can strengthen the envisaged paradigm sh ift by taking up and disseminating the lessons 
learned from the GCF-funded Programme. Adequate capacity buildi ng (see Outcome 3) will allow the partners to 
foster and implement EbA approaches through their own capacitie s and resources. With this approach, the 
awareness and knowledge of the design, implementation and maint enance of EbA measures at the community level 
can be enhanced significantly. Monitoring and evaluation of the  different project approaches by the BAF and the 
IUCN will assure the documentation of experiences and best prac tices, which will be integrated into the capacity 
building for all stakeholders. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
The Programme is directed at the creation of an enabling enviro nment for EbA approaches in marine and coastal 
ecosystems that will be sustained after Programme implementatio n by the local communities and national authorities. 
At the local level, the increasi ng vulnerability of coastal com munities to climate change will be reduced through 
adequate management of conservation areas (MPAs and LMMAs), and  the conservation and restoration of marine 
and coastal ecosystems. Public participation and local communit y involvement is an essential factor in contributing to 
the success of MPAs. Stakeholders will be involved right from t he beginning of the sub-project planning process, 
which is an important part of creating the expected benefits fr om EbA sub-projects. Enhancing existing national 
resource-based livelihoods, e.g. sustainable fisheries practice s, with value added to harvests as well as diversification 
of livelihoods, may reduce pressure on natural resources. Impro vement of the well-being and food security of the 
local (vulnerable) communities creates conducive conditions for  the sustained participation of the local actors in 
resilient development.  
The Programme will also create an enabling environment on the n ational scale of the participating countries through 
knowledge transfer about successful EbA approaches to governmen tal institutions and integration of best practices in 
the plannin g process for national adaptation policies. In this wa y, the experiences of the funded sub-pro jects will not


---
*Page 41*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 59 
   
 
 be limited to a small scale, but reflected in national strategi es for risk-prone areas.  
Contribution to regulator y framework and policies 
At the national level, all countries of the Programme region ha ve strategic adaptation plans and policies in place. 
Various efforts have been conducted at the national and subnati onal levels on climate change impacts and 
adaptation strategies (e.g. the World Bank supported PPCR). 
Since those plans will need to be updated regularly to improve the resilience of coastal populations to climate risks, 
the results and lessons learned, which will be systematized and  disseminated within the GCF-funded Programme, will 
contribute to the national planning and effective implementatio n of adaptation measures, including EbA approaches in 
marine and coastal ecosystems. Therefore, the Programme focused  on EbA has the potential to place mainstream 
climate change adaptation into policies and strategies for mari ne and coastal areas on a national, regional and global 
scale. 
With this potential for a paradigm shift outlined above, the Pr ogramme contributes to a development pathway of the 
participating countries towards an increased climate resilience  in coastal zones which is consistent with the national 
climate change adaptation stra tegies and action plans.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 p age) 
SDG 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
The Programme increases the resilience of the population in coa stal areas to extreme climate and natural hazards 
through improvement and conservation of services from coastal e cosystems. Negative impacts of climate change, 
such as cyclones, floods and coastal erosion, mostly affect the  poor population, who do not have the (financial) 
means to deal with weather shocks and are prone to losing their  living and income base (fishery, agriculture, tourism) 
from such events. Without protection through insurance, the poo r are the group most vulnerable to the effects of 
climate change. The Programme strengthens the risk-reducing cap acity of the poor. Fisheries management 
enhances productivity and stabilizes the income of fishers, lea ding to improved livelihoods and food security. 
SDG 2. End hunger, achie ve food security and  improved nutrition  and promote sustai nable agriculture 
About 95% of the world’s 50 million fishers live in developing countries. Fish is essential to the diet of many 
populations. It accounts for about 50% of the protein consumed in many least-developed countries. This applies also 
to the coastal populations of the Programme region, which depen d on fish as their main source of protein and 
therefore as key to their food security and nutrition. The GCF- funded Programme would increase the productive 
capacity and climate resilience of subsistence fisheries in a r egion where the population is vulnerable to climate 
change events through a better provision of ecosystem services.  
SDG 5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
During the project selection p rocess, the BAF will ensure that both men and women benefit from sustainable and 
climate-smart livelihood options in fisheries, aquaculture, tou rism, ecosystem restoration and sustainable 
management of coastal and marine resources. Women represent the  majority of the workforce in fish processing and 
marketing operations related to marine fisheries and marine aqu aculture. All submitted project proposals will be 
scrutinized regarding gender-sensitivity in the general project  concept. Proposed measures  will be gender-sensitive 
and promote the participation of women in decision-making proce sses within the framework of the Programme. 
Specific measures to enhance the role and opportunities of wome n in the scope of sub-proj ects will be included in 
Component 3, including a Guide to  Gender Mainstreaming (see B.2 ., Component 3 and G.2. Gender Assessment).  
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclus ive and sustainable economic gr owth, full and productive employment and 
decent work for all 
The target population of the EbA measures will profit from an i ncreased and/or secured provision of ecosystem 
services, e.g. income gains for fishers or employees in fish pr ocessing and the tourism sector . Small-scale fisheries in 
Africa employ over 95% of fishers and provide more than 90% of the fish consumed across the continent. As an 
example, in Mozambique, the fishery sector represented 8% of th e country’s gross domestic product in 2018.29 The 
planned measures will directly contribute to the recovery and s ustainability of fish stocks. Mangroves, coral reefs and 
seagrass beds are the most important coastal ecosystems for fis h, as they serve as spawning and breeding grounds.  
Many of these coastal areas are inhabited by impoverished and h ighly vulnerable communities, which will be 
specificall y targeted b y the Pro gramme. As a result of the adaptation measures, the resilience a gainst climate chan ge 
 
29 Club of Mozambique, 30.01.2019; https://clubofmozambique.com/n ews/mozambique-artisanal-fisheries-sector-posts-6-2m-in-revenue /


---
*Page 42*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 59 
   
 
 risks of these groups, including the risk of losing employment and main income sources, is expected to increase. 
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its imp acts by regulating emissions and 
promoting developments in renewable energy 
The Programme’s climate adaptation measures target the most vul nerable and poor in least developed countries, 
addressing especially Indicator 13.1 “Strengthen resilience and  adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and 
natural disasters in all countries” (see section “Impact Potent ial”). 
SDG 14. Protection and sustainable use of oceans, seas and mari ne resources  
The focus of the GCF-funded Programme is EbA in coastal and mar ine areas. Ecosystems and their services will be 
used in order to reduce climate change-related risks for vulner able coastal populations. Coral reefs, seagrass and 
mangroves offer an effective protection against erosion in coas tal regions as they reduce the energy of waves. They 
are also an important attraction for tourism and serve as breed ing and feeding grounds for fish stocks. The proposed 
measures improve the sustainable management of MPAs and LMMAs a s well as of broader coastal management, 
and reduce pressures on marine an d coastal ecosystems within an d outside of protected areas. 
The selected countries are contracting parties of the Nairobi C onvention for the Protection, Management and 
Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the WIO Re gion. Priorities for the programme of work for the 
Convention include ecosystem-based management of marine and coa stal ecosystems as well as adaptation to 
climate change to reduce vulnerability and build resilience.30  
SDG 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrest rial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, 
combat desertification, and halt a nd reverse land degradation a nd halt biodi versity loss 
Coastal ecosystems build the interface between marine and terre strial living, and therefore are closely interconnected 
to near-shore terrestrial ecosystems. This means that changes t o or destruction of marine habitats also affect coastal 
ecosystems (changes in nutrient s, sediments, m angroves needing freshwater), lead to loss of mangroves and 
seagrasses, which in turn leads to sedimentation of coral reefs . A loss of coral reefs leads to decreased storm 
buffering and therefore to erosion, which in turn negatively af fects terrestrial habitats. Mangrove forests support one 
of the highest biodiversity values in the world. With its focus  on the protection and sustainable management of 
coastal and near-shore marine ecosystems through EbA-based meas ures, the Programme directly contributes to the 
conservation of terrestrial ecosystems and the halting of biodi versity losses. 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The selection of the countries to be supported by this GCF-fund ed Programme was guided by criteria including the 
vulnerability of the country and the beneficiary groups to clim ate change. As outlined in the baseline (see B.1.), the 
four countries and their coastal population are highly suscepti ble to adverse effects of climate change, and 
demonstrate at the same time imm ense financial and technical di fficulties in coping with these effects.  
Selection criteria include:  
(i) The country’s vulnerability to adverse effects of climate c hange (measured by internationally accepted 
indicators like the University of Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index (GAIN);   
(ii) The principal need for the implementation of climate chang e adaptation programmes and measures, 
confirmed in natio nal strategies and policies; and 
(iii) The relevance of ecosystem s ervices from coastal and mari ne ecosystems for the socio-economic 
development and vulnerability of  the coastal population of the countries (measured by existence of 
significant mangroves, coral reefs and other coastal and marine  ecosystems). 
The countries in the Programme r egion strongly fulfill these se lection criteria. Especially-low-income countries like 
Madagascar, Tanzania and Mozambique are most threatened by clim ate change. According to the climate 
projections for the selected countries, future trends indicate that climate change effects (see B.1.) will increase in the 
next decades. GAIN summarizes a country's vulnerability to clim ate change and other global challenges compared to 
its readiness to improve resilience. According to this tool, Ma dagascar, Mozambique, Kenya and Tanzania are 
among the top three most vulnerable and least ready countries i n the world. All of these countries outline in their 
climate change policies, necessary adaptation measures in their  coastal regions due to the high vulnerability of the 
population.  
 
30 P. 2 of Progress report of the Executive Director of the ninth COP, 30 and 31 August 2018 : 
http://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/25770/CP9. 4_Report_Executive_Director_EN.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y


---
*Page 43*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 59 
   
 
 The GCF-funded Programme would enhance the adaptive capacity of  the coastal and marine ecosystems of the four 
selected countries through the proposed EbA approach. The selec tion criteria for sub-projects funded under a 
specific GCF-Programme call for proposals will ensure that fund ed measures will enhance ecosystem services that 
contribute to reducing climate change-related risks for vulnera ble coastal communities. 
 
Due to the status of Madagascar, Mozambique and Tanzania as lea st developed countries, the national budgets of 
these three targeted countries are extremely limited and not ev en sufficient to address the basic needs of the 
countries’ populations. 
The focus of the sub-projects is the funding of public goods su ch as conservation and sustainable use of relevant 
coastal ecosystems in order to strengthen the provision of ecos ystem services. Local communities consist of mainly 
poor populations, which depend highly on ecosystems and their s ervices, and which are strongly affected by climate 
change events. It is difficult for them to provide their own fi nancial resources for climate adaptation measures. The 
recent cyclones in Mozambique in 2019 demonstrated how the poor  population is affected by climate change effects, 
in many cases losing the entire basis of their livelihood, when  governments do not have the financial resources to 
assist affected fam ilies in rebuilding their existence.  
As adaptation needs are growing in these countries, they will n ot be able to finance EbA measures from public 
sources; the countries therefore highly depend on external fund ing for climate adaptation. South Africa has a higher 
income and national budget, however, due to the importance of t he marine and coastal ecosystems that partly cross 
its state boundaries, the country  offers significant opportunit ies for transboundary projects.  
Funds from private sources are not expected as there is no fina ncial benefit for invest ors. If applicable, and 
depending on the project context, possible options for tourism and support for small-scal e private enterprises will be 
explored in order to enhance the sustainability of project inte rventions. Therefore, and as an additional option, the 
involvement of the private sector (such as private fisheries or  eco-tourism) can be integrated into the calls for 
proposals.  
The selected countries do not have technical capacities or know ledge regarding EbA approaches and methodologies 
for their implementation. Theref ore, the sub-projects will inco rporate expertise and capacity building for implementing 
entities on EbA activities and implementation, in participation  with local communities as well as local and national 
governmental authorities.  
In summary, due to the development status of the Programme coun tries, the high proportion of poor population, their 
tight fiscal situation and their vulnerability to climate chang e, we recommend to finance the Programme on a grant 
basis, as neither governments nor the local com munities will be  able to pay debt service for the needed funds. We 
deem the proposed financial structure as adequate and reasonabl e in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
which are promoting EbA approaches in order to reduce the vulne rability of coastal populations and avoid negative 
impacts of climate change th rough ecosystem services. 
 
D.5. Country ownershi p (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The support of the NDAs for the proposed Programme is secured ( see below – Role of NDA). Therefore, the 
Programme is well aligned with, and makes a significant contrib ution to, national adaptation strategies of the selected 
countries as set out in key poli cy and strategic documents (see  B.1. for details):  
Madagascar: To cope with climate change risks and adapt climate sensitive s ectors and regions, Madagascar has 
set up an ambitious policy framework. The proposed Programme is aligned with the adaptation prioritie s highlighted 
in the NDC and the NAPA. The NAPA contains a set of planned act ivities, related to EbA in coastal and marine 
areas, which coincide with measures which are eligible for fund ing within the proposed Programme, such as 
improved management of sustainable fisheries management, mangro ve reforestation, seagr ass rehabilitation and 
rehabilitation of beach vegetatio n, which fit in the context of  the national priorities and strategies and contribute to the 
achievement of climate adaptation objectives.   
Mozambique: Climate adaptation strategies in Mozambique, with its extensive  coastline and high vulnerability to 
climate change-related risks give priority to coastal zones and  actions on coastal protection, including forest 
restoration, rehabilitation of dunes and mangroves, actions to sensitize and disseminate good practices in coastal 
communities (NAPA; 2007), as well as an integrated coastal zone  management approach for fisheries, coastal and 
marine ecosystem management, coa stal and marine protection, mar ine parks and tourism. The National Climate 
Change Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy proposes actions to i ncrease the resilience of fisheries, e.g. regeneration 
and protection programmes for the mangroves, algae and seaweeds  associated with potential carbon capture and 
storage (‘blue carbon’).  
South Africa: The Adaptation Strate gy includes measures related specificall y to EbA: communit y-based adaptation,


---
*Page 44*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 59 
   
 
 conservation agriculture and clim ate-smart agriculture (includi ng forestry and fisheries). The EbA concept for fisheries 
management is designed to build greater resilience in the fishe ries sector by securing existing fisheries and 
biodiversity and assisting the recovery of impacted resources a nd whole ecosystems. It furthermore includes 
guidelines for municipality planning around coastal measures to  ensure nursery habitats for prawns and fish are 
maintained and coastal ecosystems are protected to buffer again st impacts of storm surges (NAP; 2016).  
Tanzania:  The coastal and marine environment is the second highest prior ity for climate adaptation. Tanzania is 
planning a number of marine and coastal environment management programmes including mangrove reforestation 
as well as conservation of coastal resources. Additional measur es are: elimination of destructive fishing practices and 
overfishing; reduction of pollution and damaging extraction; pr oper management of salt production and seaweed 
farming,; coastal ecosystem monitoring; restoration of degraded  habitats e.g., beach nourishment, vetiver grass 
planting, mangrove re planting, stimulation of coral reefs growt h; and the establis hment of MPAs.  
Alignment with e xisting policies - Conclusion:  
All four countries proposed for the GCF Programme have a strong  focus on and commitment to coastal and marine 
conservation within their national strategies, including their NDCs and National Climate Strategies and NAPAs. In 
addition, the proposed countries (see B.1.) participate in the Nairobi Convention and the Wo rld Bank Initiative PPCR.  
There is outstanding momentum towards ownership of and attentio n to the proposed Programme among the 
stakeholders of the countries participating in the Programme. A ll four governments are showing the highest interest in 
and commitment to the GCF-funded Programme, as all of them stro ngly need financial and technical support for EbA-
based measures in coastal and marine ecosystems already envisag ed within their National Adaptation Plans. 
For the selected Programme countries the GCF Country Work Progr ammes were not yet available at the time of 
Programme development. The “GCF Consolidated Country and Entity  Work Programme” (Protocol from the Meeting 
of the GCF Board, February 2018) provides orientation for the e laboration of GCF Country Work Programmes. GCF 
organized in 2016 a structured dialogue for Africa which allowe d countries to articulate their priorities. Coastal 
infrastructure, coastal ecosystems and policy frameworks for co astal management came out as one of five priorities.  
KfW – Accredited Entity 
By following its internal rules, policies and procedures, KfW a s Accredited Entity ensures the Programme’s 
compliance with GCF’s standards  in line with the Accredited Mas ter Agreement between the GCF and the KfW. 
The KfW is Germany’s public Promotional Bank, and with a balanc e sheet of 485 billion EUR (2018) and an annual 
funding volume of over  75.5 billion EUR (201 8), it is one of th e largest development banks in the world. On behalf of 
the German Government,  particularly the Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and D evelopment (BMZ), the 
KfW through its sector Development Bank administers Germany’s o fficial Financial Cooperation in about 70 
developing and transition countries worldwide.  
The Development Bank sector of the KfW has a long record of fin ancial cooperation with all four countries of the 
Programme, with a portfolio dating back to 1965. Currently, the  KfW has an ongoing portfolio in these countries in the 
natural resource management, water, health, energy, financial a nd governance sectors. The interdisciplinary teams 
from KfW Headquarters as well as from the local KfW offices in the Programme region have profound knowledge and 
technical expertise regarding the institutional settings and pr ocedures for programmes and projects in the natural 
resource management sector and maintaining relationships with r elevant national partners , which will facilitate 
smooth implementation.  
The KfW provides oversight and backstopping services, as well a s technical advice through experienced country 
desk managers, sector experts and engineers. Sub-projects to be  financed under the GCF Programme will be 
developed by international and local NGOs in cooperation with t he local authorities and local stakeholders. The BAF 
will evaluate, assess and select proposals,  applying the well-e stablished and proven management capacity of the 
KfW.  
Blue Action Fund – Executing Entity 
Within a very short time, the BAF was fully operational and suc cessfully managed to establish its grant-making 
mechanism. Within its first year, the BAF implemented two open calls for proposals, and a third call followed in early 
2019. The BAF has begun to implement sub-projects resulting fro m one restricted start-up call as well as from two 
open calls for proposals, and is currently selecting proposals from a third call. Currently, seven sub-projects are being 
implemented and eight sub-projects are in the pipeline; up to t wo additional calls are planned for a GCF-funded 
Programme in 2019/2020. 
The BAF is already working in a highly efficient manner, with a  lean management structure and highly qualified staff, 
yet it is constantly aiming to i ncrease its efficiency. It esti mates that by the time it is fully operational it will achieve a 
ratio of total administrative expenses to total expenses of les s than 10% (which is well below international standards


---
*Page 45*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 59 
   
 
 for nature conservation foundations); total administrative expe nses also include expenses for knowledge exchange, 
studies and capacity building.  
The BAF is very well integrated into the network of internation al think tanks and research institutes working with 
marine and coastal ecosystems and their interrelation with clim ate change and its effects, as well as adaptation 
needs. This is key to the evaluation of project proposals and t heir monitoring and evaluation. With technical support 
from the IUCN, the BAF provides the highest expertise in the fi eld of coastal and marine ecosystem services and EbA 
concepts.  
The BAF supports national and inte rnational NGOs. Its approach is not to become a new actor implementing ocean 
conservation but rather a new financial partner for NGOs that a re successfully working in this field – enabling them to 
redouble their efforts with additional funding and to dissemina te experiences, best practices and innovative 
approaches on a global scale.  
 
National Designated Author ity and GCF Focal Points  
The Programme has been discussed with the NDAs of the participa ting countries. The GCF focal points for the four 
participating countries have received the concept note and been  asked for comments, for which purpose they shared 
the document with relevant sector ministries. The concept notes  detailed the national approval processes of the 
participating countries. As a result of this consultation proce ss, no-objection letters were issued by the participating 
countries.  
The GCF-funded Programme is based on an open approach to sub-pr oject proposals. By definition, the exact project 
areas and project communities will only be known once a grant s ub-project has been selected. Each NGO proposal 
must include an endorsement letter from the relevant national a uthority in the respective beneficiary country that 
documents the embeddedness of the proposed project measures int o the country’s policies and strategies. 
All NGOs require proven competence and a successful track recor d in the relevant country in implementing projects 
aligned with national strategies and policies in the coastal an d marine sector. They have usually been operating in a 
given project area for years and therefore have well-establishe d relationships with the targeted coastal communities. 
Participatory development will be one of their trademarks, and they will demonstrate key competencies that 
safeguard the concept and ensure implementation of their projec ts is closely aligned with the needs of local and 
national stakeholders.  
Civil Society Organizati ons and Stakeholders  
To ensure civil soci ety participation, sub- projects will have t o provide information on community engagement and how 
they ensure that relevant instit utions, groups and local commun ities are involved in planning and implementation, as 
well as detailing what stakeholders will be able to change thro ugh successful implementation of the project. The role 
of local administrations in the implementation of the project m ust be described. In  addition, a stakeho lder analysis will 
characterize the stakeholders and provide information on the nu mber of households/people that will benefit from the 
project, as well as the extent to which communities depend on c oastal and marine resources for their livelihoods. The 
analysis will explain how the project will impact on their live lihoods and on food security.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximatel y 1 page)  
 
Rationale for Financial Structure and Grant Funding 
With the proposed EUR 30 million  from the GCF, the KfW will be able to leverage additional funds amounting to EUR 
25 million as co-financing contributions from the German Govern ment / BMZ. Furthermore, NGOs will be required to 
contribute an additional EUR 12. 5 million, either as in-kind or  direct co-financing contributions, which will further 
increase the efficiency of the GCF funds. All proposals for sub -projects have to demonstrate the availability of 
sufficient resources for operation and maintenance to ensure th e sustainability of the sub-projects after financing from 
the GCF ends.  
All sub-projects will focus on eco system services, which are ot herwise not financed from public sources. Due to 
insufficient fiscal budgets and the need to cover basic social and economic priorities of the countries, financial 
resources for climate change adaptation from national budgets a re extremely limited and hinder the governments of 
the Programme countries in implementing adequate EbA approaches . Due to fiscal shortages, partner governments 
are hardly in a position to take out loans, which would add to their foreign debt burden. Therefore, GCF co-funding of 
the proposed Programme would make a difference to the selected countries, as they will be a ble to implement their 
climate adaptation strategies in vulnerable coastal areas. Gran t funding is also justified, as the primary focus of the 
sub-pro jects is the fundin g of public goods such as conservation and sustainable use of relevant coast al ecos ystems


---
*Page 46*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 59 
   
 
 in order to increase the adaptive capacities of coastal – mostl y poor – populations. There is no crowding out of private 
sector investments, as private capital flow in the proposed EbA  measures is not expected. T he grants will be carefully 
tailored regarding efficiency, with a view to facilitating the implementation of a maximum of EbA measures and 
impacts (see below). NGOs will demonstrate possible additional private sector involvement in their proposals, as the 
concepts of the sub-projects require a strategy to ensure the s ustainability of the project interventions. We therefore 
deem the proposed financial structure as adequate in order to a chieve the proposal’s objectives. 
The BAF through its grant-making mechanism is a flexible vehicl e specialized in financing and managing marine and 
coastal projects in developing countries. Its funding and opera tional mechanisms are well established. The foundation 
will be able to manage projects w ith budget sizes ranging from 2-5 million EUR in line with GCF performance criteria. 
Using BAF’s grant-making mechanism and the institutional networ k of NGOs, which already have planning, 
procurement and implementation systems in place, is a cost-effi cient approach for the ut ilization of GCF funds for 
climate change adaptation measures.  
The BAF, supported by an independent expert group from the IUCN , will critically review th e appropriateness of the 
design of submitted proposals for effective achievement of proj ect objectives. Economic and financial efficiency is 
one of the key evaluation criteria for selection of project pro posals.  
The BAF grant mechanism itself, with its lean management struct ure and its continuous efforts toward keeping 
administrative cost at a low lev el, is a cost-efficient funding  mechanism for small-scale projects for climate adaptation.  
Economic Value of Coastal and Marine Ecosystems 
The resources and services of marine and coastal ecosystems are  of high economic value. On a global scale, 
services of coral reefs are estimated at 375 billion USD each y ear.31 Mangroves have been estimated to provide at 
least 1.6 billion USD per year in  ecosystem services worldwide.32 WWF and Boston Consulting Group estimated the 
WIO region’s total ocean/marine asset base conservatively to be  at least 333.8 billion US D, derived from direct 
outputs from the ocean (e.g. fisheries, mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass), services supported by the ocean (e.g. 
marine tourism) and adjacent benefits associated with the coast lines (e.g. carbon sequestration). The Gross Marine 
Product (GMP) 33 is the ocean’s annual economic value. In the WIO, the total GM P is estimated at 20.8 billion USD 
(2015). Given that several of the countries of the WIO are amon g the poorest in the world, the ocean's contribution 
plays a significant role in alle viating poverty. Of critical im portance are the food and livelihood benefits that coastal 
and marine ecosystems provide but which are not captured in con ventional economic analysis. In Africa, small-scale 
fisheries, which are heavily dependent on intact coastal and ma rine ecosystems, employ over 95% of fishers, and 
provide more than 90% of the fish consumed across the continent . As an example, in Mozambique, small-scale 
fisheries contributed 8% of the country’s GDP in 2018.34 
Costs and Benefits from Climate Change Adaptation 
Compared to traditional infrastructure investments for coastal protection (e.g. construction of protection walls), EbA 
approaches not only reduce the risks of the effects of climate change, but also reduce the vulnerability of the coastal 
communities and are therefore highly effective in reducing clim ate change-related risk. In addition, EbA approaches 
are more cost efficient than traditional infrastructure measure s and have lower maintenance costs (see Annex 3). 
Estimations on costs and benefits from Climate Change Adaptatio n confirm the additional value of EbA measures, as 
they deliver a set of ecosystem services, which include not onl y the reduction of risks of climate change but also the 
improvement of livelihood through income generation and food se curity as well as benefits derived from climate 
mitigation. A study for coastal areas in the Caribbean35 compiled a comprehensive inventory of local adaptation 
measures, many of which span both climate adaptation and econom ic development. For the cost-benefit analysis, the 
benefit is calculated as sum of averted loss and any additional  revenues. Each adaptation measure is plotted on the 
adaptation cost curve, ranging from the most cost-efficient on the left of the curve to the least cost-efficient measures 
on the right. It demonstrates that cost-efficient measures are mostly related to EbA measures (see Figure 11 and  
Annex 3).  
The cases presented in Annex 3 refer to regions that are expose d to coastal flooding and storm surge, which are 
expected to increase with future climate change. The effects of  climate change are very similar to those occurring in 
the Pro gramme re gion. The results of the cost-benefit-ratio anal ysis can therefore be assumed as indicative for the 
 
31 IUCN; Wong et al., 2014 
32 https://oceanconference.un.org/coa/SustainableFisheries 
33 Obura, D. et al., 2017. Reviving the Western Indian Ocean Econ omy: Actions for a Sustainable Future - Summary. WWF Internatio nal, 
Gland, Switzerland. 20pp. 
34 www.clubofmozambique.com ; see news, dated 31.1.2019 . 
35 Swiss RE: Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility; 2010.


---
*Page 47*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 59 
   
 
 Programme region, too.   
 
 
Figure 11: Swiss RE: Enhancing the Climate Risk and Adaptation Fact Base for the Caribbean, 2010, p.19.  
Main results of the case studies are demonstrated in the graph above (Antigua and Barbuda case; please see also 
Annex 3):  
(1) the cost-benefit ratio (CBR) of mangrove planting and of re e f  r e v i v a l  ( C B R  >  0 . 1 )  i s  m u c h  l o w e r  t h a n  t h a t  o f  
infrastructure measures, such as coastal stilts or sea-walls (C BR > 5); 
(2) Mangrove planting and reef r evival are under the most cost- efficient measures identified; 
(3) The CBR of mangrove planting and reef revival is far below the threshold of 1.5, which is defined as the line for 
measures with net economic benefits. 
A study on valuation of ecosystem services of mangroves in the Zambezi delta of Mozambique (WWF 2017, see 
annex 3) resulted in the following yield figures: i) USD 2.240/ ha/year for direct use (charcoal and poles production) 
and a total of USD 26,600 for indirect use (coastal protection,  habitat value for fish, carbon sequestration). This 
compares very favourably with ref orestation or rehabilitation c osts for mangrove forests (see below). This illustrates 
that the value of restoration projects for mangroves but also c oral reefs can be enormous. They represent low cost 
and site-specific alternatives t o traditional ‘grey’ adaptation  measures.  
EbA measures  in coastal and marine ecosystems are of increasing importance in climate adaptation strategies. As 
people are at the core of EbA, it is crucial to engage affected  communities in designing respective EbA measures, 
ensuring not onl y the suitabilit y but also the sustainability o f the adaptation strategies.36  
Efficiency and effectiveness are key evaluation criteria applie d by BAF and KfW to assess and monitor sub-projects 
before, during and after implementation. For ensuring the effec tiveness of the proposed concepts and measures to 
be financed, the criteria of the Draft Appraisal Matrix in Anne x 23 will apply during project selection. Quantitative full- 
fledged cost-benefit analysis is not required from the NGOs as this is not suitable for this type of sub-projects. 
However, during project appraisal and selection a rigorous asse ssment of costs in relation to expected impacts/ 
benefits will be performed. Minimum thresholds for impacts are defined in individual calls for proposals. Reasonable 
thresholds appear 5,000 direct beneficiaries per pro ject and 100,000 ha protected area per pro ject. Assumin g total 
 
36 Evaluation, Cost-Benefit and C ost-Effectiveness-Analysis of Ec osystem-based Adaptation measures in Vietnam; (ELAN, 2015; Reid , 
2016).


---
*Page 48*
---

D  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 59 
   
 
 average costs of EUR 3 million for a sub-project the following upper cost thresholds can be derived: maximum total 
costs per beneficiary: EUR 600.0037, maximum total costs per ha coastal ecosystem under improved m anagement: 
EUR 30.00. Furthermore the maximum share of indirect costs is s et at 10%. For some specific measures cost 
benchmarks will be applied, based on cost data of the current B AF portfolio, e.g. for mangrove reforestation (EUR 
3,000/ha) and mangrove rehabilitation through assisted natural regeneration and planting of wildlings (EUR 250/ha).  
No strict thresholds for cost effectiveness can be applied sinc e the sub-projects are too diverse in terms of 
requirements and planned activities38. Instead, sub-project-specific assessment of budgeted costs (i ncluding 
adequacy checks of unit costs,  bill of quantities and proposed overheads, such as staff and travel costs) with planned 
measures and impacts is performed. As an input for this analysi s, comparison of costs with similar projects will be 
carried out during the appraisal.BAF, supported by independent experts and IUCNwill sele ct submitted proposals 
based on their economic and financial effectiveness and efficie ncy.  
EbA measures such as coastal management and protection and rest oration of ecosystems are public services that do 
not generate direct cash flow for the public authorities or the  implementing entities. As such, there is no financial 
return on investment to be expected from the sub-projects. As m ainly environmental and social benefits from an 
increased provision of ecosystem  services will prevail, grant-f inancing of these measures can be justified. In 
conclusion, while the Programme bears economic benefits, none o f the planned outputs entails significant revenue 
generation or cost recovery through payments from the beneficia ries to the government or to the implementing 
agencies (NGOs). Any loan repayment from benefits generated by the Programme is therefore assumed to be 
impossible. 
Financial sustainability beyond th e life of sub-projects has be en an over-riding consideration during the design of the 
BAF grant-making mechanism and the definition of project eligib i l i t y  a n d  a p p r a i s a l  c r i t e r i a .  T h e  p l a n n e d  E b A  
measures within the GCF Programme are public sector activities (e.g. protection and management of MPAs and 
LMMAs and coastal management) for public goods in nature, and w ill not themselves generate cash flow for public 
authorities. The fun ded projects will bear mainly ecological an d socio-economic benefits. Nevertheless, they are 
designed in a way to maximize sustainability, for example by an choring them within existing governmental institutions 
(nat ion al  and local ) as w ell as local co mmunit ie s an d NGO s,  so that they are not dependent on ongoing external 
support. Benefits generated by projects are used to cover opera tional costs wherever possible and to ensure the 
sustainability of proje ct measures and activities. In the last year of project implementation, the funding of projects will 
be reduced and in this transition phase O&M funds will have alr eady been borne by the project stakeholders (local 
communities and NGOs, governmental institutions). The project a pplicants have to provide details on the exit strategy 
of the sub-projects (see B.6.). 
Best available technologies and best practices regarding EbA ap proaches in marine and coas tal ecosystems will be 
used in the scope of the Programme. International available kno wledge and state-of-the-art EbA measures, available 
in international NGOs, will be co nnected with knowledge from th e local target communities, which will be integrated in 
the concepts of sub-projects. The BAF, supported by an independ ent expert group from the IUCN, will critically 
review the appropriateness of the design of submitted project p roposals regarding technical concepts, innovative 
character and effective achievement of project objectives. The BAF has a large funding scope, connecting 
international-level organizations with the grass-root level, as  well as NGOs with governmental organizations, with the 
aim of working across sectors and national boundaries. This mea ns that the operational range of ongoing measures 
is enlarged, knowledge exchange is fostered, and climate change  adaptation tools and mechanisms are 
mainstreamed. 
 
 
 
37Assuming total costs of sub-project of EUR 3 million and define d minimum size of target group of 5,000 ; however, for achievin g full marks 
under this indicator, 20,000 beneficiaries have to be supported , eqalling a total cost of EUR 150/beneficiary  
38 If sufficient cost data are available for the second call of pr oposals of  the Programme similar benchmarks could be developed  for other 
measures, e.g. restoration of coral reefs or see grass meadows.


---
*Page 49*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 59  
   
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives  
☐ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development  
  E.2. Core indicator targets  
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in section A.  
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cuttin g only) Annual not applicable  
Lifetime not applicable 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO 2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) (a) Total project financing _____    Choose an item.     
(b) Requested GCF amount  _____   Choose an item.  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  _____   t CO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO 2eq (d = a / c) _____    Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO 2eq removed 
(e = b / c) _____    Choose an item.  / t 
CO 2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) (f) Total finance leveraged  _____    Choose an item.  
(g) Public source co-financed _____    Choose an item.  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  _____    Choose an item.  
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) _____    
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  _____   
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) _____   
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  Direct ~minimum of 85,000; 340,000 likely  
50% female 
Indirect Indirect beneficiaries comprise the total coastal population 
dependent on ecosystem services in the project areas, which 
differs significantly between the sub-projects. Number of indir ect 
beneficiaries will be known afte r selection of sub-project prop osals 
and reported about in annual progress reports to the GCF. 
50% of indirect beneficiaries are women 
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17.  
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) Direct Estimate for direct beneficiaries: 5-10% of the project areas o f the 
funded sub-projects (50% being women), equal to approx. 0.4 % of the total coastal population of the four countries (indicati ve 
estimate
). 
Indirect  Number of indirect beneficiaries will be known and reported ab out 
after selection of sub-pro jects.  
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.


---
*Page 50*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 59  
   
 
 E.3. Fund-level impacts  
 
Expected Results Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target Assum-
ptions Mid-
term  Final  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable people, communities 
and regions A1.2 Number of 
males and females benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc.)  Household 
Surveys, Monitoring Reports from 
BAF; Mid-term 
review and 
final evaluation 
reports 
 0 men 
0 women   50,000 men,  
50,000 women 
direct beneficiaries (estimate; tbc at mid-
term review) 
  
A2.0 Health and well-
being, and food and 
water security A2.1 number of 
males and females 
benefitting from access to health 
care, food or water 
and overall well-being Household 
surveys, 
Monitoring 
Reports from 
BAF; Mid-term review and final evaluation 
reports 
 0 men 
0 women
  30,000 men,  
30,000 women 
direct beneficiaries 
(estimate; tbc at mid-term review) 
  
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change A3.1 Number of 
physical assests 
made more resilient to climate variablility 
and change, 
considering human benefits Rehabilitation 
records, 
contracts; 
photographs; 
Monitoring 
Reports from 
BAF; Mid-term 
review and final evaluation reports 
 0 
commu-
nities 
(with 
infra-structure) 10 40 communities with 
infrastructure (100,000 men & 100,000 women as direct beneficiaries (estimate; tbc at mid-
term review) 
  
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem services A4.1 Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems protected and 
stregnthened in 
response to climate variability and 
change Mapping of 
areas, legal 
demarcation of 
new areas, 
surveys, 
photographs, 
Monitoring 
Reports from 
BAF; Mid-term 
review and final evaluation reports 
 0 ha
 3,00
0 ha 28, 000 ha of coastal and marine 
ecosystems 
(mangroves, coral 
reefs, seagrass) 
(a) newly protected 
and (b) protected 
and under more 
effective 
management (measured with adequate methods, 
e.g. METT or 
others) (“X” tbd in the concepts of the funded sub-projects) 
 Activities 
foster the 
population’s 
mobilization 
for protection 
and restoration activities, 
community-
based management of MPAs and 
sustainable 
fisheries.
 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes  
 
Expected Outcomes  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term ) Final


---
*Page 51*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 59  
   
 
   A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate-responsive 
planning and 
development  A5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation   Revised 
planning 
documents, 
new 
legislation or 
regulation. 
Annual 
Reports from 
sub-projects;   
Mid-Term 
and Final 
Monitoring 
Reports  
 
 0 1  8 Capacity 
development with 
competent 
authorities will 
result in 2 
improved systems 
in each of the 
countries.  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks A7.2 Number of males 
and females reached by 
[or total geogrpahic 
coverage of] climate-
related early warning 
systems and other risk 
reduction measures 
established/strengthene
d  Household 
Surveys; 
Annual  
Reports from 
sub-projects;   
Mid-Term 
and Final 
Monitoring 
Reports  
 
 0 10.000 200.000 Capacity-building 
and outreach 
activities foster the 
adoption of EbA 
approaches by the 
local communities; 
National 
institutions and 
policies provide 
ongoing support to 
the approach, 
tools, instruments 
and strategies 
developed by the 
sub-projects


---
*Page 52*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 59  
   
 
  
39 All activities (apart from the cross-cutting ones, see activity  3.4) are carried out by BAF through NGOs on the basis of proje ct concepts 
appraised and selected by BAF. The contractual arrangements GCF -KfW and KfW-BAF will reflect this.   E.5. Programme performance indicators  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions, 
progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Results Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term Final 
       
Output 1.  Coastal 
ecosystems, which are 
particularly relevant for 
climate change adaptation, 
are better protected and 
managed in a more 
sustainable way 
 Number and size of new 
marine and coastal 
protected areas;  Number 
and size of protected 
areas with improved 
protection level and 
efficient management  Mapping of areas, 
legal demarcation 
documents, 
Management 
Effectiveness 
Tracking Tool 
(METT) 
documentation.  
Annual Reports 
from sub-projects; 
Mid-Term and 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Reports from BAF 
 
 0 ha under 
adequate 
protection/ 
manageme
nt  200,0
00 ha  1.7 
million ha  National 
institutions 
responsible for 
protected areas 
and their 
management 
support the 
activities and 
provide improved 
enforcement;   
The infrastructure 
is respected and 
duly maintained  
 
Output 2.  Degraded 
coastal ecosystems, which 
are particularly relevant for 
climate change adaptation, 
are rehabilitated 
 Size of marine and coastal 
ecosystems 
rehabilitated/restored  Mapping of areas, 
surveys of 
rehabilitated 
ecosystems, 
photographs.  
Annual Reports 
from sub-projects; 
Mid-Term and 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Reports from BAF  
 0 ha 
rehabili-
tated 3,000 
ha   
25,000 
ha Enforcement from 
governmental 
authorities 
improved; 
rehabilitated sites 
will not be 
destroyed by 
extreme weather 
events   
Output 3.  Enhanced 
knowledge, expertise and 
capacity of relevant 
national agencies to use 
Ecosystem-based 
Adaptation (EbA) 
approaches for a climate-
resilient coastal zone 
management  
 
 Lessons learned / best 
practices are documented 
and published in renowned 
regional and international 
media; number of local, 
national and international 
institutions with which 
lessons learned were 
disseminated and actively 
shared; 
Revision of national 
strategies resulting in 
higher importance of  EbA 
approaches for climate-
resilient coastal 
management  Reports, 
publications and 
presentations 
Minutes, 
photographs and 
participants lists of 
meetings, 
trainings and 
conferences. 
Annual Reports 
from sub-projects; 
Mid-Term and 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Reports from BAF   
0 articles of 
lessons 
learnt  
placed in 
renowned 
scientific 
journals 
 
0 revised 
strategies   0 
 
 
 
 
 
0  
 
 
At least 2 
of the 4 
partner 
countries 
have 
drafted 
revised 
strategies 
with mor 
e focus 
on EbA   
       
E.6. Activities 39 
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflecte d 
in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables


---
*Page 53*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 59  
   
 
 Component 1:  
Funding window for protection 
and sustainable management of coastal ecosystems relevant for EbA (mangroves, 
coral reefs, seagrass)
    
1.1. Funding for Improved 
sustainable management of 
Marine Protected Areas 
(MPAs) and Locally Managed 
Marine Areas (LMMAs) Measures eligible for financing  towards 
supporting local communities managing 
protected areas may include 
(i) Infrastructure,  
(ii) boats and other equipment,  
(iii) demarcation of areas through 
buoys, 
(iv) participatory co-management, 
update of management plans to 
make sites more resilient to climate 
change impacts; enforcement of activities outlined in management 
plans, and 
 
(v) reduction of post-harvest losses 
and improved processing of fish.  Construction of small 
buildings, other small 
works, Supply of 
equipment, consultancy, 
technical expertise and 
consulting, studies  Consultancy for review of existing management plans and 
updates; develop participatory 
approach for co-management; define protection measures and sites; plan and implement protection activities 
(procurement processes for 
works and equipment); Identify potential for reduction of post-harvest losses and fish 
processing; method for 
implementing improvements 
together with women and men in 
the supply chain.  
 
1.2. Funding for measures to 
reduce physical damage to coastal and marine 
ecosystems Activities eligible for funding include:  
(i) Mooring buoys for minimizing 
damage of coral reefs by anchors,  
(ii) Demarcation and signalling of 
relevant ecosystems,   
(iii) Installation of breakwaters to 
protect parts of reefs from wave action,  
(iv) Boardwalks for the protection of 
beach vegetation, and  
(v) Participatory land use planning for 
improved protection of coastal 
ecosystems from damaging human impacts.
 Construction of small buildings, other small 
works, Supply of equipment, consultancy, 
technical expertise and 
consulting, studies
 Review of existing coastal 
management and coastal 
protection against physical damage and proposal for improvements; planning of 
protection activities and tender 
processes; execution of works. 
 
1.3. Funding for measures to 
reduce pressure and land-
based stressors on coastal 
and marine ecosystems (in 
and outside protected areas) 
 (i) Promotion of alternative fuel wood 
sources, where mangroves are used, 
(ii) Promotion of sustainable fisheries 
management as well as 
aquaculture, including co-
management approaches with local 
communities, promotion of 
Integrated Multi-Trophic Aquaculture (IMTA) and seaweed 
farming, and 
 
(iii) Reduction of sedimentation from 
land-based erosion through reforestation and/or slope 
stabilization.
 Consultancy from 
technical experts and outreach trainers; 
moderation and 
workshops; aquaculture facilities;  studies; works; services 
for reforestation
 Consultancies for identification of main pressure factors and 
stressors on ecosystems; identification of alternatives; develop co-management 
methods together with 
stakeholders; implement 
sustainable production and 
income alternatives with local 
communities; execute 
reforestation activities. 
 
Component 2:  Funding window for rehabilitation of degraded 
coastal ecosystems relevant 
for Eb
A    
2.1. Funding for mangrove 
reforestation   Community-based management of 
selection of suitable sites and 
rehabilitation measures; combination of 
physical and biological measures to control site conditions; comprehensive planning of modalities for nursery 
management and seedling production, Advisory services; 
seeds; 
installations/services for nursery; transplanting; workshops 
 Advisory services to assist communities in site selection 
and planning of nurseries;  
Advisory for transplanting and 
O&M;  
Small works for nurseries, 
probably on a community


---
*Page 54*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 59  
   
 
 transplanting and maintenance.  
 working scheme;  
Workshops with moderation for 
reforestation techniques; 
Systematization of lessons 
learned and best practices.  
2.2. Funding for seagrass 
rehabilitation 
 Site selection; germination and 
cultivation of seagrass and 
transplantation to sites with suitable 
conditions 
 Advisory services; 
seeds; 
installations/services for 
nursery; transplanting; 
workshops  Advisory services to assist 
communities in site selection 
and planning of nurseries;  
Advisory for transplanting and 
O&M;  
Small works for nurseries, 
probably on a community 
working scheme;  
Workshops with moderation for 
reforestation techniques; 
Systematization of lessons 
learned and best practices.  
2.3. Funding for rehabilitation 
of beach vegetation  
 Site selection; cultivation of vegetation 
and transplantation to suitable sites Advisory services; 
seeds; 
installations/services for 
nursery; transplanting; workshops
 Advisory services to assist 
communities in site selection 
and planning of nurseries;  
Advisory for transplanting and 
O&M;  
Small works for nurseries, 
probably on a community 
working scheme;  
Workshops with moderation for 
reforestation techniques;  
Systematization of lessons 
learned and best practices.  
2.4. Funding for coral reef restoration (if applicable) 
 Effective management at an adequate 
spatial scale to be put in place before 
active restoration; avoidance of 
stressors that cause coral damages; re-
stabilization of damaged reefs and 
corals; propagation and transplantation 
of corals to new sites or construction of 
in situ coral nurseries; passive 
restoration via good management of 
reef resources. Advisory services; 
management support; 
installations/services for 
nursery; transplanting; 
workshops
 Management plan and personal structures put in place and operational;  
Sufficient protection measures 
(Component 1) in place;  
Studies on adequate restoration 
technique and proper site 
selection and planning of 
nurseries (on-site or off-site);  
Systematization of lessons 
learned and best practices.
 
Component 3:  
Support to knowledge 
exchange and capacity building for appropriate and feasible EbA approaches  
  
3.1.  Funding towards 
awareness raising and 
capacity building of national / regional agencies on the relevance and options of using EbA measures for 
climate-resilient coastal zone management 
 Identify best practice and organize 
exchange visits; develop 
communication material for different 
publics (local communities, national institutions responsible for climate change policies and their 
implementation). Exchange lessons 
learned and best practices with broader 
national, regional and international 
public. Studies; Workshops, 
incl. moderation; travel expenses; consultancy; platform for information 
exchange. 
 Studies regarding evaluation of project results and impacts and systematization; 
Organization of workshops, 
including moderation,  
Organization of exchange visits 
of stakeholders;  
Development of a suitable 
platform for information exchange on EbA in marine and 
coastal ecosystems and lessons 
learned and dissemination of 
best practices.
 
3.2. Funding towards capacity building of national / regional Workshops and rural extension 
activities for local communities on EbA Studies; Workshops, 
incl. moderation; travel Studies regarding evaluation of 
project results and impacts and


---
*Page 55*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 59  
   
 
 agencies on climate risk 
assessment and how to 
include EbA measures in climate-resilient coastal zone management (instruments, 
methodologies, incentive 
schemes, etc.) 
 measures; developing training modules 
for capacity building; on-the-ground 
training regarding sustainable fisheries, coastal management, protected area management. Develop adequate 
teaching material posters to reach 
stakeholders (women and men) expenses; consultancy; 
printing materials, etc.
 systematization;  
Organization of workshops for 
capacity building of local and 
national stakeholders;  
Elaboration of communication 
and learning materials, folders, 
etc. 
 3.3 Funding towards regional exchange of experiences and lessons learnt from the implementation of EbA 
measures and on how to 
make EbA an integral part of climate-resilient coastal zone management.  
 Studies for consolidation and 
systematization of experiences and 
lessons learnt of EbA;  Workshops and 
exchange visits for national authorities;  Studies; Workshops, 
incl. moderation; travel 
expenses; consultancy; 
printing materials, etc. Studies regarding evaluation of 
project results and impacts and 
systematization;  
Organization of workshops for 
capacity building of local and 
national stakeholders;  
Elaboration of communication 
and learning materials, folders, 
etc. 
3.4 Cross-Cutting Activities regarding Capacity Building 
and Knowledge Exchange 
(managed by BAF):  
 
- Monitoring and 
Evaluation of the 
Programme 
- Gender 
mainstreaming 
guideline 
development  
- Funding of gender 
strengthening 
measures at sub-
project level 
 Monitoring and Evaluation of the 
Programme by specialized experts 
 
Consulting services for the Elaboration of a Guide to Gender Mainstreaming of BAF Procedures 
 
Funding of gender promotion measures at sub-project level   
 
 
 
 
Specialized expert 
services (such as IUCN 
for monitoring and 
evaluation); Consulting 
Services   
 
   
Specific gender 
promotion activities: capacity development, coaching support to women groups, etc  
E.7. Monitoring, repor ting and evaluation ar rangements (max. 50 0 words, approxim ately 1 page) 
Monitoring, repo rting and evaluation a rrangements will comply w ith the relevant GCF polic ies.  Several qualified 
stakeholders will be involved, with the IUCN being a key indepe ndent evaluator. 
On the sub-project level: 
Monitoring of the grant activities is considered essential for an effective funding mechanism. NGOs have the main 
responsibility for monitoring at project level. BAF supervises the implementation of sub-projects. At the beginning of the 
project, NGOs are required to submit a detailed project work pl an divided into quarterly actions and deliverables. Every six 
months, the NGOs update the project work plan to reflect action s and deliverables achieved and any changes. Each 
project requires a Mid-term Financial Audit and Technical Revie w and a Final Financial and Technical Review. The 
Technical Reviews will be impleme nted by the IUCN as independen t evaluator. The Financial Reviews will be carried out 
by independent auditing companies. 
The BAF’s monitoring, internal evaluation and reporting will ma inly be done through bi-annual funding advance requests, 
annual reports, and on-the ground missions. In addition, the BA F contributes to monitoring implementation of projects at 
field level and ensures that e ligibility criteria are met.  
On the GCF-funded Pr ogramme level:  
The BAF, in coordination with the IUCN, undertakes monitoring a nd selected reviews of the sub-projects funded by the 
GCF Programme to assess implementation progress and compliance w i t h  a l l  P r o g r a m m e  a g r e e m e n t s ,  a s  w e l l  a s  t o  
monitor progress in achieving outputs and evidence of use of fu nds. 
A mid-term review is carried out in the third year of the Progr amme implementation  by independent evaluators. It includes


---
*Page 56*
---

E  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 59  
   
 
 (I) Review of the institutional, technical, environmental, soci al, economic and financial aspects of the Programme; 
(II) Review of the portfolio of sub-projects, incl. activities,  planned outputs, expected impacts, cost and financing;  
(III) Review of the achievement of planned impacts and indicato rs (including estimates for beneficiaries); and 
(IV) Assessment of the need to restructure or reformulate the P rogramme. 
Independent IUCN experts carry out a Final Review mission, wher e the satisfactory implementation within the agreed 
framework and good financial practices, the delivery of outputs  and the achievement of Program me outputs is evaluated.  
KfW will accompany Programme implementation on a regular basis and will ensure the terms set out in the Financing 
Agreement. KfW Headquar ters staff will support the BAF with tec hnical questions; KfW offices in the partner countries will 
follow up on project implementati on and maintain direct contact  with Implementing Partners and national counterparts 
(NDAs, sector ministries ).


---
*Page 57*
---

F  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 59  
   
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
 
Key financial and operational r isks will be assessed in detail during the project proposal preparation by the NGOs. 
The BAF will ensure that only tec hnically feasible, socially ac ceptable and financially sustainable project proposals 
will be eligible for funding. Furthermore, the appropriateness of proposed measures to deal with environmental and 
social risks is duly discussed during project appraisal. Implem entation of mitigation measures is assessed through the 
BAF’s Environmental and Social Impact Management Framework. 
The main risks of the Programme  relate to the need to strengthe n institutions at local levels, due to the limited 
capacities of stakeholders and relevant authorities with regard  to project implementation and sustainable O&M. 
Appropriate mitigatio n measures will be buil t into the concepts  of each sub-project (see below).  
Taking into account the mitigating measures as described below,  the level of impacts of risks to the Programme 
is medium with a medium probability. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category Probability Impact 
Other Medium Medium  
Description 
Occurrence of extreme weather events / natural disasters and en vironmental risks external to sub-projects, affecting 
targeted communities and/or ecos ystems. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
In order to mitigate the risk, BAF will require risk assessment  before funding and will select project proposals across 
various regions to manage risk probability. Areas prone to high  risk of extreme weather events, such as low-lying 
areas that are regularly affected by floods, and where project activities would have little potential for success, shall be 
excluded. Instead, alternative areas should be identified.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category Probability Impact 
Technical and operational  Medium Medium  
Description 
Limited capacities of stakeholde rs and relevant authorities ham per implementation and sustainable O&M.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Implementation by experienced N GOs ensures sufficient capacitie s for core implementation of activities regarding 
EbA; NGOs have to present a proven record of execution of proje cts with community stakeholders in the relevant 
fields and in the project country. In addition, project proposa ls must include capacity building of stakeholders for 
project implementation and O&M. In the one-year consolidation p hase of the project, NGOs accompany stakeholders 
in order to transfer O&M responsibilit y of pro ject activities graduall y.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Category Probability Impact 
Prohibited practices Low Medium  
Description 
Corruption, fraud and misuse of funds.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Prior to the approval of a sub-project, BAF performs a full due  diligence process of the applicant NGO. For each 
grant, BAF performs a Mid-term F inancial and Technical Review a nd a Final Financial and Technical Review. 
Renowned auditing companies w ill conduct the Financial Review. The Technical Review will  follow a monitoring 
concept defined b y BAF accordin g to the characteristics, ob jectives and planned results and impacts of each sub-


---
*Page 58*
---

F  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 59  
   
 
 project. Financial and Technical Reviews together provide suffi cient control of the proper utilization of Programme 
funds. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Category Probability Impact 
Governance Medium High  
Description 
Political support for the Programme will not be achieved and/or  maintained.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Prior to the approval of a sub-project, BAF performs a full due  diligence process of the applicant NGO. For each 
grant, BAF performs a Mid-term Financial and Technical Review a nd a Final Financial and Technical Review. 
Renowned auditing comp anies will conduct the Financial Review. The Technical Review will follow a monitoring 
concept defined by BAF according to the characteristics, object ives and planned results and impacts of each project. 
Financial and Technical Reviews together provide sufficient con trol of the proper utilizat ion of Programme funds. 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category Probability Impact 
Technical and operational High Medium  
Description 
Limited enforcement by responsible authorities in case of illeg al fishery and destructive fishing methods.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The interventions by implementing NGOs and a higher presence pr ovides a better supervision of the project areas 
and additional external checks and balances. Furthermore, proje ct proposals in many cases can include activities to 
support local monitorin g and enforcement.


---
*Page 59*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 57  
   
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk as sessment (max. 750 words, appro ximately 1.5 pages)  
The general Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) o f the BAF specifies the details of the ESMS at 
Fund level as well as the ESMS re quirements for NGO sub-project s.  
BAF’s ESMS provides a description of processes to ensure that E nvironmental and Social (E&S) topics are duly 
addressed as part of the Blue Action Fund’s activities in line with the Performance Standards (PS) of the International 
Finance Corporation (I FC) and the Sustaina bility Guidelines of the KfW Development Bank (2016).  
In conjunction with BAF’s Grant Procedures Manual, the ESMS def ines procedures, tools and responsibilities for 
assessing, managing and monitoring environmental and social ris ks and impacts associated with projects supported 
by the BAF throughout the entire project lifecycle, in line wit h its international and national requirements.  
The ESMS is applicable for all projects receiving funding from the Blue Action Fund. Projects can currently be divided 
into six main types, although some projects can be assigned to more than one type: 
 Designation of new Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) 
 Development of an effective mana gement system for existing/new -established MPAs 
 Implementation of improved nature conservation measures 
 Development of alternative sustainable livelihoods 
 Projects involving activities related to aquaculture 
 Small-scale construction activities (e.g. ranger offices, rese arch or monitoring facilities, jetty, fish processing 
or storage facilities, access roads, tourism facilities etc.). 
A key principle of the E&S risk management process is incorpora ting E&S concerns as an intrinsic part of project 
cycle management. Each step of the project life cycle provides opportunities to address E&S requirements to achieve 
g o o d  E & S  p e r f o r m a n c e  i n  t h e  p r o j e c t s .  T h e  g r a p h i c  b e l o w  s u m m a r i zes the E&S risk management process 
implemented by the Blue Action Fund. 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
An Environmental and Social Impa ct Assessment (ESIA) will be pa rt of any application of the sub-projects. The 
Programme falls into GCF ISS risk category I-2. The BAF ESMS is  documented in Annex 6.


---
*Page 60*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 57  
   
 
 G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximatel y 1 page)  
Within the context of the target countries, issues relating to gender equality remain an on-going challenge, specifically 
in traditional fishing communities, often living in remote loca tions, with low access to education, employment and 
market opportunities. Isolated coastal communities frequently f ace food insecurity, environmental degradation and 
vulnerability to climate change, w ith women often being the mos t vulnerable and bearing the brunt of these 
challenges. 
Women, as key agents responsible for the resilience of small-sc ale fishing communities, as well as for the 
reproductive work, have a leading role to play in climate chang e adaptation, ensuring climate justice, and disaster risk 
management. Women and men use and manage marine and coastal eco systems differently, have specific 
knowledge, capabilities and needs related to this and are diffe rently impacted by changes in their environment due to 
climate change, pollution, and globalization.  
Therefore, there is a strong rationale to build in gender consi derations in the overall Programme strategy and design. 
The Programme will apply entirely gender sensitive and gender r esponsive planning, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation at the Programme, as well as at the project and comm unity level and in the overall policy dialogue with 
institutional and non - governmental stakeholders.  
A Guide to Gender Mainstreaming that will be developed prior to t he official launch of the Prog ramme, will support 
further gender assessment and analysis, as well as the developm ent of project specific gender action plans. Country 
level assessments and action plans will be completed as part of  the Programme Guide .   
The Guide will be developed by a qualified team of consultants,  to be assigned by the BAF with funding from the 
K f W .  T h e  a p p r o a c h  o f  t h e  G u i d e  w i l l  b e  a l i g n e d  t o  t h e  G C F ’ s  “ M a instreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund 
Projects”-Manual and to the KfW’s Gender Strategy (as accredite d entity), relevant safeguard requirements of the 
BAF’s ESMS and relevant policies, legislation and actions plans  of the target countries. 
As a key instrument of the Programme, the Guide will support pr oject developers to ensure an overall gender 
sensitive approach for the entire project cycle. In this regard , the guidance document will be closely linked to the 
BAF’s ESMS which governs the Programme’s environmental and soci al safeguard requirements. The acquisition of 
gender disaggregated baseline data for social impact assessment , gender sensitive impact assessments, gender 
considerations in the development of process frameworks to miti gate impacts from access restrictions to protected 
areas, gender sensitive indicators for monitoring and evaluatio n are some of the areas which will be covered by the 
Guide. Other important topics w ill comprise gender sensitive st akeholder engagement, as well as guidance for the 
development of capacity building measures for women and men, e. g. in order to achieve equal representation on 
different decision making levels, such as in management structu res for protected areas or in community based 
management structures for ecosystems/ecosystem services.  
The Programme’s Guide to Gender Mainstreaming will inform gende r considerations for the overall global BAF 
funding portfolio with the overall intention to apply the provi sions of the Guide for the entire BAF portfolio. Applicants 
will be required to apply the rec ommendations and provisions of  the Programme Guide to Gender Mainstreaming 
throughout the project cycle and to provide evidence that they transferred recommendations from the Programme 
level meaningfully to the specifics of the respective project.  
In their project propo sals, project applicants will provide inf ormation on how they ensure that relevant institutions, 
groups and local communities are i nvolved in planning and imple mentation, as well as detailing what stakeholders will 
be able to change through successful implementation of the proj ect. In addition, a stakeholder analysis will 
characterize the stakeholders and provide information on the nu mber of households/people that will benefit from the 
project, as well as the extent to which communities depend on c oastal and marine resources for their livelihoods. All 
these aspects will be analysed using a gender sensitive approac h/methodology and by acquiring gender 
disaggregated information. Detailed approaches and plans regard ing involvement of women on the sub-project level 
will be identified and developed in a parti cipatory manner on t he level of the individual projects. 
During the project selection pr ocess, the BAF w ill ensure that both men and women equally benefit from sustainable 
and climate-smart livelihood options in fisheries, aquaculture,  tourism, ecosystem restoration and sustainable 
management of coastal and marine resources. All submitted proje ct proposals will be scrutinized regarding gender-
sensitivity in the general proje ct concept. Prop osed activities  will be gender-sensitive and promote the participation of 
women in decision-making processes within the framework of the Programme.  
In addition, women will be particularly encouraged to take thei r role in project implementation as well as being part of 
various implementing and decision making entities at different levels. The resources availa ble for capacity building 
can provide the necessary suppor t and training to women in the technical, organizational and leadership domains.


---
*Page 61*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 57  
   
 
 More information and possible activities on the project level i n the gender mainstreaming context are included in 
Annex 8. 
G.3.  Financial management and procurem ent (max. 500 words, approxima tely 1 page)  
 
In line with the general arrangements as described in section B .4, procurement and financial management will be 
implemented according to BAF’s Grant Procedures Manual (Annex 2 2), which details all guidelines and rules for 
procurement, disbursement methods, financial accounting and aud iting. In summary, the m ethods are as follows. 
Procurement 
Procurement of goods, works and related services and other cons ulting services for projects funded by the GCF will 
be based on strict ethical principles and best international pr ocurement practices for NG Os. Procurement will be 
conforming with BAF’s procurement policy, which is in accordanc e with relevant KfW procurement guidelines (see 
Annex 10 and 22).   
The following thresholds apply to all types of procurement for consulting services: 
Contract value  Procurement method  
< EUR 10,000  Discretionary award  (= direct award)  
EUR 10,000 to EUR 99,999  Limited competitive bidding/price 
quotation (at least 3 qualified bidders)  
≥ EUR 100,000  Open competitive bidding  
 
The following thresholds apply to all types of procurement for goods and services other than consulting : 
Contract value  Procurement method  
< EUR 5,000  Discretionary award  (= direct award)  
EUR 5,000 to EUR 99,999  Limited competitive bidding/price 
quotation (at least 3 qualified bidders)  
≥ EUR 100,000  Open competitive bidding  
Discretionary award: Prior to the first direct award, the contracting party will obt ain BAF’s no-objection to a standard 
request for proposal and standard contracts for this type of pr ocurement to be used by the Implementing Partners 
(NGOs) in the project  
Limited competitive bidding: Prior to the first tender, the contracting party will obtain BA F’s no-objection to the 
standard tender documents and standard contracts. The suitabili ty of the shortlisted bidders must be documented by 
the Implementing Partners.  
Open competitive bidding: NGOs implementing the selected sub-projects will inform the BAF  as early as possible 
about their intention to implement open competitive bidding, an d are required to provide the BAF with the tender 
documents prior to invitation to tender and the tender evaluati on reports for no-objection. Tenders must be advertised 
in recognized national, regional and international newspapers a s well as on the website of German Trade and Invest 
(GTAI). Prior to the conclusion of contracts, Implementing Part ners are required to submit the negotiated draft 
contract for no-objection to the BAF. Exemptions from internati onal bidding (i.e. national bidding) must be agreed by 
the BAF.  
All contracts include an agreed declaration of undertaking, fol lowing KfW guidelines regarding rules for conflict of 
interest, corruption and fraud, sanctionable practices, and soc ial and environmental responsibility, as well as 
safeguards regarding health and working safety. 
Accounting and disbursements: Implementing Partners are required to have strong financial man agement and 
internal control systems. This includes planning and budgeting,  internal control and accounting, as well as funds, 
cash flow and assets management. Implementing Partners must ope n a separate bank account for the project or 
dispose of a sub-account, or a separate and internally tracked and traceable bookkeeping entry in the financial 
management system. This ensures transparency regarding financia l transactions and renders audits more efficient.  
On a six-monthly basis, NGOs implementing the selected sub-proj ects are expected to submit funding requests in 
relation to the upcoming work, including: a budget and detailed  activity plan for the upcoming work period; the initial 
or updated work plan; a pro gress report that references the work plan, the most recent deta iled activit y plan; and the


---
*Page 62*
---

G  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 57  
   
 
 budget for the previous work period (including amounts spent, a ny unspent funds and a comparison/reconciliation).  
In addition, the BAF as well as the KfW staff carry out regular  on-site checks of the proper physical implementation 
and bookkeeping. Internationally renowned and independent audit ing companies will conduct the financial reviews. 
The KfW will disburse to the BAF according to disbursement proc edures agreed with the GCF. The BAF will disburse 
to sub-projects according to project progress. It is proposed t hat the GCF disburses funds directly to the BAF 
Foundation in two tr anches (call by call) of 15 million EUR eac h. Each tranche will fund t he sub-projects selected 
within one of the two calls. Funds will be invested according t o BAF investments (these can be provided to the GCF 
for information). If it turns out during the evaluation of prop osals of the first call that the absorption capacity of the 
proposed region WIO is not sufficient to absorb all of the GCF funds (contrary to current expectations). 
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms th at the funding proposal, including its annexes, with 
the exception of annex 12 - AE fee request- may be disclosed in  full by the GCF, as no information is being provided 
in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies  of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidentia l portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresp onding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 63*
---

H  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 57 
   
 
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet forma t 
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programm e milestones 
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or  C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Im pact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Reset tlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement pla n  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action pl an  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance )  
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitm ent letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventio ns 
☒ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)  
☒ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for prop osals based on up-scaling or replicating a 
pilot project 
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third partie s or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ Annex 22 BAF Grant Procedures Manual 
☒ Annex 23 Draft Appraisal Matrix: Criteria for the evaluation of  submitted sub-project proposals 
☒ Annex 24a Logframe of a theoretical Sub-project Model   
☒ Annex 24b Implementation and Disbursement Plan for Model Sub-Pr oject


---
*Page 64*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 67*
---

Scanned with CamScanner


---
*Page 68*
---

Scanned with CamScanner


---
*Page 70*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Blue Action Fund (BAF): GCF Ecosystem Based Adaptation 
Programme in the Western Indian Ocean  
Existence of subproject (s) 
to be identified after GCF 
Board approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I -2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or 
location (s) of programme  Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa , and Tanzania  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A   
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website   N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks   N/A  
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Thursday, October 10, 2019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, French, and Portuguese  
Explanation on language  English is one of the official languages of South Africa and 
Tanzania.  
 
French  is one of the official language s of Madagascar . 
 
Portuguese  is the  official language o f Mozambique .   
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.kfw -
entwicklungsbank.de/PDF/Entwicklungsfinanzierung/Themen -
NEU/BlueActionFund_ESMS_Eng_2019.pdf      
 
French:  
https://www.kfw -


---
*Page 71*
---

entwicklungsbank.de/PDF/Entwicklungsfinanzierung/Themen -
NEU/BlueActionFund_ESMS_French_2019.pdf  
  
Portuguese:   
https://www.kfw -
entwicklungsbank.de/PDF/Entwicklungsfinanzierung/Themen -
NEU/BlueActionFund_ESMS_Portuguese_2019.pdf   
Other link(s)  KfW website:  
www.kfw -entwicklungsbank.de/international -financing/KfW -
Development -Bank/Topics/Enviroment -and-sustainability/  
 
BAF website:  
https://www.blueactionfund.org/documents -and-publications/   
Remarks  An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I -2 
programme is contained in the ‘Environmental & Social 
Management System (ESMS)’ . ESMS v ersion  is September 2019 . 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website   N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks   N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Thursday, October 10, 2019  
Place  Ministry of Environment, Ecology, Sea and Forests  
B P 3948, Rue Toto Radola - Antsahavola  
Antanarivo, 101 Madagascar  
 
KfW Office Maputo  
Avenida Francisco Orlando  
Magumbwe No. 976  
CP 2766 Maputo  
Mozambique  
 
KfW Office Pretoria  
Hatfield G ardens, BLOCK E  
P.O. Box 13732  
333 Grosvenor St  
Hatfield 0028 Pretoria  
South Africa  
 
KfW  Office Dar es Salaam  
Rufiji Street Plot 1668  
House No. 20  
Masaki Peninsula  
Dar es Salaam  
Tanz ania


---
*Page 72*
---

Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Wednesday, November 20, 2019  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Tuesday, November 12, 2019  
Note: This form was prepared by the  accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 73 
 
 
Secretariat’s 	assessment 	of	FP122	
Proposal name: Blue Action Fund (BAF): GCF Ecosystem Based Adaptation 
Programme in the Western Indian Ocean 
Accredited entity: Kreditanst alt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) 
Country/(ies): Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa and the United Republic 
of Tanzania 
Project/programme size:  Medium 
I. Overall	assessment 	of	the	Secretariat 	
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Bo ard for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 	 Points	of	caution	
This project targets an ecologically diverse 
region. The western Indian Ocean is the world’s most significant area in terms of marine and terrestrial biodiversity and is a 
biological gene pool for coastal South-East 
Africa and East Africa Eligibility criteria fo r subprojects and non-
governmental organizations (sub-accredited entities) must be verified and consistent with 
GCF policies 
Grant recipients are required to provide 25 
per cent of the budget of their projects  
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term shee t and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary 	of	the	Secretariat’s 	assessment 	
2.1 Project background  
3. The “GCF Ecosystem Based Adaptation Pr ogramme in the Western Indian Ocean” 
programme under the Blue Action Fund (BAF) aims to increase the resilience of coastal 
communities along the Indian Ocean in countries in southern Africa, namely Madagascar, 
Mozambique, South Africa and the United Republic of Tanzania. GCF will contribute to a funding window under BAF with co-financing from other sources and mandatory co-financing of 25 per cent from grant recipients for subprojects financed through the BAF funding window. 	
4. The western Indian Ocean region is underg oing rapid climate change. Mozambique was 
hit by two major cyclones in 2019, even though it rarely experienced cyclones in the past; 
Cyclone Idai in March 2019 was the second deadlies t tropical cyclone on record in the Southern 
Hemisphere, bringing severe damage to the coastal area around the major port of Beira. The 
other countries in the region are facing simila rly increasing threats of cyclones and tropical 
storms. Intact marine and coastal ecosystems would serve as a buffer to absorb the brunt of the force of cyclones and storms, protecting the populated hinterlands.


---
*Page 74*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 74 
 
 
5. BAF is an existing fund established by the German Government and is currently 
receiving funding from France, Germany and Sweden for on-granting to non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) to implement marine protecti on and coastal resilience projects in tropical 
countries. BAF was established under German law as an NGO. By German law, BAF can provide 
grant financing only. For the current project, BAF will open a special call for the western Indian 
Ocean region in which project prop osals must respond directly to boosting resilience to climate 
change.	
6. Total project finance is EUR 55 million, with a request to GCF for grant financing of EUR 
30 million. The Government of Germany will contribute EUR 25 million in grant financing to the 
project. Additionally, grant recipients are required to contribute a minimum of 25 per cent to the total cost of their project. 	
7. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) works in partnership with 
BAF. IUCN supports the subproject appraisal pr ocess, provides strategic advice for the further 
development of or changes to the strategic direction of BAF funding and open calls for 
proposals, and supervises external monitoring an d evaluation of subprojects. IUCN has essential 
knowledge, access to networks of researchers on marine and coastal ecosystems, and significant 
capacities for targeted communication and knowledge exchange; it can therefore bring significant value added to the project. 
2.2 Component-by-component analysis 
Component 	1:	Protection 	and	sustainable 	management 	of	coastal	resources 	relevant	for	
ecosystem ‐based	adaptation 	(mangroves, 	coral	reefs,	seagrass); 	(total	cost:	USD	30.0	million;	GCF	
cost:	USD	16.0	million,	or	53	per	cent)	
8. Under this component, eligible activities comprise the identification, planning, financing 
and implementation of coastal management and protection measures. The emphasis is on non-revenue-generating natural resources management activities carried out by public sector 
entities, such as developing and strengthening the management of marine protected areas 
(MPAs) with the engagement of local communities, including infrastructure (e.g. jetties, offices, 
visitor centres, breakwaters, boardwalks) and equipment (e.g. boats, outfits for guards). 
9. Land-based interventions are foreseen to reduce  the pressure on marine resources, such 
as the provision of fuelwood (less harvesting of mangrove tree species), better land-use 
planning to reduce runoff and erosion into coas tal zones, aquaculture to reduce pressure on 
natural fish resources, and other measures that demonstrably reduce overexploitation of or 
stressors on marine resources. 
10. The proposed interventions strengthen the local MPA administrations, which are newly 
established in some areas and which tend to lack adequate knowledge of climate change issues. 
Furthermore, the pressure from human land use an d marine resource exploitation is reduced, 
allowing the marine resources to recover from overexploitation. This component is considered critical for the sustainability of the project and the long-term resilience of the marine areas. 
Component 	2:	Rehabilitation 	of	degraded 	coastal	ecosystems 	relevant	for	ecosystem ‐based	
adaptation 	(total	cost:	USD	14.0	million;	GCF	cost:	USD	8.0	million,	or	57	per	cent)	
11. Under this component, ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) approaches to mangrove 
rehabilitation mostly include community-based management of suitable sites and rehabilitation 
activities as well as a combination of physical an d biological measures to control site conditions. 
This includes the selection of ecologically and socioeconomically favourable sites alongside nursery management and seedling production, transplanting and maintenance. The activities 
for coral reef rehabilitation include proper si te management and avoidance of stressors that 
cause coral reef damage. Coral reef rehabilitati on includes the restabilization of damaged reefs


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 75 
 
 
and corals as well as the propagation and transplantation of corals to new sites. Passive 
restoration via the effective management of reef  resources, being far more economical than 
active coral reef restoration, is considered as  a preferred option for coral reef management. 
Seagrass rehabilitation involves germination and cultivation of seagrass and its transplantation 
to sites with suitable conditions. 
12. The proposed interventions build on proven  approaches and technologies for EbA in 
marine areas. The interventions are very likely to be effective in protecting the MPAs and restoring their ecosystem functioning. The focus on community engagement boosts the 
sustainability of the interventions, as well as the cost-effectiveness. 
Component 	3:	Knowledge 	exchange 	and	capacity‐building	regarding 	appropriate 	and	feasible	
ecosystem ‐based	adaptation 	approaches 	(total	cost:	USD	7.5	million;	GCF	cost:	USD	4.5	million,	or	
60	per	cent)	
13. The experiences with the subprojects under this on-granting facility will be captured 
and disseminated thro ugh three approaches: 
(a) Awareness-raising and capacity-building of national/regional agencies on the relevance 
of and options for using EbA measures for climate-resilient coastal zone management; 
(b) Capacity-building of national/regional agencies on climate risk assessment and how to 
include EbA measures in climate-resi lient coastal zone management; and 
(c) Regional exchange of experiences and lessons learned from the implementation of EbA 
measures and on how to make EbA an integral  part of climate-resilient coastal zone 
management. 
14. This component is crucial to facilitate the broader dissemination of lessons learned from 
the project such that they may be used elsewhere, leading to upscaling of the project. This component is also financed through co-financing. 
Project	management 	(total	cost:	USD	3.5	million;	GCF	cost:	USD	1.5	million,	or	42.8	per	cent)	
15. Project management costs amount to 6.3 per cent of the total project cost. Only 5 per 
cent of the grant request to GCF is applied to the project management costs. 
III. Assessment 	of	performance 	against	investment 	criteria		
3.1 Impact potential        Scale:	Medium  
16. The proposed project reaches out to the coastal communities in the four target 
countries, which tend to be on the margins of society. The impact will be high for those communities that are awarded subprojects. Wher e the subprojects actively protect and restore 
the coastal environment (mangroves, seagrass beds and coral reefs), the impact will be high in terms of protection against tropical cyclones and storms. 
17. For the countries overall, the impact will depend on the extent of the awarded 
subprojects. Where MPAs are established and stre ngthened, the impact will be high, as well as 
in areas where significant investments are made in  land management in coastal areas. For South 
Africa, the impact is rated as low/medium cons idering that only the north-eastern coast of 
KwaZulu-Natal is covered by the project. 
18. The grants scheme provides incentives to create sustainable value chains by improving 
entrepreneurship for the local private sector enterp rises. While this is not expected to lead to 
significant commercial gain initially, this may grow  into commercially viable undertakings in the 
medium to long term.


---
*Page 76*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 76 
 
 
3.2 Paradigm shift potentia l            Scale:	High  
19.  The project will introduce best practices from around the world to the region, which 
has the potential to radically change the way th at marine resources are managed in the region. 
The guidelines for the subprojects emphasize thes e best practices and other elements of solid 
project design and transparency in  implementation and reporting. 
20. The project fosters regional exchange and cross-jurisdictional subprojects, allowing 
countries to take on lessons learned from other countries and apply these locally and nationally. 
In particular, the approach to climate-resili ent management of coastal resources will be a 
significant departure from the business-as-usual exploitation of coastal and marine resources. 
21. The emphasis on creating more value in the local communities through the development 
of cottage industries and support to micro and sma ll enterprises is considered highly effective in 
recognizing the value of the ecosystem services of  the coastal and marine areas over the long 
term, as opposed to overexploitation for quick gain. 
3.3 Sustainable development potential           Scale:	High  
22. The project directly responds to Sustainabl e Development Goals 2 (food security) and 5 
(gender equality). The subprojects also have several other Sustainable Development Goals as 
secondary targets. 
23. The development of marine protected areas (MPAs), cottage industries and support to 
land-based sustainable farming practices by the project delivers a long-term benefit that will 
persist beyond the lifetime of the project. 
24. All major GCF safeguard policies are reflecte d in the guidelines for on-granting. In 
particular, the gender aspect of subprojects will be closely scrutinized, ensuring gender equity 
in all awarded grants. 
3.4 Needs of the recipient             Scale:	High  
25. Three of the four countries in the project are classified as least developed countries: 
Madagascar, Mozambique and the United Republic  of Tanzania; this would be the GCF’s first 
funded activity for Mozambique. 
26. All four countries have significant gaps in their marine management and a shortage of 
funding to establish the enabling factors that would allow for the privat e sector to invest in 
activities that would foster climate resilience and create a stable environment over the long 
term for the protection and sustainable management of the marine resources. The project encourages the development of these enabling fact ors, leading to more favourable conditions 
for upscaling, something the countries would not be expected to achieve without this 
programme. 
3.5 Country ownership      Scale:	Medium/high  
27. The proposal aligns well with national climate change and environmental and marine 
management policies and strategies in the four countries. BAF is an existing mechanism 
established and based in Germany and has a global funding scope. The programme addresses an 
area where all countries have significant gaps in their climate change response strategies.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 77 
 
 
28. The programme takes a participatory approa ch and proposes to include a community-
based approach in financing sub projects, wh ich would enable autonomous community-led 
solutions. 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness      Scale:	Medium/high 	
29. Given that the project is for an on-granting facility (74 per cent of the total budget), it is 
difficult to establish the efficiency and effectiveness at this time. The current situation in the 
target areas of the project and the conditions for on-granting, however, mean that the efficiency and effectiveness of the GCF grant financing is medium to high. 
(a) There is co-financing of EUR 25 million in grants to be added to the EUR 30 million grant 
request to GCF; 
(b) Grant recipients need to contribute at least 25 per cent to the total cost of their 
subproject; and, 
(c) The on-granting windows target soft interven tions with minimal construction and other 
capital-intensive interventions. 
IV. Assessment 	of	consistency 	with	GCF	safeguards 	and	policies	
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards 
30. Environmental 	and	social	risk	category . The accredited entity (AE) has categorized 
the programme as category I-2. The subprojects under the programme are divided into six main 
types (with some subprojects assigned to more than one type), namely: (1) Designation of new 
MPAs; (2) Development of an effective management system for existing/newly established 
MPAs; (3) Implementation of improved nature  conservation measures; (4) Development of 
alternative sustainable livelihoods; (5) Projects  involving aquaculture activities; and (6) Small-
scale construction activities (e.g. ranger offices,  research or monitoring facilities, jetties, fish 
processing or storage facilities, access roads, to urism facilities, etc.). The potential risks and 
adverse impacts of these subprojects are expected to be few and limited in scope; generally site-
specific; largely reversible; and readily addressed through mitigation measures. The 
programme also excludes category A subp rojects that will receive GCF funding. 
31. Environmental 	and	social	assessment . The AE provided an environmental and social 
management system (ESMS) given that specific sites of the subprojects to be located in 
Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa and the Unit ed Republic of Tanzania have not yet been 
identified at this stage. The ESMS lays do wn the principles and procedures to assess and 
manage the environmental and social impacts of its activities on affected communities and the 
environment in accordance with  international standards and best practices as well as the 
Performance Standards of the International Finance Corporation and the Sustainability 
Guidelines of Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) Development Bank (2016). The ESMS was 
disclosed in compliance with the GCF Informatio n Disclosure Policy. Cate gory B subprojects are 
expected to undergo an environmental and soci al assessment process to identify the risks and 
areas of concern. A management plan should also  be prepared. The ESMS provides guidance in 
conducting an environmental and social impact assessment. It requires contractors to develop 
and implement an environmental and social management plan  for small construction activities. 
32. Environmental 	and	social	risks	and	impacts.  The programme’s potential negative 
environmental and social risks and impacts that ha ve been identified include impacts due to the 
siting of the projects, such as impacts on land take or restriction of access to terrestrial or 
marine natural resources, which could affect pe ople’s livelihoods; impacts on terrestrial or


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 78 
 
 
marine natural habitats and or flora/fauna; an d possible impacts on cultural heritage. The 
subprojects may also have impacts on workers’ heal th and safety (related to occupational health 
and safety) during construction activities, which can range from minor injuries to fatal accidents (e.g. boating accidents). The construction activiti es may also have impact s on labour conditions 
such as the possible employment of children, non-compliant and non-transparent remuneration 
to fulfil legal requirements, possible harassment, intimidation, and/or exploitation of workforce 
(forced labour), and discrimination toward worker s due to origin, gender, age, ethnicity or any 
other criteria not related to the job at hand . The programme has also identified potential 
impacts on the community in relation to change to or loss of current types of livelihoods, 
exposure to accidents on open construction sit es, impacts related to to urism, and disturbances 
due to exposure to construction-related noi se, vibration and dust, among other things. An 
environmental and social management plan at the subproject level should be prepared.  
33. The ESMS outlines that indigenous peoples, where identified in accordance with the 
International Finance Corporation Performance Standard 7 definition, are potential 
stakeholders who may be affected by the subp rojects. Where such indigenous peoples are 
impacted, their free, prior and informed consent needs to be part of the stakeholder 
engagement plan. The grievance redress mechanism will need to be culturally appropriate and accessible for indigenous peoples. 
34. Implementation 	arrangement.  At the subproject level, the grantees are responsible for 
the day-to-day monitoring of the implementation  of the environmental and social requirements, 
including engagement with local stakeholders. It is  also the grantees’ responsibility to monitor 
the environmental and social performance of it s contractors and subcontractors. The ESMS has 
provided a template for environmental and social monitoring in subprojects. At the institutional 
level, BAF and its advisers will oversee the implem entation of environmental and social issues 
as part of the fund’s monitoring activities. The AE  will also be able to participate in monitoring 
visits, which will include the participation of  its environmental and social experts.  
35. Stakeholder 	engagement . The AE has conducted consultation with regional and 
international NGOs. It also plans to continue th e consultations for the AE to get feedback from 
experiences in project implementation on the ground and with local communities and organizations. At the subproject level, the ESMS provides guidelines for stakeholder 
consultations and stakeholder engagement.  
36. Grievance 	redress	mechanism . The ESMS describes the programme’s requirement for 
its implementation partners to set up a grieva nce redress mechanism at the subproject level. 
The ESMS also indicates that it is the responsibility of the grantees to establish a grievance log and report grievances and complaints raised by re levant stakeholders to the programme. It also 
includes providing workers with access to a grieva nce mechanism. At the in stitutional level, BAF 
will also put a grievance redress mechanism in pl ace. The institutional grievance mechanism of 
the AE will also be a key channel for grievance management. Responsibilities for grievance management at KfW lie within the Complaints Management Team, the responsible Project 
Manager and the Environmental and Social Expert. The responsible entity for grievance 
management at BAF is the Fund Management Team.  
4.2 Gender policy  
37. The AE has submitted a gender assessment; th erefore, it complies with the operational 
guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Gender  Action Plan. The AE has also provided a 
programme-level gender action plan with the expectation that there will be a project-level 
assessment and gender action plans to be develope d once project locations are identified in the 
four countries.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 79 
 
 
38. The AE has provided in the gender assessment the prevailing gender inequality situation 
broadly for each country. It indi cates that in all four countries, gender inequalities affect more 
women than men in the social, economic and political arenas. Given this reality, all four countries have attempted to mainstream gend er and women’s empowerment in their climate 
change and other relevant national plans. The assessment, which was a desk exercise, has also 
looked into common challenges in addressing gender across the four countries. The challenges 
include the lack of recognition and undermining of the contribu tion of women in fisheries, 
marine and coastal conservation and resource management works. Fishing is portrayed as a 
male domain while in reality, when the whole fish ing cycle is taken into account, 47 per cent of 
the workforce is female.  Fishing has differentiated health impacts on men and women, with women in particular bein g affected by, for example, marine contaminants which are particularly 
dangerous for fetus development.   
39. The gender analysis has provided information as it relates to fishing as an activity and 
the existing inequalities between women and men. Women are involved in overall coastal 
management and management of marine resources. They engage in the management/use of 
mangroves and corals, the collection and harvesting of mussels and seaweeds and the 
processing of catches and harvested products, as well as being involved in the maintenance of fishing gear and tools and in marketing activi ties. The assessment indicates that insufficient 
attention is given to the contribution of women to the sector, attributing the situation to the 
limited access for women to education, employment and market opportunities. Detailed 
approaches and plans regarding the involvement of  women at the project level will be identified 
and developed in a participatory manner for indivi dual projects and in the four countries. NGOs 
will be selected to undertake the activities; however, there is limited information in the gender 
assessment on the selection criteria of potent ial NGOs across the six investment criteria.  
40. As indicated in the funding proposal, there is  an overall target of 50 per cent female 
participation in the project. Similar targets are included in the programme-level gender action 
plan for identified activities. However, this is an indicative plan to be used by the potential NGOs 
that will be developing the specific action plans. The action plan includes indicative activities 
such as formulating women’s self-help grou ps and improving wome n’s decision-making 
capacity, creating alternative incomes and increasing the involvement of women in nursery 
activities and training for women. Indicators, targets and timelines are included in the action plan. However, responsibility for the implementa tion would be given to NGOs whose capacity 
on gender is not clear; moreover, it is not clear how BAF and KfW would provide support to 
these NGOs on gender issues. Although the AE indicates that it will undertake assessments at 
the initial stages and develop action plans once project sites are identified, this activity, along with indicators and targets, budget and time lines, are not included in the action plan. 
41. A specific budget for the programme-level ac tion plan has not been provided; however, 
the funding proposal indicates that financial allo cation will be made once activities have been 
identified. It also indicates that a qualified te am of consultants will be assigned by BAF with 
funding from KfW to develop the gender guidelin es at the initial stages but has not indicated 
how implementation of the gender action plan is going to be supported by BAF and KfW and what support will be provided to NGOs. It is  recommended that the AE consider the above-
mentioned points while developing the project-level gender action plan to ensure that activities that could give rise to location-specific gender issues are identified and supported with baselines, targets, indicators, budget and timeli nes; there should also be an indication of 
whether BAF and KfW and the NGOs in the four countries will have the requisite gender 
expertise to implement the gender action plans that will be developed.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall	programme 	assessment 	(medium 	risk):


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 80 
 
 
42. The funding proposal is for a EUR 30 millio n grant for a programme executed by BAF. 
The objective of the programme is to enhance ecosystem services that contribute to reducing 
climate change related risk for vulnerable coas tal communities. The executing entity (BAF) will 
launch thematic calls for proposals. The selected projects will be implemented by local NGOs.  KfW is the AE and co-founder of the executing en tity (BAF). Other contributors to BAF include 
the French Development Agency and Swed ish Ministry for Foreign Affairs.  
43. The success of the programme depends on the ability of BAF to attract and select high-
quality NGOs that implement high-impact projects.  
4.3.2.  Accredited 	entity/executing 	entity	capability 	to	execute	the	current	programme 	
(medium 	risk):	
44. The AE is a German state-owned development bank. The institution benefits from a state 
guarantee and is triple A rated by Moody’s, Fitch and Standard & Poor’s. KfW has a track record in climate finance. In 2018, KfW provided aro und EUR 8.7 billion in financing to developing 
countries and emerging economies on behalf of  the German Federal Government (in 2017 the 
amount provided to developing countries an d emerging economies was EUR 8.2 billion). 
Around 58 per cent was earmarked for climate ch ange mitigation and environmental protection 
projects. 
45. The executing entity is an independent non-profit foundation which will select projects 
to be implemented by local NGOs. BAF was establi shed in 2016 by KfW and the German Federal 
Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development. Although the track record of BAF is limited, its ability to execute the project is st rengthened by the involvement of experienced co-
financiers and good governance (two-tier bo ard structure and commitment to governance 
codes). The BAF team has experience working with NGOs in development cooperation. 
4.3.3.  Project‐specific	risks	(medium 	risk):	
46. NGO selection: BAF is located in Germany an d has no local presence in the countries 
where the projects are to be implemented. The success of the programme depends on the ability 
of BAF to attract and select high-quality partne rs that can deliver impact. BAF requires that 
NGOs have proven competence and track record in the project area over several years. The AE 
will undertake activities to ensure the quality of  the implementation; this includes independent 
evaluation reports. 
47. Project sourcing and selection: the impact of the programme will be driven by the ability 
of BAF to generate a strong pipeline of NGOs/pro jects. Projects are to be sourced via a public 
tender. Since its establishment in 2016 BAF has spent EUR 1.3 million (as at December 2018) 
for project-related expenses and has committed EUR 11 million in future programme grants. 
BAF has a limited track record in project selection but is expected to benefit from the involvement of IUCN as a partner in the selection process. 
48. Disbursement of GCF funds to BAF: as at year-end 2018, BAF had EUR 64 million in 
contributions. However, pending utilization of these funds for end projects, BAF has invested 
the funds in bank deposits, corporate bonds and equity shares. Its investments include 
securities of corporates active in aviation and the chemical industry. As the implementation 
period of the GCF programme is seven years, it is required that the AE disburse GCF funds to 
BAF based on the implementation requirement of the underlying projects by the NGOs and prevent BAF investing GCF funds in it s corporate investment portfolio. 
49. Political risk: the AE has identified medium risks of not achieving political support for 
the programme. The local projects and the NGOs  will need continuing political support to 
achieve the objectives. The AE and BAF are required  to consider this aspect in the selection of 
the project and the NGOs.


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 81 
 
 
4.3.4.  Compliance 	risk	rating	(medium): 	
50. Project activities include three components: supplying tools for improving the 
management of marine, coastal and freshwater protected areas and the management of coastal ecosystems (with some possible procurement, rehabilitation of ecosystems and capacity-
building.  A number of NGOs, some of which have  not yet been fully identified, are participating 
in the implementation and co-fin ancing of the project. Activiti es such as procurement and the 
involvement of as yet unidentified NGOs poses a risk of money-laundering and financing of terrorism. Because these NGOs have not been fully identified, the potential risk ranges from 
medium to high. KfW and BAF, which is an NGO re gistered in Germany, have provided detailed 
information about the anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism and counterparty due diligence measures to be implemented to screen and vet the remaining NGOs 
and counterparties, as well as to monitor and mitigate money-laundering and financing of 
terrorism risks.  A preliminary screening against United Nations Security Council sanctions does 
not reveal any ‘hit’ on any of the parties identifi ed so far as being prohibited from engaging with 
GCF. Additional screenings will be conduc ted as additional parties are identified. 
51. While Compliance notes the risk of money-laundering and financing of terrorism that 
may be found in the uncertainty of co-financing  partners and the procurement activities of the 
funding proposal, the AE and the EE have demonstrated a level of commitment and processes to 
address and mitigate these risks to a level of medium. 
4.3.5.  GCF	portfolio 	concentration 	risk	(low	risk):	
52. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation: 	
53. It is recommended that the Board consider the above-mentioned factors in its decision. 
Summary 	risk	assessment 	 Rationale 	
Overall programme 	Medium The success of the programme depends 
on the ability of the Blue Action Fund to attract and select high-quality non-
governmental organizations that 
implement high-impact projects. The 
project is exposed to asset and liability risk 
Comfort is derived from the involvement 
of experienced co-financiers and good governance structure at Blue Action Fund Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability to implement 
this programme 	Medium 
Project-specific execution 	Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration 	 Low	
Compliance Medium 
4.4 Fiduciary 
54. The AE, KfW, will be responsible for ensuring  that GCF funds are disbursed and utilized 
in accordance with the terms of the applicab le documentation, while also observing the 
implementation schedule of the programme.    
55. The executing entity, BAF, will implement the programme, while KfW will monitor the 
performance of BAF as executing entity in line with its rules, policies and procedures. BAF will 
be responsible for selecting NGOs as project im plementing partners according to a specific


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 82 
 
 
selection mechanism and criteria. BAF will conclude grant agreements with the NGOs 
implementing the subprojects and will supervise and provide support to the NGOs. 
56. The implementing partners (NGOs) are required to have strong financial management 
and internal control systems. This includes pl anning and budgeting, internal control and 
accounting, as well as funds, cash flow and assets management. Implementing partners must 
open a separate bank account for the project or a separate bookkeeping entry in the financial 
management system. The NGOs must also demo nstrate sufficient implementing capacity, 
implementing experience in projects with loca l communities and authorities, as well as the 
necessary safeguards, especially with regard to environmental and social safeguard 
requirements. They have to demonstrate sufficien t financial strength and fund at least 25 per 
cent of the total project costs (“match funding”).  
57. KfW will disburse to BAF according to disb ursement procedures agreed with GCF while 
BAF will disburse to subprojects according to project progress. The programme’s procurement 
and financial management will be implemented according to the BAF grant procedures manual. 
Procurement of goods, works and related services within the subprojects will be based on strict 
ethical principles and best international procurem ent practices for NGOs and should conform to 
the BAF procurement policy. 
58. BAF and KfW staff carry out regular on-site checks of the proper physical 
implementation and bookkeeping. Internatio nally renowned and independent auditing 
companies will conduct the financial reviews. 
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting 
59. The programme is categorized as addressing adaptation through interventions in all 
four adaptation results areas. The expected to tal number of beneficiaries is 200,000, which 
accounts for 5–10 per cent of the project areas of the funded subproject s and approximately 0.4 
per cent of the total coastal populati on of the four target countries. 
60. The revised funding proposal adequately ca ptures the recommendation provided by the 
Secretariat for the log frame and monitoring and evaluation arrangement by including the indicators – for example, A2.0 “Health and well-being, and food and water security” – necessary 
to capture all potential impacts generated by the programme that are relevant to the GCF results 
framework and elaborating on means of verification for some indicators to provide clarity on where and how the information abou t the indicator can be obtained. 
61. With regard to the arrangements on midterm and final monitoring, reporting and 
evaluation, an independent evaluator has been identified who will be carrying this out. 
4.6 Legal assessment 
62. The Accreditation Master Agreement was si gned with the Accredited Entity on 
15 December 2016 and it became effective on 6 November 2017. 
63. The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Madagascar, the Republic 
of Mozambique, the United Republ ic of Tanzania, and the Republic of South Africa, countries in 
which GCF is not provided with privileges an d immunities. This means that, amongst other 
things, the GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, which 
risks need to be further assessed. At the date of this assessment, the GCF Secretariat has engaged with the relevant  countries as follows: 
(a) With respect to the Republic of Madagascar, the GCF sent the last version of a draft 
privileges and immunities agreement to the National Designated Authority of the Republic of Madagascar on 13 May 2019. The agreement is currently under negotiation;


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 83 
 
 
(b) With regard to the Republic of Mozambique, the Secretariat has not yet initiated 
discussions on a privileges and immunities agreement with the government of the 
Republic of Mozambique; 
(c) With regard to the United Republic of Ta nzania, a draft privileges and immunities 
agreement was sent to the United Republic of  Tanzania on 13 November 2015. The last 
communication from the United Republic of  Tanzania was received by the GCF on 
21 May 2016; and 
(d) With regard to the Republic of South Africa, a draft privileges and immunities agreement 
was sent to the Republic of South Africa by the GCF on 9 March 2016. No response has 
been received yet from the Republic of South Africa. 
64. The Heads of the Independent Redress Me chanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that  disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the countries, or has been  provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities. 
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
65. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommende d that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions: 	
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval or the date when the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificat e or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals, whichever is later; and 	
(b) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 84 
 
 
Independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel’s	assessment 	of	
FP122	
Proposal name: Blue Action Fund (BAF): GCF Ecosystem Based Adap tation 
Programme in the Western Indian Ocean 
Accredited entity: Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW)  
Project/programme size: Medium 
I. Assessment 	of	the	independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel	
1.1 Impact potential                                                               Scale:	Medium/High  
1. Oceans and coastal regions are severely exposed to the impacts of climate change. 
Mangrove forests and coral reefs protect coastal areas against the effects of climate change, such 
as enhanced storm surges, cyclones and coastal erosion. They re duce the force of wave action on 
the coast and subsequent damag es to coastal populations. 
2. These ecosystems play a vital role in the livelihoods of coasta l populations in the West 
Indian Ocean. Mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass beds, which f unction as spawning and 
breeding grounds for fish, support  the livelihood of a large nu mber of fishermen. Mangroves 
themselves provide coastal protec tion and reduce disaster risk.  They also act as a source of 
firewood and timber for the population of the region. Embracing  the highest marine 
biodiversity in the world, coral reefs are crucial for ecosyste m health and for adaptation to 
climate change. Seagrass reduces coastal erosion, serves as nur sery grounds for young 
commercial fish, and is home  to hundreds of species. 
3. In addition, mangroves, sea grass  and coral reefs absorb and st ore huge amounts of 
carbon dioxide  so their protection and restorat ion contribute to climate mitig ation.  
4. Coastal regions of the Mozambique Channel/West Indian Ocean (WI O) comprise one of 
the world’s most significant marine and terrestrial biodiversit y areas and a biological gene pool 
for coastal south-eastern and Ea st Africa. In the region, these  ecosystems are still abundant, but 
are rapidly degrading and dimini shing due to population increas es and the unsustainable use of 
the ecosystems. Climate change  is also contributing to the ongo ing degradation. Coral reefs are 
damaged as a result of increasing sea water temperatures and ac idity. Extreme storm events in 
the region cause broad damage to coral reefs, mangroves and sea  grass beds. 
5. The WIO region is regarded as one of the most vulnerable region s worldwide to the 
impacts of climate change, such as sea-level rise, enhanced sto rm intensity, recurrent storm 
surges and coastal erosion. Recurrent cyclones, with subsequent  storm surges, flooding and 
coastal erosion, cause the loss of lives, valuable land and inf rastructure.  
6. These damages to the region are magnified due to its large popu lation and high 
vulnerability. In Madagascar and Mozambique, 66 per cent and 60  per cent of the population are 
living in the coastal region, respectively.  
7. Madagascar, Mozambique, and the United Republic of Tanzania are  included in those 
most vulnerable and least-prepared countries to suffer the impa cts of climate change. According 
to the ND-Gain Index, three co untries are ranked 169th (Madagas car), 159th (Mozambique),


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 85 
 
 
and 149th (United Republic of Ta nzania) respectively out of 181  countries.1 Therefore, the 
vulnerability of the coastal population to climate change in al l three countries is extremely high. 
The risks and damages that these populations face would increas e with sea level rise and storm 
intensification. 
8. The Blue Action Fund (BAF), the executing entity, is an indepen dent non-profit 
foundation established in 2016 by the German Federal Ministry f or Economic Cooperation and 
Development, and KfW Development  Bank (KfW), the accredited ent ity (AE). Currently, the BAF 
is the only global institution exclusively funding local-level initiatives in the marine/coastal 
conservation and sustainable fisheries sectors. It provides fin ancial supports to non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) to strengthen the resilience of coastal populations.  
9. The proposed programme (the Prog ramme) aims to promote ecosyste m-based 
adaptation (EbA) approaches in the  WIO region. Four countries, Madagascar, Mozambique, the 
United Republic of Tanzania and South Africa are selected for t he Programme based on the 
vulnerability of their coastal po pulations to climate change an d the high potential for EbA. The 
WIO region contains 16 per cent of the world’s coral reefs host ing the second peak of coral reef 
biodiversity globally. Mozambique  harbours the second longest e xtension of mangroves in 
Africa. Respective governments a lso indicate commitment to clim ate change adaptation policies. 
The Programme will be implemented by BAF from its special fundi ng window, as yet to be 
created.  
10. The Programme will implement an EbA approach to enhance the sus tainable 
management and restoration of marine and coastal ecosystems for  the purpose of reducing 
climate-change-related risks for vulnerable coastal communities  in the region. The 
implementation will take p lace over seven years. 
11. BAF will solicit proposals from NGOs for subprojects focusing o n climate change 
adaptation through EbA activitie s in the target countries. The subprojects are required to 
address climate-related impacts primarily rather than developme nt-related impacts only, to 
align with national and/or regio nal climate change adaptation p lans, particularly nationally 
determined contributions and nat ional adaptation plans, to prom ote capacity-building and 
knowledge exchange, and to contribute to climate change mitigat ion. 
12. The AE estimates the total funding requirement of the Programme  to be EUR 55 million, 
of which GCF is required to contribute a EUR 30 million grant. The balance of EUR 25 million 
will be provided by the AE in grant form.  
13. As per BAF operational requirements, participating NGOs are req uired to contribute 25 
per cent of the total cost of their subprojects either in kind or as co-financing. The total amount 
of the EbA subprojects that BAF would support can reach a maxim um of EUR 73 million. 
14. The Programme has three components. Component 1 (GCF cost: EUR 30 million; AE 
cost: EUR 14 million) enhances th e protection and sustainable m anagement of coastal resources 
relevant for EbA (mangroves, cora l reefs and seagrass). Under t he component, the Programme 
finances NGOs to undertake identification, planning, financing and implementation of coastal 
management and protection measures.  
15. Component 2 (GCF cost: EUR 8 mi llion; AE cost: EUR 6 million) i ncludes rehabilitation of 
degraded coastal ecosystems relevant for EbA. Eligible activiti es to be financed by the 
Programme include mangrove reforestation, seagrass rehabilitati on, rehabilitation of beach 
vegetation, and coral reef restor ation, where applicable (e.g. for more temperature-resilient 
species). 
16. Component 3 (GCF cost: EUR 4.5 million; AE cost: EUR 3.0 millio n) enhances knowledge 
exchange and capacity-building through effective and feasible E bA approaches suitable to the 
 
1 https://gain.nd.edu


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 86 
 
 
region. Awareness-raising and capacity-building on climate risk  assessment and the relevance 
of and options for using EbA measures for climate-resilient coa stal zone management are 
promoted in national/regional agencies. 
17. The AE estimates that the Program me would support approximately  17 subprojects of 
an average project cost of around EUR 3 million.  
18. As per the independent Technical  Advisory Panel (iTAP) request,  the AE presented two 
project models to illustrate the  expected impacts and contribut ions of subprojects in line with 
GCF investment criteria: an adapt ation project targeting the im provement of protected 
coastal/marine areas, and a mang rove rehabilitation project. Th e AE also developed a draft 
appraisal matrix, which includes  criteria for the evaluation of  submitted subproject proposals. 
19. In selecting EbA subprojects for the Programme, BAF applies a m inimum threshold of 
5,000 direct beneficiaries. Accordingly, 85,000 direct benefici aries can be expected in total. Fifty 
per cent of the direct beneficiaries will be women. (Direct ben eficiaries usually represent 5–10 
per cent of the total population of the area where subproject i s implemented.) 
20. Ongoing BAF subprojects of EUR 2–4 million result in direct ben eficiaries of between 
5,000 and 52,000, with an average of approximately 20,000.  
21. The number of indirect beneficia ries will differ significantly between the subprojects 
and depending upon the ecosystem services available in the subp roject areas. The number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries will be confirmed after the s election of subprojects and will be 
reported annually to GCF. 
22. Coastal and marine conservation subprojects have potential for carbon sequestration. 
The sequestration rate of carbon sinks, such as mangroves and s eagrass beds is estimated as 
two to four times higher than that of tropical forests. Accordi ngly, the impacts on climate change 
mitigation can be realized as co-benefits.  
23. The iTAP assesses the impact potential of the proposed Programm e as “medium/high”. 
The AE estimates the number of direct beneficiaries of the Prog ramme to be 85,000 at 
minimum, of which half will be women. This target does not seem  high when compared with 
ongoing BAF subprojects. As the AE indicates, a total number of  340,000 direct beneficiaries 
could be realized if the average number of beneficiaries turns out to be similar to the existing 
BAF portfolio.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                Scale:	Medium/High 	
24. Replication and scaling up of EbA measures implemented by NGOs with the 
Programme’s financial support can be assumed feasible and effec tive in the WIO region. The 
Programme will expand and promote sustainable EbA practices in coastal and marine 
ecosystems in the region. It aims to make EbA an integral part of coastal management in the 
participating countries with effective and cost-efficient clima te change adaptation measures. 
The BAF partnership arrangement with NGOs helps to identify and  subsequently replicate EbA 
subprojects to enhance marine and coastal conservation in the a rea. Having similar marine and 
coastal ecosystems, and socioeconomic structures, the four coun tries in the Programme face 
similar climate adaptation challenges.  
25. The Programme will contribute to the creation and exchange of k nowledge and learning 
of EbA concepts for sustainable coastal planning and developmen t. The BAF ensures the 
exchange of experiences and lessons learned from the implementa tion of EbA subprojects 
among NGOs and communities. Moreo ver, the Programme capitalizes  on the knowledge and 
experience of NGOs in EbA approa ches working with the relevant stakeholders in the WIO 
region.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 87 
 
 
26. The Programme is supported by the  BAF global platform for knowl edge exchange and 
learning of innovative concepts and experiences of EbA for mang roves, reefs and seagrass as 
well as sustainable coastal pla nning and management. The collab oration of BAF with the 
International Union for Conserva tion of Nature and Natural Reso urces (IUCN) as a technical 
adviser can further strengthen the dissemination of knowledge a nd lessons learned from the 
Programme.  
27. The Programme aims to contribute t o the creation of an enabling  environment for EbA 
approaches in marine and coastal  ecosystems in the region, whic h can be sustained by the local 
communities and national authorities following project completi on. Public participation and 
local community involvement in subprojects are essential to enh ance the management of 
conservation areas so that marin e and coastal ecosystems can be  restored and conserved. The 
improvement of economic benefits  and food security can ensure t he sustained participation of 
local communities in resilient and sustainable development duri ng and after the completion of 
subprojects. 
28. The AE considers the Programme to have the potential to mainstr eam climate change 
adaptation into policies and strategies for marine and coastal areas on a national and regional 
scale. The governments in the region will benefit from knowledg e exchange and learning of EbA 
approaches to coastal management and conservation. The AE and B AF plan to utilize their 
international network, as well as  existing collaborations, to s upport regional governments to 
reflect and integrate successful EbA approaches into their nati onal adaptation policies and 
strategies.  
29. The iTAP assesses the Programme as “medium/high” against this c riterion. While the 
EbA approaches that the Programme promotes may not be necessari ly new, they can be 
considered innovative in the regi on. However, the iTAP cannot, in the absence of substantiation 
of the AE claims, endorse the supposition that paradigm shift i s entailed in the grant funding 
mechanism that allows the addressing and bundling of on-the-gro und measures by local NGOs. 
1.3 Sustainable development potent ial                                            Scale:		High	
1.3.1.  Environmental 	co‐benefits	
30. Coral reefs, seagrass and mangroves offer an effective protecti on against erosion in 
coastal regions as they reduce t he energy of waves. The Program me enhances the sustainable 
management of marine and coastal ecosystems in the region. 
1.3.2.  Social	co‐benefits	
31. The Programme increases the resil ience of the population in coa stal areas to extreme 
climate and natural hazards through improvement and conservatio n of services from coastal 
ecosystems.  
32. In addition, it improves food security and nutrition for the co astal population of the 
region by enhancing the producti ve capacity of subsistence fish eries through the improved 
provision of ecosystem services.  In many least developed countr ies, fish accounts for about 50 
per cent of the protein consumed . The coastal population of the  Programme region is similarly 
dependent on fish as their main source of protein. 
33. The BAF scrutinizes subproject p roposals to ensure that both me n and women will 
benefit and that women’s participation in the decision-making p rocess will be promoted. 
Specific measures to enhance the  role and opportunities of wome n in the scope of subprojects 
will be included in component 3.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 88 
 
 
1.3.3.  Economic 	co‐benefits	
34. As spawning and breeding grounds, mangroves, coral reefs and se agrass beds are the 
most important coastal ecosystems for fish. Through the improve d provision of ecosystem 
services, the Programme increases the productive capacity and c limate resilience of subsistence 
fisheries in the WIO region. The target population of the EbA m easures will profit from income 
gains for fishers or employees in the fish processing and the t ourism sectors.  
35. The iTAP assesses the sustainable development potential of the Programme as “high”. 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                                                      Scale:	High	
36. The Programme enhances the adaptive capacity of the coastal and  marine ecosystems of 
the four selected countries thr ough the EbA approach. The count ries are of critical need of 
adaptation measures to mitigate the negative impacts of climate  change.  
37. According to the ND-Gain Index, Madagascar, Mozambique and the United Republic of 
Tanzania are among the  countries most vulnerable to and least r eady for climate change in the 
world. These countries further lack technical capacities or kno wledge of EbA approaches and 
methodologies for their implementation.  
38. The coastal population of the co untries depends significantly o n ecosystems and their 
services, therefore, it is vulnerable to the effects of climate  change. Local communities consist of 
mainly poor populations, therefore, they cannot afford to use t heir limited financial resources 
for climate adaptation measures. 
39. Madagascar, Mozambique and the United Republic of Tanzania are regarded as least 
developed countries and are highly dependent on external fundin g. As their national budgets 
are limited, public sector fundin g is unavailable to support Eb A subprojects. Private sector 
investment in adaptation subprojects cannot be envisioned as th ey are unlikely to offer a 
financial return sufficient to interest private sector investor s. 
40. While it has a higher income and national budget, South Africa is proposed for inclusion 
in the Programme due to the importance of the marine and coasta l ecosystems that partly cross 
its Sate boundaries. The country  offers opportunities for trans boundary projects. 
41. Accordingly, the iTAP assesses the needs of the recipient as “h igh”. 
1.5 Country ownership                                                                           Scale:	High	
42. The Programme is consistent with the national climate strategy or plan of the four 
countries. All four countries selected have a strong focus on a nd commitment to coastal and 
marine conservation within their national strategies, including  their nationally determined 
contributions, national climate strategies and national adaptat ion programmes of action. 
43. Madagascar has a policy framework  to cope with climate change risks and promote 
climate change adaptation. The Programme is aligned with the adaptation priorities highlig hted 
in its nationally determined cont ribution as well as its nation al adaptation programme of action, 
which contains a set of planned activities related to EbA in co astal and marine areas. The 
activities include sustainable fishery management, mangrove ref orestation, seagrass 
rehabilitation and rehabilitation of beach vegetation, which ar e eligible for the Programme’s 
financial supports.  
44. Climate adaptation strategies in Mozambique prioritize coastal protection, including 
forest restoration, rehabilitatio n of dunes and m angroves, and the promotion of good practices 
in coastal communities. Its nation al adaptation programme of ac tion also includes an integrated


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 89 
 
 
coastal zone management approach  for fisheries, coastal and mar ine ecosystem management, 
coastal and marine protection, m arine parks and tourism. The co untry’s National Climate 
Change Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy proposes actions to i ncrease the resilience of 
fisheries and protection programmes for the mangroves, algae an d seaweeds associated with 
potential carbon capture and storage.  
45. In the United Republic of Tanzan ia, the coastal and marine envi ronment is regarded as 
one of the highest priorities fo r climate adaptation. According ly, a large number of marine and 
coastal environment management programmes are being considered.  The programmes include 
mangrove reforestation; conservation of coastal resources; elim ination of destructive fishing 
practices and overfishing; prope r management of salt production  and seaweed farming, coastal 
ecosystem monitoring; restoration of degraded habitats (e.g. be ach nourishment, vetiver grass 
planting, mangrove replanting, stimulation of coral reefs growt h; and the establishment of 
marine protected areas).  
46. The Adaptation Strategy of South Africa includes measures relat ed specifically to EbA: 
community-based adaptation, conservation agriculture and climat e-smart agriculture (including 
forestry and fisheries). The EbA concept for fisheries manageme nt is designed to build greater 
resilience in the fisheries sector by securing existing fisheri es and biodiversity and assisting the 
recovery of impacted resources and whole ecosystems.  
47. The AE and EE have consulted with the national designated autho rities of the four 
countries in the Programme, and a concept note was presented to  the national designated 
authorities on which their governments were requested to commen t. All four governments 
express support for the Programme. 
48. Both the AE and EE possess the capacity and track record to del iver the Programme as 
proposed. The AE is Germany’s pu blic promotional bank, and it h ad a balance sheet of EUR 485 
billion and an annual funding vo lume of over EUR 75.5 billion i n 2018. The AE through its sector 
development bank administers the government financial assistanc e in about 70 developing and 
transition countries.  
49. The development bank sector of the AE has a long record of fina ncial cooperation with 
all four countries in the Program me, with a portfolio dating ba ck to 1965. Currently, the AE has 
an ongoing portfolio in these co untries in the natural resource  management, water, health, 
energy, financial and governance  sectors. The AE will supervise  GCF grant funding for BAF, and 
provide technical supports from i ts country and sector experts for the Programme.  
50. The EE was established in 2016 b y the German Federal Ministry f or Economic 
Cooperation and Development and the AE. It is an independent no n-profit foundation focusing 
on the promotion of resilient and sustainable marine/coastal ec osystems. Since its inception, 
BAF has implemented two open ca lls for proposal as well as a th ird call in 2019. As a result, BAF 
is currently implementing seven subprojects and has eight more in the pipeline. 
51. The operation of BAF is primaril y to provide grant funding to N GOs undertaking eligible 
subprojects. BAF does not develo p or implement subprojects. Rat her, it offers additional 
financial support to NGOs that are successfully working already  so that their efforts can be 
expanded and their approach and e xperiences disseminated broadl y. With technical support 
from IUCN, BAF provides crucial expertise on coastal and marine  ecosystem services and EbA 
concepts for the Programme.  
52. During concept development of the  Programme, NGOs  operating bot h internationally 
and in the region were approache d by BAF and req uested to provi de comments and 
suggestions.  
53. During implementation, the Progr amme will solicit subproject pr oposals from NGOs. 
The NGOs are required to demonst rate proven competence and a su ccessful track record in the 
relevant country in implementing projects aligned with the need s of local and national


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 90 
 
 
stakeholders. Each proposal will need the endorsement of the re levant national authority of the 
alignment with applicable national policies and strategies to t he coastal and marine sector. The 
engagement of relevant stakeholders (i.e. local communities and  regional/national authorities 
and civil society) is required in the preparation and implement ation of subprojects. 
54. No-objection letters were issued  by the four countries, which a re attached to the funding 
proposal.  
55. Accordingly, the iTAP rates th e proposal “high” against this cr iterion. 
1.6 Efficiency and effectivene ss                                         Scale:	Medium/High 	
56. Since its inception, BAF has funded seven EbA projects proposed  by NGOs in 
marine/coastal preservations through calls for proposal, and an  additional eight subprojects are 
in its pipeline for implementati on. As its funding and operatio nal track record is established, 
BAF should be able to manage subprojects of EUR 2–5 million in line with GCF performance 
criteria. The NGOs that will be selected by BAF should already have planning, procurement and 
implementation systems in place to implement a cost-efficient a pproach for the utilization of 
GCF funds. With the technical support of IUCN, BAF examines the  design of submitted proposals 
for the achievement of project objectives effectively.  
57. The proposed EUR 30 million gran t from GCF will be matched by a  EUR 25 million grant 
from the AE. Furthermore, NGOs w ill be required to contribute a n additional EUR 12.5 million, 
either as in-kind or direct co-financing contributions to the s ubprojects. Accordingly, the GCF 
grant will realize a co-finance r atio of 0.8 at BAF level and 1 .25 at subproject level, including 
project management costs of EUR 2 million. 
58. GCF financial assistance in the form of a grant should be suppo rted. EbA subprojects for 
coastal management and restoratio n of ecosystems financed by th e Programme do not generate 
revenue or direct cash flow. As subprojects do not generate pre dictable cash flow for 
repayment, the provision of debt  by the Programme is unfeasible . 
59. Private sector funding cannot be expected since financial retur n on the subprojects is 
limited. Accordingly, there is no  crowding out of private secto r financing. 
60. The resources and services of mar ine and coastal ecosystems car ry high economic value. 
In Africa, small-scale fisheries employ over 95 per cent of fis hers, and provide more than 90 per 
cent of the fish consumed across the continent. As an example, in Mozambique, small-scale 
fisheries contributed 8 per cent of the country’s gross domesti c product in 2018. In the WIO, the 
total gross marine product is estimated at USD 20.8 billion (20 15). 
61. The EbA approaches are considered effective in mitigating clima te-change-related risks. 
Compared with traditional infrastructure for coastal protection , such as the construction of 
protection walls, EbA approaches reduce not only the risks of t he effects of climate change, but 
also the vulnerability of the co astal communities. Furthermore,  EbA approaches are more cost 
efficient than traditional infrastructure measures, and have lo wer maintenance costs. They also 
improve the livelihood of the coastal communities through incom e generation and food security.  
62. Efficiency and effectiveness are one of the key evaluation crit eria of the Programme 
through which to assess and monitor subprojects. BAF and the AE  assess subproject costs 
against expected impacts/benefit s during appraisal and selectio n.  
63. As a part of the subproject assessment, BAF and the AE examine detailed exit strategies 
presented by NGOs. In the last y ear of subproject implementatio n, the funding of subprojects 
will be reduced for handover. Sta keholders of the subproject ar e required to assume operation 
and maintenance costs du ring the transition.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 91 
 
 
64. For the preparation of subprojects, the best available EbA tech nologies and practices of 
marine and coastal ecosystems are mobilized for the Programme c onnecting international NGOs 
and local communities and stakeholders. BAF, with IUCN support,  will evaluate technical 
concepts, innovative character an d effective achievement of pro ject objectives of submitted 
subproject proposals 
65. The iTAP rates the proposal “medi um/high” against this criterio n. 
II. Overall	remarks 	from	the	independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel	
66. The iTAP recommends that the Board approve the proposed Program me as presented.  
67. The Programme promotes EbA approaches in Madagascar, Mozambique , the United 
Republic of Tanzania and South Africa where their coastal popul ation is vulnerable to climate 
change and the introduction of EbA approaches have high potenti al. The Programme is 
consistent with the national climate strategy or plan of the fo ur countries. The EbA measures to 
be implemented by NGOs with the Programme’s financial support c an be replicated and scaled 
up in the region. Both AE and EE have the capacity and track re cord to implement the 
Programme as presented.


---
*Page 92*
---

  
		 	 	 	 	 	 GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 92 
 
 
 Response 	from	the	accredited 	entity	to	the	independent 	
Technical 	Advisory 	Panel's	assessment 	(FP122) 	
Proposal name: Blue Action Fund (BAF): GCF Ecosystem Based Adap tation Programme in 
the Western Indian Ocean  
Accredited entity: Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) 
 
Impact	potential  
The	assessment 	of	iTAP	has	been	noted	and	is	appreciated. 	We	fully	concur	with	the	judgement 	
of	iTAP	that	the	estimate	of	85,000	direct	beneficiaries 	is	a	very	conservative 	estimate, 	based	on	
the	related	eligibility 	criterion	for	sub‐project	proposals 	(number	of	direct	beneficiaries 	must	be	
at	least	5000 ).	The	actual	number	of	beneficiaries 	is	expected	to	be	significantly 	higher.  
Paradigm 	shift	potential 	
The	assessment 	of	iTAP	has	been	noted	and	is	appreciated. 	Furthermore, 	we	would	like	to	stress	
that	the	BAF	is	unique	in	the	context	of	official	development 	cooperation. 	According 	to	our	
knowledge, 	the	BAF	is	the	only	globally	operating 	financing 	instrument 	in	the	area	of	coastal	
and	maritime 	conservation 	and	ecosystem ‐based	adaptation 	that	provides	direct	funding	
opportunities 	for	NGOs.	Due	to	this,	the	special	mix	of	strengths 	of	local	NGOs	(e.g.		well‐
established 	trust‐relationship 	to	local	communities) 	in	partnership 	with	renowned 	international 	
NGOs	(e.g.	proven	project	management 	and	technical 	capacities) 	can	be	leveraged 	for	successful 	
project	implementation.  
Sustainable 	development 	potential  
The	assessment 	of	iTAP	has	been	noted	and	is	appreciated.  
Needs	of	the	recipient  
ITAP’s	assessment 	has	been	noted	and	is	appreciated.  
Country	ownership 	
The	assessment 	of	iTAP	has	been	noted	and	is	appreciated.  
Efficiency 	and	effectiveness  
We	fully	concur	with	the	judgement 	of	iTAP	that	EbA	approaches 	are	highly	effective	in	
mitigating 	climate	change‐related	risks,	and	at	the	same	time	are	superior	to	technical 	solutions	
with	regard	to	cost‐efficiency 	and	maintenance 	costs.	This	is	corroborated 	by	case	studies	in	
different	parts	of	the	world.	For	example,	a	study	on	ecosystem 	services	of	mangroves 	in	the	
Zambezi	delta	of	Mozambique 	(WWF	2017)	resulted	in	a	total	value	of	USD	28,840	per	ha	and	
year,	reflecting 	the	combined 	value	of	both	direct	and	indirect	use.	When	comparing 	these


---
*Page 93*
---

  
		 	 	 	 	 	 GCF/B.24/02/Add.08 	
Page 93 
 
 
 values	with	the	reforestation 	costs	(<	USD	3000/ha) 	or	rehabilitation 	costs	(approx.	USD	
250/ha)	for	mangroves, 	it	might	even	be	justified	to	rate	this	aspect	as	being	highly	efficient	and	
effective.	  
Overall	remarks 	from	the	Independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel:	
We	strongly	appreciate 	the	progression 	and	the	results	of	iTAP’s	assessment 	and	are	very	
pleased	to	learn	that	iTAP	recommends 	support	for	the	Programme 	proposal.


---
*Page 94*
---

1 Annex 8 Gender assessment and programme-level action plan 
Blue Action Fund (BAF) – Programme for Western Indian Ocean – E cosystem 
based Adaptation 
Gender Analysis/ Assessment and Gender Action Plan Template 
Part I Gender Analysis/ Assessment 
This document provides a high level overview of the gender situ ation and key gender 
matters in the four target countries of the Programme and discu sses gender issues that are 
relevant to the Programme. A gender action plan is also include d in this assessment 
document. 
As specific projects for funding under the Programme will only be identified in the course of 
calls for applications which are yet to come, more detailed inf ormation in the format of 
project level gender assessments and –action plans will be developed once individual 
projects will have been approved. A Guide to Gender Mainstreaming that will be developed 
under the Programme, prior to the launch of calls for funding applications, will support further gender assessment and analysis as well as the development of project specific gender 
action plans.   
Introduction 
Gender issues in the context of climat e change in the Programme Region 
The Programme concentrates on one of the most vulnerable regions affected by the adverse 
effects of climate change: the Mozambique Channel / West Indian  Ocean (WIO). The WIO 
region’s local coastal populations are suffering from poverty, high population growth, and 
persistent marginalization. Climate change impacts that include  sea level rise, sea 
temperature change, coral bleaching, and storm events in additi on to effects from 
unsustainable use constitute increasing pressure to the region’ s ecosystems and the people 
who depend upon them.  
Within the context of the three main target countries (Mozambiq ue, Madagascar, Tanzania) 
and South Africa as an additional target country for transbound ary projects, issues relating to 
gender equality remain an on-going challenge, specifically in t raditional fishing communities, 
often living in remote locations, with low access to education,  employment and market 
opportunities. Isolated coastal communities frequently face foo d insecurity, environmental 
degradation and vulnerability to climate change, with women oft en being the most vulnerable 
and bearing the brunt of these challenges. 
Women and men use and manage marine and coastal ecosystems diff erently, have specific 
knowledge, capabilities and needs related to this and are diffe rently impacted by changes in 
their environment due to climate change, pollution, and globali zation. Recognition is 
increasing that sustainable and integrated marine and coastal e cosystem management 
requires gender sensitive and gen der responsive planning, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation at project, policy an d community level. This becomes evident in the Call for Gender documentation  for FP122


---
*Page 95*
---

2 Action1 issued by Member states at the UN Conference to Support  the Implementation of 
Sustainable Development Goal 14 (UN Ocean Conference) held in J une 2017, which 
highlighted the crucial role of women in the implementation of Sustainable Development 
Goal 14, “Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and mar ine resources for 
sustainable development”.1 
Fishing communities, and in parti cular coastal fishing communit ies, are faced with the 
immediate and growing threat of climate change and disasters. T he burden of protecting 
their livelihood rights, while at the same time standing up aga inst policies and practices that 
destroy their environment and th eir livelihood options, falls m ost directly upon these 
communities. Women, as key agents responsible for the resilienc e of small-scale fishing 
communities as well as for the reproductive work, have a leadin g role to play in climate 
change adaptation, ensuring climat e justice, and disaster risk management. 
Gender Inequality in the Target Countries of the Programme 
The target countries of the Programme (Mozambique, Madagascar a nd Tanzania; South 
Africa only for transboundary proj ects) show low to very low ra nkings in terms of both, 
Gender Inequality Index (GII) and the Human Development Index ( HDI), as presented in 
Table 1 below (for South Africa, Human Development is on a medi um level).  Whilst data on 
Mozambique and Madagascar are not available, Tanzania scored si gnificantly lower than 
South Africa (90) with a ranking of 130.  These poor rankings s how that social development 
including gender considerations  will support overall human and economic development, 
whilst low social and gender dev elopment levels will hamper soc ial and economic 
development. The fact that women represent about 50% of the tot al population in the target 
countries and will represent com parable percentages in the pote ntial target communities of 
the Programme, constitutes a strong rationale to build in gende r considerations in the overall 
program strategy and -design as in the requirements and in appr aisal- and monitoring 
procedures on the individual project level.  
Table 1: Gender Inequality Index and Human Development Index by country 
Country Gender Inequality Human Development 
 Index (GII) Ranking  Index (HDI) Ranking 
South Africa 0.389 90 0.699 113 
Mozambique 0.552 n.a. 0.437 180 
Tanzania 0.537 130 0.538 154 
Madagascar n.a. n.a. 0.519 161 
Source: UNDP data, 2018 
In the four target countries, gender inequalities evidently aff ect more women than men. For 
example, when analyzing key indicators for gender inequality, t he results show that women 
are socially, economically and pol itically more disadvantaged t han men. Maternal mortality 
ratios are high in all target countries, ranging from 489 death s per 100,000 live births in 
 
1 https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/27633/Gen der_MarEco.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y


---
*Page 96*
---

3 Mozambique to 138 in South Africa. The average percentage for s eats in parliament held by 
women ranges between 19.6 % for Madagascar and 41% for South Af rica. Regarding the 
percentage of female/male population with at least some access to secondary education, 
Tanzania has the lowest rate with only 11.9% of the female popu lation whilst for South 
Africa, 74.2% of the female population have access to secondary  education (information for 
Madagascar is not available). In M ozambique few girls finish pr imary school (46%), even 
fewer finish secondary school (22%), and 56% of women are illit erate (upwards of 70% in 
rural areas).2 
Table 2: Key Indicators on Gender Inequality in Target Countries 
 Maternal 
mortality 
ratio* Adolescent 
birth rate** Share of 
seats in parliament 
for women (%) Population with at 
least some secondary education 
(%tages held by women) Labor Force 
Participation (%tages ages 15 
and older) 
    Female Male Female Male 
South Africa 138 42.8 41.0 74.2 77.4 47.9 62.0 
Mozambique 489 135.2 39.6 16.1 27.3 82.5 74.6 
Tanzania 398 115.1 37.2 11.9 16.9 79.5 87.4 
Madagascar 353 109.6 19.6 n.a. n.a. 83.6 89.4 
Source UNDP data; *deaths per 100,000 live births; **birth per 1000 women, ages 1 5-19 
Gender Policies: Regional Context 
Member states of the SADC region are signatories to the SADC Pr otocol on Gender and 
Development, and have pledged to facilitate and encourage the i ntegration and 
mainstreaming of gender issues into the initiatives and program mes undertaken in SADC, to 
ensure sustainable development of the region. The objectives of  the SADC Gender protocol 
are as follows: 
 
 To provide for the empowermen t of women, to eliminate discrimi nation and to 
achieve gender equality and equity through the development of g ender responsive 
legislation, policies, programmes and projects; 
 To harmonize the implementation of the various instruments to which the SADC 
member states have subscribed to at the regional continental an d intercontinental 
level, on gender equality and equity; 
 To address emerging gender i ssues and concerns; 
 To set realistic, measureable ta rgets, time frames and indicat ors for achieving gender 
equality and equity; 
 To strengthen, monitor and evaluate the progress made by SADB member states 
towards achieving the targets and goals set out in the Gender p rotocol; and 
 To deepen regional integration, attain sustainable development  and strengthen 
community building. 
 
2 https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1860/Mozamb ique_Gender_Factsheet_September_2018.pdf


---
*Page 97*
---

4 Source: SADC Protocol on Gender and Development3 
National Policy Context: Examples 
This section presents relevant examples for national gender pol icies and action plans in the 
context of environment and climate change. The planned Guide for  Gender Mainstreaming 
for the Programme will provide a more detailed and comprehensiv e analysis of the relevant 
policy and legal frameworks  of the target countries.  
Mozambique: Climate Change and Gender Action Plan (Phase II), 2 0134 
The overall objective of Moza mbique’s Climate Change and Gender  Action Plan is to ensure 
national climate change efforts mainstream gender into policies , programs, and strategies so 
that both men and women have equal access to and opportunities and potential benefits 
from climate change response, imp roving the quality of life for  the whole of the population. 
The information below is considered as relevant for the Program me and hence was 
extracted from the Climate Change and Gender Action Plan Docume nt.  
The Plan states that is important to make the connection betwee n coastal security and 
adaptation with the populations that live and depend on the nat ural resources found there. 
Rural coastal communities in Africa have long harvested fish an d other natural resources to 
support themselves and their fami lies. A history of colonialism , exacerbated then by a period 
of civil war, increased inequalit ies and vulnerabilities, and i n the dynamic coastal and  
fisheries context, choices, opt ions, and adaptive responses dif fer between men and women. 
Fisheries and tourism have a strong relationship and for that r eason are generally male 
dominated, providing the local male fishers with most of the mo netary benefits. Although, 
women do take part in post-harvest activities, such as processi ng, selling, and marketing of 
marine resources providing access  to monetary income and liveli hood security. Climate 
change is already threatening fishing sector production by decr easing quantity of fish caught 
due to increased ocean temperature and destruction of sand bank s from erosion, along with 
reducing the size of fish (sinc e 2008). Also, stronger winds th roughout the year hinder 
fishers from entering the ocean to find fish populations that a re farther off the shore now; 
cyclones and erratic precipitati on have destructive impact, as well. Men are the main fishers 
in the 
industrial and semi-industrial ca tegories, but for artisanal fi shing, women and children 
constitute the main collectors as  well as being a substantial p ortion of fishers without boats. 
Artisanal production in 2003 was estimated by the Ministry of F isheries (MPESCAS) to be 
about 67,074 tons. The artisanal fishing sector also includes c ollection of seaweed (red 
algae, Kappaphycus), of which women do 80% of the collection.  In the central and northern 
regions, women work as collectors and in the market but very ra rely are allowed to work 
commercially in fishing. In the southern region, some women are  involved in commercial 
fishing and also work in the markets.  The intended General Outcomes of the CCGAP comprise  
 
3 https://extranet.sadc.int/files/2112/9794/9109/SADC_PROTOCOL_ON _GENDER_AND_DEVELOPMENT.pdf  
 
4 https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document /2014_IUCN_Climate-Change-Gender-Action-Plan-
Mozambique.pdf


---
*Page 98*
---

5  
 Enhance the sustainability and resilience of biodiversity and coastal ecosystems to 
the impacts of climate change through the mainstreaming of a ge nder perspective. 
 To promote mainstreaming o f gender and climate change in polic ies, plans, 
strategies and programs relat ed to integrated management of coa sts and fisheries 
 To increase women’s role as agent s/ informants for monitoring,  maintenance and 
reporting of vulnerable infrastruc ture (e.g. due to sea level r ise, cyclones). 
 To promote more active involv ement of women participating in c onservation and 
improvement of protection pr actices in coastal areas. 
 
Tanzania: National Strategy on Gender and Climate Change, 20135 
The information below is considered as relevant for the Program me and hence was 
extracted from the National Strategy on Gender and Climate Chan ge Document.  
Climate change will exacerbate environmental and social problem s in the coastal areas of 
the Indian Ocean basin, including in Tanzania. Climate change i mpacts are evident in the 
country’s coastal areas and are expected to intensify in the fu ture, affecting fishers, coastal 
residents, resource users, recreation, infrastructure and touri sm development. The poorest 
coastal communities are often the most exposed to the impacts a nd the least resilient and 
able to adapt.  
Tanzania’s 800 kilometers of coas t is of critical importance to  the development of the 
country. It contributes one-third of the national economy, hous es 75 percent of the country’s 
industry, is the location of the largest urban centers, and sup ports a quarter of the country’s 
population. This is a population that is growing rapidly and in habits a coast with high 
biodiversity and productivity. The concentration of people and economic opportunity poses a 
real threat to the ecosystem services that are so important. Th e challenge is to balance the 
conservation and sustainable use of the resource base on which the rural coastal economy 
depends, while developing new economic opportunities in a way t hat benefits the people of 
the coast and the nation as a whole. 
 
The fishing or seafood gatheri ng system is a dynamic system tha t goes beyond the activity 
of catching. The system is composed by a cycle involving catchi ng, processing, storage, 
marketing, acquisition, construc tion and maintenance of fishing  equipment and gear, such as 
boats and nets, permits clearing, firewood, salt and water gath ering and hauling for product 
processing, and preparation of food for the fishermen, etc. Rol es and participation in fishing 
and fishing related activities are differentiated and divided a long gender lines. For example, 
in artisanal fishing communities, women are mainly responsible for performing the skilled 
and time-consuming jobs that tak e place on-shore.  In Tanzania women’s role largely 
centers on the processing and marketing of fish that are caught  by men. Women may also 
be involved in the making and mending of nets as well as the bu ilding of boats. However 
they are also engage in fishing with small implements, wading a nd gleaning the shores for 
shellfish.  Today, women in Tanz anian coastal villages dominate  activities such as seaweed 
farming that includes multiple areas of work, i.e. production, weeding, harvesting, drying and 
marketing of the products. Seaweed farming has been developed a s an alternative to 
destructive fishing practice, co ral and sand mining.  Women in various islands are 
conducting innovative sustainable entrepreneurial activities; s uch is the case of octopus 
fishing in places such as Jibondo and Juani (90% are in the han ds of the women). As part of 
the development of the business, women have been trained and le arned the importance of 
keeping records of biological par ameters to facilitate conserva tion. In the artisanal sector of 
Tanzania women do most of the fish marketing. The majority of w omen purchases and 
processes the waste products from the fish plants. Marketing of  fish provides the main 
 
5 https://www.climatelinks.org/res ources/tanzania‐climate‐change ‐gender‐action‐plan


---
*Page 99*
---

6 source of income in many families of Tanzania, reflecting in im proved livelihoods when 
women control this income. Women’s role in the industrial proce ssing of marine products is 
central. In some factories the ra tio of women working is three women for one man. Despite 
this, a study conducted in 2002 pointed out that only men were permanently employed, 
women did not have any leading jo bs, nor were they involved in the planning process. The 
company also practiced different wages for men and women. Women  wages were lower 
than men. It should be noted that, in spite of the importance o f women’s participation in 
fishing activities - be it at the time the fish are caught, pro cessed, or sold, the conditions 
under which their involvement takes place in Tanzania are not o f a most equitable nature: 
 
 Women do not usually participate in the meetings held by the f ishermen’s 
organizations; 
 Most of the fishing projects are men-oriented, and the partici pation of women is 
limited with respect to planning, programming and management; a nd 
 There are very few policies or p rograms within the fishing sec tor where gender 
aspects are considered. 
As a general practice, projects contemplate a technical offer f or the fisherman producing 
large quantities of fish. However , women from marine-coastal zo nes or riverbanks perform a 
series of tasks, such as gathering bivalves, mollusks and oyste rs, among others. Despite the 
fact that all of these tasks involve intense labor and are extr emely time consuming, the 
exploitation techniques conti nue being very rudimentary. 
The technological bias that favors men, particularly in fisheri es projects, contributes to the 
inferior position and suppressed rights and privileges of women  in the fishing industry. 
Women involvement in processing and marketing though recognized  has only to a little 
degree been considered when planning  the fisheries development projects. 
The Strategy identifies the foll owing key actions in order to f oster gender mainstreaming:  
 Develop Gender-Responsive progra ms and projects to address cli mate change in 
coastal environments; 
 Encourage women to establish inno vative enterprises or to exte nd existing 
enterprises; 
 Improve women’s capacity to address climate change challenges in coastal areas. 
Madagascar: National Biodiver sity and Action Plans 2015-20256 
The information below is considered as relevant for the Program me and hence was 
extracted from the National Biodiversity and Action Plan Docume nt.  
Madagascar is one of the most climate vulnerable countries in t he world with a poor and 
predominantly rural population, a  high geographical exposure to  climate events, and a lack 
of readily available resources to respond to and recover from c limate disasters. From 1990 
to 2015, 65 natural hazards – including, floods, cyclones, drou ghts, epidemics, and extreme 
temperatures – affected Madagasca r and caused economic damages of over US$2.2 billion. 
Recent catastrophic risk modelli ng work suggests that, on avera ge, Madagascar 
experiences over US$100 million in combined direct losses from tropical cyclones and floods 
each year. 
 
6 https://www.cbd.int/ doc/world/mg/mg‐nbsap‐v2‐en.pdf


---
*Page 100*
---

7 The Report informs that the defined national objectives are bas ed on the challenges, threats, 
issues, gaps and the identified opportunities by consultations series with stakeholders and 
actors and also workshops throughout the country.  
According to the Action Plan Report, all biodiversity-related a ctivities will be 
guided by the following principles  
 
 Maintain the relationship between biodiversity conservation an d economic, social and 
development, material and spiritual well-being of the people; 
 Prevent the biodiversity loss and the ecosystem services degra dation by undertaking 
national challenges on biodiversit y conservation and rational u se of natural resources 
while adopting collaborative and participatory approaches in or der to get support of 
all stakeholders ; 
 Implement effective education of all stakeholders on the biodi versity and natural 
resources values and on national b iodiversity conservation stra tegies and action 
plans; 
 Ensure the fair and equitable benef its sharing arising from th e access to genetic 
resources to encourage the biodi versity conservation and promot e sustainable 
natural resources use and above all develop a sense of ownershi p and 
environmental reflex citizens; 
 Integrate the biodiversity and its ecosystem services value in  all sectors and national 
planning processes is an essentia l element to ensure environmen tally and 
economically sustainable development ; 
 Develop natural capital knowl edge through scientific research,  use of research 
results and enhancement of traditional knowledge; 
 Ensure sustainable funding mec hanisms to meet national commitm ents to 
biodiversity conservation and natural resource management; 
 Browse all opportunities to impr ove the people living conditio ns through sustainable 
biodiversity use o and ecosystem services; 
 Safeguard vulnerable social groups, including women and childr en who are highly 
dependent on the biodiversity and ecosystems services for their  livelihoods and 
prosperity;  
 Emphasize the importance of intersectorial and holistic consid eration factors; 
 Highlight the crucial role of the continuous adapted and proxi mity IEC 
 Emphasize the imperativeness to reinforce measures to stop the  environmental 
degradation spiral in general, to build resilience to the impac ts of climate disruption 
and to maintain or restore the ecological and economic ecosyste ms functions.  
 
Objective 6 of the Action Plan states:  
In 2025, all exploited fish stocks and other ma rine living resources and freshwater / brackish 
water are measured and managed sustainably an d destructive harvesting practices are 
eliminated. 
 
Strategic Guidelines: 
 Make available information and / or tools to all stakeholders to improve the rational 
and sustainable management of fisheries; 
 Set up legal and legislative fr ameworks for fisheries manageme nt and strengthen  
effectively their implementation . 
 
Objective 11 of the Action Plan states:  In 2025, 10% of terrestrial ecosystems and 15% of coastal and marine areas , especially the 
areas of particular importance for biodivers ity and ecosystem services , are conserved


---
*Page 101*
---

8 adequately in ecologically representative syst ems and in protected areas and are managed 
effectively by different strategic approaches . 
 Strategic Guidelines: 
 Set up sustainable management and financial mechanism, and par ticipative 
approach with local communities of the representative and uniqu e System of 
terrestrial, marine and coasta l Protected Areas of Madagascar. 
 
Objective 14 of the Action Plan states:  
In 2025, terrestrial ecosystems including fore sts, marine and coastal, sweet-brackish water 
including mangroves and lentic  environments that provide es sential services, particularly 
water supply and those that contribute to health, livelihoods and human well-being are 
protected and restored. And equitable access to  ecosystem services is ensured for all, 
taking into account the gender approach. 
Strategic Guidelines:  
 
 Develop and implement awareness tools and integrating gender e quality in the 
achievement of all objectives of the NBSAP, develop related inf ormation. 
  
South Africa: Strategy toward Ge nder Mainstreaming in the Envir onment Sector, 
2016-2021)
7 
 
The information below is considered as relevant for the Program me and hence was 
extracted from the Strategy Document.  
The Strategy was developed based on a comprehensive process of stak eholder 
engagement. Regarding gender mainstreaming in the context of ma rine and coast 
protection, the Strategy refers  to the following aspects as mai n issues and entry points: 
 
 Integrating a gender perspective in the decisive socio-politic al, economic and cultural 
aspects of conservation and coastal management. 
 Ensuring that a gender perspecti ve is explored for the incorpo ration of important 
knowledge, skills and experiences  into all conservation program mes. 
 Taking into account gender mains treaming principles toward enh ancing sustainability 
of environmental resource use on land and in the oceans and coa stal environments. 
 Ensuring equal participation of both women and men as benefici aries of oceans and 
coasts in terms of harvesting needs which currently need to be improved and  
prioritised e.g. fishing quotas. 
 
In this context, key questions to be addressed are outlined in the Strategy:  
 
 Data on the use of biological resources, disaggregated by sex – what is used by 
whom, by women or men? 
 Data on threats to biodiversity, disaggregated by sex – what k ind of threats are the 
activities carried out by women and men? 
 
7 
https://www.environmen t.gov.za/sites/defau lt/files/docs/publica tions/strategytowardgendermainstreamingi
ntheenvironmentsec tor2016_2021.pdf


---
*Page 102*
---

9  Data on the anthropogenic causes behind such threats, disaggre gated by sex – what 
are the socio-economic, cultural and other factors influencing women and men? 
 Data on trends of sustainability disaggregated by sex – change s in the sustainability 
of activities carried out by women and men? 
 Data on access to biological resources and resource-use regime s disaggregated by 
sex – to which resources and to what extent do women and men ha ve access? 
 Data on control over biological resources and resource-use reg imes, disaggregated 
by sex? 
 Data on the sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biolo gical resources and 
traditional knowledge, disaggregated by sex – do women and men share benefits to 
the same extent? Are such benefits designed to meet to the need s of women?  
As local government role players are often at the end of the im plementation cycle and are 
the tier that is responsible for the hands on operations of any  plans, policies and strategies 
that are formulated for and by the sector, a successful impleme ntation of the Gender 
Mainstreaming Strategy requires that local government is adequa tely trained and 
capacitated in their role to ens ure gender mainstreaming in the  sector. 
 
The goals of gender-sensitive loc al environmental governance ac cording the Gender 
Mainstreaming Strategy are: 
 To increase women’s participatio n in environmental politics, n ot only in formal 
political structures but also in other forms of civic engagemen t in environmental 
politics. 
 To strengthen environmental and gender-awareness and capacitie s among both 
women and men politicians and civil servants, which is currentl y a priority challenge 
not only in the sector but in the country and public service as  a whole. 
 To strengthen services that address the specific needs and int erests of women and 
men in the community, which r equire gender sensitive environmen tal planning and 
allocation of resources. 
 To create awareness of women’s right to a clean and healthy en vironment. 
Priorities to be implemented during to 2016 – 2021 comprise, am ongst others, the following: 
 
 Ensure policies accommodate gender mainstreaming and women iss ues; 
 Education and awareness i.e. know ledge and skills transfer, me ntorship 
programmes,  
 Forging of partnerships and networking platforms,  
 Create empowerment programmes that start with capacity develop ment and then 
eventually result in tangible projects at grassroots.  
 Create opportunities for women to  show case what they have ach ieved; 
 Creating and ensuring access to financial assistance and techn ological advances; 
 Raise literacy levels of women involved in projects and ensure  participation of 
women with disability and women with children with disabilities ; 
 Identify already existing projects and identify gaps while ens uring project 
sustainability for continuity; 
 
Gender Mainstreaming in Management of Coastal Ecosystems: Commo n 
Challenges 
Historically, the contributions o f women in onshore fisheries, aquaculture, processing and 
trading of marine products, in managing waste from urban and to urist growth, and their 
important role in conservation and disaster-risk reduction init iatives in marine and coastal


---
*Page 103*
---

10 areas have been routinely ignor ed or underestimated in research , management and policy. 
A variety of inter-related factors have led to women’s work and  contributions in fisheries, 
marine and coastal conservation and resources management being grossly undermined and 
undocumented. These include top- down and linear planning, lack of gender-disaggregated 
data, focus on formal and paid activities where men dominate an d the production and 
techno-environmental bias of mar ine and coastal development pol icies and projects.  
The key messages from the Global Gender and Environment Outlook  (2016)8 regarding 
marine and coastal communities and ecosystems are:  
 Women and men have common but di fferentiated responsibilities in the fishing 
sector. Fishing is frequently por trayed as a male domain, but w hen the whole fishing 
cycle is taken into account, act ually some 47% of the workforce  is female.  
 Fishing both reflects and def ines gender boundaries; men are c onventionally defined 
as “fishers”, while women’s activities in the sector are too of ten overlooked in official 
programmes, data collection and support.  
 Environmental change and damage to  marine systems have gendere d impacts, and 
women and men experience climate disruptions differently. Clima te change is 
especially threatening to coastal communities and fishing livel ihoods. “Downstream” 
effects on fishing sector activities such as post-harvest work are often not taken into 
account.  
 Health impacts are gender-differentiated. For example, many ma rine contaminants 
are particularly dangerous for foetal development. Chemical con taminants in ocean 
systems bioaccumulate, threat ening human health and the health of marine 
organisms.  
 As fisheries collapse globally and fish become scarce locally,  many women have to 
turn to transactional sex to bridge the scarcity gap.  
 Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing relies on tr afficked, indentured and 
slave labour, mostly by men.  
 Evidence suggests that fisherie s management improves when wome n are actively 
involved.  
Under the Programme and based on the approach from the planned Guide to Gender 
Mainstreaming specific challenges  for the different project are as/target countries will 
comprehensively be assessed and correspondingly addressed in ov erall project design, -
mechanisms and –activities . In this context, the wide range and diversity of involvement of  
women in overall coastal management and management of marine re sources, such as 
management/use of mangroves and corals, collection and harvesti ng of mussels and 
seaweeds, processing of catches and harvested products, but als o involvement in 
maintenance of gears and tools, in marketing activities and fin ally also women’s participation 
in  community based organisations related to coastal management  and female staff of 
administrations involved in c oastal management will be meaningf ully considered. 
Each project, in the project level gender assessment, will unde rtake an analysis of 
underlying causes for less attention to contributions of women within coastal 
management/use and management of ecosystems and related activit ies. These causes are 
expected to be specific and depending on the respective local s ocio-cultural setting and the 
overall national setting in terms of perception of women’s role  in economic and resource 
management activities, specifical ly in the marine resources use  and -management area. The 
corresponding interventions will be developed with diligent con sideration of the results of the 
 
8 
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/14764/Gen der_and_environment_outlook_HIGH_res.pdf
?sequence=1&isAllowed=y


---
*Page 104*
---

11 project level gender assessments, w ith tailored interventions, established and agreed upon 
using the participatory approach.  Actions will be integrated in to the project level gender 
action plan correspondingly.   
 
Programme Level Gender Mainstreaming   
The Programme’s overall objective is to enhance, through the co nservation and sustainable 
use of coastal ecosystems, ecos ystem services that contribute t o reducing climate change-
related risks for vulnerable coast al communities. The outcome w ill increase the resilience of 
vulnerable coastal populations to climate change.  
In order to achieve objectives and intended outcomes, the Progr amme will entirely apply 
gender sensitive and gender responsive planning, implementation , monitoring and 
evaluation at the programme- as well as at the project-  and co mmunity level and as well in 
overall policy dialogue with ins titutional and non - government al stakeholders.  
 
One of the key steps to ensure gender mainstreaming at all leve ls is the development of a 
Guide to  Gender Mainstreaming . The Guide will be developed by a qualified team of 
consultants, to be assigned by BAF (as project executing agency ) and will be available once 
the call for projects under t he Programme will be launched.  
 
The approach of the Gender Mainstr eaming Guide will be aligned to the GCF’s 
“Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects”-Manual an d to  
 KFW’s Gender Strategy (as accredited entity) 
 Relevant safeguard requirements of the BAF’s ESMS 
 Relevant policies, legislation and actions plans of the target  countries (the manual 
will analyse the policy and legal frameworks of the target coun tries according to their 
relevance for the Programme) 
 
As a key instrument of the Programme, the Guide will support pr oject developers to ensure 
an overall gender sensitive approach for the entire project cyc le. In this regard, the guidance 
document will be closely linked to the BAF’s ESMS which governs  the Programme’s 
environmental and social safeguard requirements. The acquisitio n of gender disaggregated 
baseline data for social impact assessment, gender sensitive im pact assessments, gender 
considerations in the development  of process frameworks to miti gate impacts from access 
restrictions to protected areas, gender sensitive indicators fo r monitoring and evaluation are 
some of the areas which will be covered by the Manual. Other im portant topics wi ll comprise 
gender sensitive stakeholder engagement as well as guidance for  the development of 
capacity building measures for women and men, e.g. in order to achieve equal 
representation on different decision making levels such as in m anagement structures for 
marine protected areas or in co mmunity based management structu res for marine 
ecosystems/ecosystem services.   
The Programme’s Guide to Gender M ainstreaming will inform gende r considerations for the 
overall global BAF funding portfolio with the overall intention  to apply the provisions of the 
Guide for the entire BAF portfolio.   
 
In addition, the Guide to Gender Mainstreaming will provide cou ntry specific gender 
assessments and –action plans as  well as guidance to produce pr oject level assessments 
and action plans for projects  in the four countries.


---
*Page 105*
---

12 Gender Assessment and G ender Mainstreaming at the Project Level  
Applicants will be required to  apply the recommendations and pr ovisions of the Programme 
Guide to Gender Mainstreaming throughout the project cycle and to provide evidence that 
they transferred recommendations  from the Programme level meani ngfully to the specifics of 
the respective project.  
In their project proposals, project applicants will provide inf ormation on how they ensure that 
relevant institutions, groups and local communities are involve d in planning and 
implementation, as well as detai ling what stakeholders will be able to change through 
successful implementation of the project. In addition, a stakeh older analysis will characterize 
the stakeholders and provide information on the number of house holds/people that will 
benefit from the project, as well as the extent to which commun ities depend on coastal and 
marine resources for their live lihoods. All these aspects will be analysed using a gender 
sensitive approach/methodology and by acquiring gender disaggre gated information.  
Detailed approaches and plans  regarding involvement of women o n the project level will be 
identified and developed in a participatory manner on the level  of the individual projects, 
based on guidance from the GCF Gender Mainstreaming Guide and c orresponding to the 
provisions of the Gender Assessment/Gender Action Plan. Both do cuments, but especially 
the Gender Action Plan are regar ded as “living documents”, to b e updated once the Gender 
Mainstreaming Guide with the country level gender assessments w ill be completed.  
 
During the project selection process, BAF will ensure that both  men and women equally 
benefit from sustainable and clim ate-smart livelihood options i n fisheries, aquaculture, 
tourism, ecosystem restoration and sustainable management of co astal and marine 
resources. All submitted projec t proposals will be scrutinized regarding gender-sensitivity in 
the general project concept. Proposed activities will be gender -sensitive and promote the 
participation of women in decision-making processes within the framework of the 
Programme.  
Activities on the project leve l in the gender mainstreaming con text will comprise, but will not 
be limited to  
 Design and implementation of p roject level gender action plans , including gender 
sensitive stakeholder engagement plans 
 Project level gender analysis a nd full integration of gender a nalysis and –
considerations in the implementat ion of the ESMS, including the  development of 
gender responsive and –sensitive grievance mechanisms 
 Awareness raising and consultation on all relevant levels (com munity and different 
levels of administration as wel l as management levels of protec ted areas) 
 Capacity-building for both women and men in order to support i nformed participation 
in project activities and decision making process as well as in  order to enhance 
participation in and benefits  from livelihood programs 
 Capacity building programs for participation in natural resour ces- and protected area 
management, for both, formal protected areas as well as communi ty based 
conservation efforts 
 Integration of gender provisions into training curricula for l aw enforcement staff as 
well as into codes of conduct (e.g. related to sexual harassmen t and violence) 
 Gender sensitive monitoring and evaluation mechanisms


---
*Page 106*
---

13  
Further gender analysis on the pr oject level will be undertaken  to identify 
 
 Gender disparities that may affect the success of a project;  
 Opportunities within a project to improve women’s access to ba sic services, 
economic opportunities or decision making;  
 Specific components or other mechanisms to ensure that both wo men and men 
participate in and benefit from a project. 
 
Women will be particularly encouraged to take their role in pro ject implementation as well as 
being part of various implementing and decision making entities  at different levels. The 
resources available for capacity building can provide the neces sary support and training to 
women in the technical, organiza tional and leadership domains.


---
*Page 107*
---

14 Part II: Gender Action Plan: Template (Project/Program Level)  
Activities 		 Indicators 	and	Targets	 Timeline 	 Responsibilities 	
Impact	Statement: 	Write	the	project/program 	impact	statement 	here  Increased resilience of vulnerable coastal populations to clima te change, through EbA of coastal and marine 
ecosystems, which provide services to local communities. This i ncludes also ecosystem services for women, as women equally dep end on protection provided by marine and coastal 
ecosystems and on the income base these ecosystems provide.   
	
Outcome 	Statement: Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. The indicator for this outcome statement is the “ Use by vulnerable households, communities, 
businesses and public-sector services of fund-supported tools instruments, strategies and activities to respond to climate chan ge and variability”.  
This outcome being achieved, at least 50% of the direct benefic iaries from an increased adaptive capacity to climate change ar e women (for income opportunities in fish processing; for food 
security of women and their families). Climate change affects e qually women and men, therefore, the Programme will support gen der-specific activities, including capacity building for women.  
On Programme Management level, BAF, with the support of special ized expertise will screen its procedures and programmes and fu rther improve its project selection mechanism, monitoring 
and evaluation, with a specific focus on women.  
	
Output(s) 	Statement: 	 
Output Statement 1.  Coastal ecosystems, which are particularly relevant for climate  change adaptation, are better protected and managed in a more sustainable way 
	
 
Activities to be financed are no t definitely known at this stag e, as the sub-projects are still 
to be selected. However, under the eligible programme activitie s, the following activities 
related to women are indicated:  
 
(i) Formation of self-help groups from women in order to increase t heir voice in the 
definition of support measures to local communities in protecte d areas (project 
planning).  
 
(ii) Direct support to women to incre ase their role in the participa tory co-management 
of marine protected areas and locally managed marine areas. 
 
(iii) Women working in fisheries and fish processing are trained in t he reduction of 
post-harvest losses and improved fish processing: specific trai ning measures, 
suitable in time/location/extent for the situation and availabi lity of women;  
(iv) Creation of income alternatives, with special consideration of income 
opportunities for wome n in the production and supply chains.  
 	Outline the indicators and targets 
here:  
 
In the average for all projects:  
	
	
(i) Participation of women or 
women self-help groups in workshops defining support 
measures (>50%) 	
(ii) Significant increase of women 
in the management of the protected areas  
(iii) Women participate in 
respective trainings (>50%) 
(iv) 12 measures supporting 
sustainable lifelihoods targeting exclusively women, ranging from saving clubs, business plan development to (timeline 	for	each	
of	the	indicators): 	
 
 
 
 
 
By year 4 
  
 
By year 7   By year 7  
By year 7 
  
 NGOs, responsible for 
execution of sub-projects


---
*Page 108*
---

15 seed funding.  
 
Output(s) 	Statement: 	 
Output  Statement 2.  Degraded coastal ecosystems, which are particularly relevant f or climate change adaptation, are rehabilitated. 
	
 
Activities to be financed are no t definitely known at this stag e, as the sub-projects are still 
to be selected. However, under the eligible programme activitie s, the following activities 
related to women are indicated: 
 
(i) Community-based management of the selection of suitable sites a nd rehabilitation 
activities: Formation of self-help groups from women in order t o increase their 
voice and to have an active role in the selection of suitable s ites and rehabilitation 
activities.  
 
(ii) Projects including nursery management and seedling production w ill actively 
integrate women in the planning and execution, identifying poss ible income 
generation opportunities for women.  
	Outline the indicators and targets 
here  
	
In the average for all projects:  
	
(i) Participation of women or 
women self-help groups in 
workshops defining site 
selection and rehabilitation 
measures: (>50%) 	
(ii) Participation of women in 
nursery management and 
seedling production: >50% 
	(timeline	for	each	
of	the	indicators). 		
 
 
 
By year 4  
 
 
 
By year 4 
 
  
  
NGOs, responsible for 
execution of sub-projects 
 
Output(s) 	Statement: 	 
Output Statement 3.  Knowledge exchange and capacity building regarding appropriate and feasible EbA approaches and measures are improved  
	
 
Activities to be financed are no t definitely known at this stag e, as the sub-projects are still 
to be selected. However, under the eligible programme activitie s, the following activities 
related to women are indicated:  
(i) Capacity building on the local level will be highly gender-sens itive: for this 
purpose, a consultancy specialized in gender-sensitive Programm e design will 
screen BAF’s procedures, templates and evaluation processes and  propose 
additional indicators and options to further strengthen gender aspects to increase 
benefits for women in BAF’s project cycle.  
 
(ii) Formation of women self-help groups which receive specific trai ning in marine and 
coastal resource management, including sustainable fishery mana gement and fish 
processing.  Outline the indicators and targets 
here: 
	In the average for all projects:  	(i) Results and products of the 
consultancy are available and 
can be used by BAF in order 
to adapt its project cycle to 
further strengthen gender aspects 
(ii) Participation of women in 
respective trainings / 
workshops: >50% 
	 
 
   By year 6 
 
 
 
  
 NGOs, responsible for 
execution of sub-projects


---
*Page 109*
---

16 _________________