=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20191018155534+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.21.20047
/ModDate: D:20191018155922+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.21.20047
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
12 – 14 November 2019  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  14 GCF/B. 24/02/Add.0 6 
22 October  201 9 
Consideration  of funding proposals -  
Addendum VI 
Funding proposal package for FP 120 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled “ Chile REDD -plus results -based payments for results 
period 2014 -2016 ”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment ;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from  the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation .


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page b 
3 
70 
71 
74 
110  
141  Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal  point(s)  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment  
Gender documentation  143


---
*Page 3*
---

Please submit the completed form to fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following naming convention in the subject line and file name: 
“[Country] REDD -plusRBP FP -[Accredited entity]- yyyymmdd”   Version 1.0  
Accredited entities are expected to develop a funding proposal in close consultation with the relevant 
national designated authority and REDD -plus entity/focal point, in response to the request for proposals 
for the Pilot Programme for REDD -plus results -based  payments (Decision B.18/07). The funding proposal 
should follow the terms of reference of that Board decision and will be assessed per Stage 2 (sections 2 – 5)
of
 the scorecard annexed to the same Board decision.
P
rogramme Title:  Chile REDD -plus resu lts-based payments  for results period 2014 -
2016  
Country:  Chile  
Results period in this 
proposal:  2014 – 2016 
National Designated Authority:  Trinidad Lecaros, Ministry of Finance  
REDD- plus entity/focal point José Antonio Prado, National Corporation of Forest (CONAF)  
Accredited Entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Date of first submission/ version number:  
[2019- 06-10]  
Date of current submission/ version number  [2019- 10-11] [V. 4]


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 2  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  Proposed and projected REDD -plus results  
 
Please provide the following information:  
 
Total volume of REDD -plus results achieved in 
the results period as reported in the country’s 
BUR technical annex (tCO 2eq):  6.136.475 tCO2eq 2014  
6.136.475 tCO2eq 2015  
6.136.475 tCO2eq 2016  
 
Total 18.409.425 tCO2eq  
A= Achieved volume of REDD -plus results 
offered to the pilot programme in this proposal 
(tCO 2eq):   
Between 2014 and 2016, Chile achieved results on reducing 
emissions from REDD+ totaling 18.409.42 5 tCO2e). Chile has 
not received other REDD+ payments for the results of 2014 - 
2016. However, The Nature Conservancy (Los Rios Region) 
verified a total of 16.724 tCO2e in the period between 
November 2013 and November 2014, and SNP Patagonia Sur 
(Los Lagos  Region) verified 17 tCO2e between 2014 and 
2016. These carbon units will be subtracted from the 
archived ERs to prevent a double payment situation (more 
details in section B.2.2 viii). Additionally, as a result of the 
analysis of the reversal risk potenti al of the ENCCRV, a 
reserve fund of 21% of the remaining ERs is established as a 
buffer for reversals (more details in section C.1.1 vi1), 
accounting for a total of 3.862.464 tCO2e.  
 
These considerations result in a total volume of REDD+ 
results offered to the pilot programme of 14.530.220  
tCO2eq.  
B= Expected volume of REDD -plus results to be 
achieved in the following years of the eligibility 
period (tCO 2eq):  Chile scheduled the second milestone of monitoring for 
2021 In order to measure the results for 2018 and 2019 
against the current FREL/FRL assessed by the UNFCCC.   
 
The results to be achieved in the years of 2017 and 2018 
have not been measured. But, duri ng January and February 
of 2017, Chile suffered the effects of an extraordinary 
phenomenon called “fire storm”, when the center -south zone 
of Chile (including the regions considered in the FREL/FRL), 
presented a significant number of forest fires, that wer e 
driven by unusual values of air humidity, wind and 
temperatures. These fires produced an amount of emissions 
that was  several times higher than the average of the 
country, estimating a total amount of emissions of 72.8 
million tCO2eq for the regions bet ween O’Higgins and Bio 
Bio, While, only in Maule and Biobio Regions, 64,236 
hectares of native forest were burned2. These numbers 
indicate that during the year 2017, and because of these 
extraordinary phenomena, the c ountry did not generat e any 
ER as expected, so the year 2017 will not be considered for 
any results -based payment instance.  
 
 
 
1 https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2019/July/FCPF%20Buffer%20Guidelines_2015.pdf     
2 http://www.conaf.cl/tormenta_de_fuego- 2017/DESCRIPCION- Y-EFECTOS- TORMENTA -DE-FUEGO -18-ENERO -AL-5-
FEBRERO -2017.pdf


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 3  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
During the year 2018, Chile presented a number of forest 
fires that was closer to the historic average, so it is expected 
to have results of ER similar t o what was reported for the 
years 2014, 2015 and 2016 (6.136.475 tCO2eq)  
 
Given the abovementioned considerations, the results of the 
following years of the eligibility period would be 6.136.475 
tCO2eq (2017 = 0 tCO2eq and 2018 =6.136.475 tCO2eq).   
 
Regar ding the expected ER for 2018, Chile started 
negotiation of an Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement 
(ERPA) with the World Bank3, and the period considered for 
the ERPA goes from 2018 to 2025, while the total volume of 
emission reduction that are being con sidered for this 
agreement is 5,200,000 tCO2eq, therefore the indicative 
results to be achieved for 2018 would be set aside for the 
fulfillment of the objectives of the ERPA.  
A+B =Total volume expected to be submitted to 
the pilot programme (tCO 2eq):   
14.530.220 tCO2eq  
 
B.  Carbon elements  
B.1. Forest Reference Emission Level / Forest Reference Level (FREL/FRL)  
 
Please provide link to the FREL/FRL submission: 
https://redd.unfccc.int/files/chile_mod_sub_final_01032017_english.pdf  
 
Please provide link to the UNFCCC Technical As sessment Report: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2016/tar/chl.pdf  
 
B.1.1. UNFCCC Technical Assessment and Analysis process 
(i) Consistency of the FREL/FRL: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the consistency of the FREL/FRL with the GHG 
Inventory, including the definition of forest  used. If the report identifies inconsistencies, explain these 
inconsistencies between the GHG inventory and FREL/FRL, and describe how they will be resolved in the next GHG 
inventory or FREL/FRL.  
 
The Technical Assessment Report (TAR) of the modified For est Reference Emission Level / Forest Reference 
Level (FREL/FRL) identifies close consistency between the modified FREL/FRL and the National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventory (GHG -I) submitted with the first BUR and  is supported by an entire chapter of the 
aforemen tioned document. However, some differences between the FREL/FRL and the GHG -I 
emissions/removal estimations, which have been duly justified, do exist,  however.  
  
For instance, the TAR points out that the emissions from deforestation and forest degradation of the modified 
FREL/FRL are significantly different from the GHG -I for the same period (2001 -2010), this is to say, in the 
modified FREL/FRL, emissions from deforestation were 3 times higher and emissions from forest degradation 
were 10 times higher compa red with the emissions reported in the GHG -I. Following the Technical Assessment 
Report release, some editorial mistakes were identified related to the value corresponding to emissions from 
forest degradation or forest land remaining forest land of the GHG -I. The accurate value is of 15.394.894,00 tons 
of CO2 instead of 938.196,57 tons of CO2, hence  the difference is no longer 10 times as was mentioned in 
 
3 LOI Signed with the WB, 
https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/system/files/documents/Letter%20of%20Intent%20signed%20C
hile.pdf


---
*Page 6*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 4  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
chapter 9 of the FREL  
 
Chile has provided a detailed explanation of these differences; indicating that the differences in emissions from 
deforestation were due to better activity data information and a more intensive use of emission factors based 
on country specific data. As an example, it could be said that activity data is the same in both the modified 
FREL/FRL and the GHG -I, but in the elaboration of the GHG -I the dates of some Cadastre maps were different 
from the ones used in the FREL/FRL. See chapter 9 of the FREL/FRL document for more details  
 
Despite the above, it is important to consider that there  are certain intrinsic differences between FREL/FRL and 
GHG -I. The main differences are related to:  
 
● Geographical scope: while the GHG -I scope is national, the FREL/FRL has a subnational scope, 
covering five regions that represent the 22% of the national territory and contain the 41% of 
the native forest.  
● The treatment of forest plantations: while GHG -I accounts for emissions and removals from 
forest plantations, these are excluded in the FREL/FRL.  
 
A comparative matrix detailing (based on chapter 9 of FRL/FREL) demonstrating forest land (ha)  and emission 
(tCO2) distribution by REDD+ activities (deforested areas, degraded areas, areas for conservation and areas for 
enhancement of forest carbon stock, planted forests, etc.), explaining  reas ons for differences in FREL and in 
GHG -I.  In the same matrix are also provided definitions for all these four activities considered in FRL and in 
GHG -I. 
  
With regards to forest degradation, during the FREL/FRL Technical Assessment (TA), Chile explained t hat the 
main reason for inconsistencies are related to activity data, the estimation methods (Gain – Loss method in the 
GHG -I vs Stock – Change method in the FREL/FRL) and the exclusion of carbon stock gains from plantations 
replacing native forests. Further more, in the activity of enhancement of forest carbon stocks, there are 
significant differences between the FREL/FRL and the GHG –I. In the FREL/FRL the values are 8 times less than 
in the GHG -I due to the exclusion of removals from forest plantations from the FREL/FRL calculation, which 
only includes biomass increment from native forests. These differences were explained with detailed and 
transparent information, taking into consideration that intrinsic differences might exist between the FREL/FRL 
and the G HG-I, given that the GHG -I has to report all the emissions/removals in the four considered sectors. In 
the cases where there was no consistency between the FREL/FRL and the GHG -I, Chile provided pertinent 
reasons, that were considered as well- justified by the TA. It was explained that the FREL/FRL represents an 
improvement in the use of higher tier methods, enhancing the precision of the estimations. Fundamentally, 
these differences are generated due to more data availability and the use of more precise met hodologies in the 
FREL/FRL, which were later integrated in the GHG -I submitted with the 3rd Biennial Update Report (BUR).  
  
With regard to the forest definition, the FREL/FRL excluded planted forests, considering only native forests in 
the definition, whil e the GHG -I included all types of forests. This exclusion was explained with the fact that more 
than the 97% of forest plantations have industrial objectives and are composed by single exotic species. More 
details about the differences in these definitions  can be found in paragraphs 34 and 35 of the TAR. The GHG -I 
and the FREL/FRL have intrinsic differences due to these dissimilar forest definitions, so the results will not be 
the same. However, to increase the consistency between these two reports the disc repancy between the dates 
of the Cadaster will be solved in the GHG -I submitted with Chile’s fourth BUR in 2020.  
As a complement to the aforementioned evaluation, the forest definition to be included in the FREL/FRL was 
submitted to an evaluation of expert s in Chile, through a workshop in which the final adjustments to the forest 
definition for the purpose of RBPs were agreed. During the FREL/FRL TA Chile stated that plantations will be 
included in the FREL/FRL once these plantations are used as permanent c over and are consistent with the 
objectives outlined in the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement   
 
In mitigation, Chile has committed to the sustainable development and recovery of 100,000 hectares of forest 
land, mainly native, which will account for greenhouse gas sequestrations and reductions of an annual 
equivalent of around 600,000 tCO2e as of 2030. This commitment is subject to the approval of the Native Forest 
Recovery and Forestry Promotion Law. Also, Chile has agreed to reforest 100,000 hectares, mostly with native 
species, which shall represent sequestrations of about 900,000 and 1,200,000 annual equivalent tons of CO2 as


---
*Page 7*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 5  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
of 2030. This commitment is conditioned to the extension of Decree Law 701 and the app roval of a new 
Forestry Promotion Law4.  
(ii.a) Data source of the FREL/FRL: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the data used for the construction of the F REL/FRL, 
specifying whether the FREL/FRL is based on historical data and is equal to or below the average annual historical 
emissions during the reference period.  
 
The subnational FREL/FRL is based on an annual average emissions/removals of CO2. The activ ity data used 
for its construction was based on a historical reference period drawn from the national land use Cadastre, 
period 1997 - 2012. The Cadastre is a project that started between 1993 and 1997, with periodic updates of the 
spatial database, and con tains information on land use, with special attention to native and planted forests. This 
data constitutes the baseline of the land use information of the country and is used in several reports and as an 
input to elaborate public policy. This information w as complemented with the use of Landsat time series 
images to obtain the AD. On the other hand, the information on emission factors were obtained from the Forest 
National Inventory, established for the period 2001 -2010, together with additional national re search developed 
by the Forest Institute (INFOR) and the Universidad Austral de Chile.5 
During the TA, the TTE noted that the original FREL/FRL was constructed using different reference periods for 
each region and activity, resulting in a matrix of FREL/FR Ls, this was due to the different availability of 
information, in particular, of different cadastre years. This problem was partially solved by Chile, presenting a 
modified FREL/FRL that considered two reference periods using interpolation methods: 2001 -2013 for 
activities and sub -activities related to land use change, and 2001 -2010 for activities or sub -activities that occur 
in permanent forest.  
(ii.b) If a country is considered HFLD: Please provide the basis/justification for this classification. N/A  
(ii.c) FREL/FRL adjustments for a HFLD country:  If adjustments made, please provide information that the 
adjustment does not exceed 0.1% of the carbon stock over the eligibility period in the relevant area and/or exceed 
10% of the FREL/FRL to reflect quantif ied, documented changes in circumstances during the reference period that 
likely underestimate future rates of deforestation or forest degradation during the eligibility period   N/A  
(iii) FREL/FRL in accordance with 12/CP.17: Please provide any additiona l information that supplements the 
information contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the quantified estimate of the FREL/FRL. 
Include whether the FREL/FRL was constructed in accordance with the guidelines in Decision 12/CP.17; 
specifi cally on the modalities for FREL/FRL and whether the raised issues were material or not material to the 
quantified estimate of the FEEL/FRL.  
 
The FREL/FRL construction was developed using the IPCC 2006 “ Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories ”. As stated in paragraph 37 of the TAR. The data and information used in the construction of the 
FREL/FRL for the four REDD+ activities are transparent, complete, consistent, accurate and in accordance with 
the guidelines for submission of info rmation on FRELs/FRLs, as contained in the annex to decision 12/CP.17. 
Furthermore, the TA highlighted (in paragraph 38 of the TAR) the willingness of Chile to implement a stepwise  
approach to improve the FREL/FRL in relation with the inclusion of new acti vities and biomes. Chile is 
currently making efforts to develop stock charts for different forest types and develop historic and current land 
use maps for different biomes of the country, such as the Mediterranean region, with the intention of 
developing a FREL/FRL with an extended geographical coverage and improvements in the methodologies.   
 
(iv) FREL/FRL transparency: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the transparency of the FREL/FRL and whether 
significant issues were raised and resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to address and overcome issues 
 
4 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Chile%20First/INDC%20Chile%20english%20version.pdf   
5 In mitigation, Chile has committed to t he sustainable development and recovery of 100,000 hectares of forest land, mainly native, 
which will account for greenhouse gas sequestrations and reductions of an annual equivalent of around 600,000 of CO2 as of 2030. 
This commitment is subject to the approval of the Native Forest Recovery and Forestry Promotion Law. Also, Chile  has agreed to 
reforest 100,000 hectares, mostly with native species, which shall represent sequestrations of about 900,000 and 1,200,000 annual 
equivalent tons of CO2 as of 2030. This commitment is conditioned to the extension of Decree Law 701 and the approval of a new 
Forestry Promotion Law. 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Chile%20First/INDC%20Chile%20english%20version.pdf


---
*Page 8*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 6  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
that were not material to the transparency of the FREL/FRL raised in TA Report that couldn’t be res olved due to 
time and data restrictions.  
 
The TAR of the FREL/FRL indicates, in paragraph 39, that several issues regarding transparency of the 
information were addressed in the modified FREL/FRL, improving the reproducibility of the calculations. For 
instance, in the first presentation of the FREL/FRL, most of the relevant methodological information was 
included in annexes. Though the exchange of opinions between the TTE and Chile, a modified document was 
elaborated, including detailed methodological desc riptions in the main body of the document, which lead to an 
important improvement with regard to the principle of transparency. Additionally, in the modified FREL/FRL 
the approach and the values used for the construction of the report were changed, enhanci ng the transparency 
and completeness of the information. On the same line, the additional data and information provided by Chile 
facilitated the TA of the submitted report.  
  
To further improve the transparency of the construction of the FREL/FRL, Chile pl anned to generate an 
integrated platform that allows the storage and dissemination  of spatial and database information, together 
with the semi- automated generation of reports and the visualization of results (paragraph 22 (a) of the TAR).  
This platform i s being developed by an external consultant, and the MRV module of the platform is planned to 
be completely functional by the beginning of 2020.  
 
(v) FREL/FRL completeness: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the understanding of the FREL/FRL and whether 
significant issues were raised and resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to address and overcome issues 
that were not material to  the completeness of the FEL/FRL raised in TA Report that couldn’t be resolved due to 
time and data restrictions. Include information that allows for the reconstruction of the FREL/FRL.  
 
The modified submission of the FREL/FRL significantly improved the tr ansparency and completeness of the 
information. Also, the data presentation was improved,  and the details of the applied methodology were 
included in the main body of the document, including the description of methods and data sources enhanced 
the replicab ility of the calculated estimations.  
 
In the original submission of the FREL/FRL, the Technical Team of Experts (TTE) indicated that some data was 
presented in tables that did not allow the assessment completion, the detailed information of the methodology  
was presented in annexes and also areas of improvement could not be identified. Chile addressed all these 
issues in the modified submission and after that the TA did not present relevant issues that were not addressed 
and solved to fulfill the completenes s of the FREL/FRL.  
  
(vi) FREL/FRL consistency: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the consistency of the methodology used over the time 
series used for th e construction of the FREL/FRL, and whether significant issues were raised in the report and 
resolved. If applicable, provide a plan to address and overcome issues that were not material to the consistency of 
the FREL/FRL raised in TA Report that couldn’t be resolved due to time and data restrictions.  
 
The applied methodology in the FREL/FRL construction is based on the activity data extracted from the 
historical series data included in the land use Cadastre made by CONAF (period 1997 to 2012). Due to budg et 
and operational limitations, the Cadastre has a database with different base years for Chilean regions. This 
information is provided for all the activities included in the FREL/FRL. During the AT, the TTE pointed out that 
Chile could ensure more consist ent time series by using the same satellite data sources (e.g. from Landsat or 
RapidEye), leading to an improved consistency of AD considering spatial and temporal resolution (paragraph 
41 of the TAR). This recommendation was considered by Chile, and the n ew maps of land use and land use 
change are being developed using Landsat data only, these maps of land use were used in the REDD+ technical 
annex of results and are based in remote sensing analysis, this maps will allow Chile to increase the consistency 
of the results by using a single source of information and a common date for all the regions, differing from the 
current time series of data, that has different years of maps for each region, using several sources of data..  
  
During the TA, a comparison of  datasets were carried out between the activity data for deforestation presented 
by Chile and the datasets from Global Forest Watch (GFW)6, that uses Landsat time series analysis.  The TAR 
 
6 https://www.globalforestwa tch.org/map/country/CHL


---
*Page 9*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 7  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
identified the differences between these results, pointing out that  the differences in forest loss for some years 
were explained in the definition of land use and forest definition that the national Cadastre considers, against 
the land cover based definition used by GFW, which doesn’t consider the same forest definition.  
(vii) FREL/FRL accuracy: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information contained 
in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the accuracy of the FREL/FRL and whether significant issues 
were raised and resolved. This should include information on whether the data and methodologies used neither 
over - nor under -estimate emissions and/or removals during the reference period. If applicable, provide a plan to 
address and overcome issues raised in TA Report that were not material to the accuracy of the FREL/FRL and that 
couldn’t be resolved due to time and data restrictions.  
 
The submitted modified FREL/FRL presents an extensive use of Tier 2 and 3 methods, which increased the 
precision of the estimations. For the forest degr adation, Chile used a tier 3 method consisting mainly on the use 
of the density graph (stock chart) of the Roble -Rauli -Coihue forest type, developed by Bahamondez et al. 
(2009)7 , and in order to improve the accuracy of the estimates, Chile is currently ma king efforts to achieve a 
better development in this activity by including density graphs for other forest types. The FREL/FRL represents 
an improvement in terms of use of higher -tier methods in comparison with the GHG -I included in the first BUR, 
which le ads to a better precision of the emission/removal estimations.  
(viii) Sources of emissions: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to whether all activities liste d in paragraph 70 of 
UNFCCC decision 1/CP.16 (‘REDD -plus activities’) that are a significant source of emissions were included. If they 
were not, justify whether activities that are significant sources of emissions were not included due to lack of data 
and/or whether the omission overestimates emissions or underestimate removals. Provide also a plan to include all 
data on all REDD -plus activities that are significant sources of emissions in future FREL/FRL submissions.  
 
The Activities indicated in paragraph  70 of decision 1/CP.16 included by Chile in its FRL/FREL are reduced 
emissions from deforestation, reducing emissions from forest degradation, forest conservation and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks.  
 
Chile explained that, in the case of the activity  of sustainable management of forests, owing to a lack of 
geographic data to identify explicitly the areas subject to this activity, Chile decided to include the carbon stock 
changes resulting from sustainable management of forests under the activity of re ducing emissions from forest 
degradation (if the result is an emission) or under enhancement of forest carbon stocks (if the result is a 
removal), it means that activities were not omitted.  The AT highly commends Chile for increasing the 
transparency of t he information relating to the exclusion of this activity and by including instead the carbon 
stock changes from this activity in two other selected activities in the modified submission.  
 
However, in order to provide an idea of the scale of the signific ance of emissions / removals of managed native 
forest, the following table presents an average of  area under management in the 5 regions where the results are 
achieved:  
 
Region  Average Area 2001 -2010 
(Ha)  
Maule  33,979.6  
Biobío  29,508.1  
Araucanía  79,149.0  
Los Ríos  118,930.0  
Los Lagos  130,766.7  
Total  392,333.3  
Source: CONAF. Legal and Administrative Department  
 
The average annual area under management represents 6.7% of the total area of native forest in the 5 regions 
(total area of native forest: 5,853,387 hectares)  
 
7 Bahamóndez C, Martin M, Muller -Using S, Rojas Y and Vergara G. 2009. Case Studies in Measuring and Assessing Forest 
Degradation: An Operational Approach to Forest Degradation. Forest Resources Assessment Working Paper. Rome: Fores try 
Department, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 8  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
Besides, according to the legislation, the following are the management activities allowed in native forest:  
 
- Thinning, elimination control of invasive alien species, felling forest burned, recovery felling, prepa ratory 
felling, regeneration felling, stripped, ecological enrichment, supplementary planting, thinning to waste, 
reforestation, revegetation, direct sowing.  
 
- Intermediate felling, sanitary felling, trimming, low trimming, trimming for non -timber purpose s, thinning, 
thinning for non -timber purposes, shape trimming and productive thinning.  
 
- Tree banding and thin thinning.  
 
In conclusion, it can be affirmed on the one hand that it is a non -significant activity in terms of emissions or 
removals since only 6.7% of the total is under management. On the other hand, due to the permitted 
management activities it is difficult to consider the managed native forest as source of degradation as suggested 
by the team of experts in paragraph 33 of the technical assessment report.  
 
(ix) Significant pools:  Please provide any additional information that supplements the information contained in 
the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the inclusion of the most significant pools. If applicable, justify 
whether significant pools were not included due to l ack of data and/or the omission does not overestimate 
emissions or underestimate removals. In addition, provide a plan to include all significant pools in future 
FREL/FRL submissions.  
 
The carbon pools considered in the modified FREL/FRL included the above and below ground biomass for all 
REDD+ activities.  Dead organic matter was considered for conservation, deforestation and degradation 
activities. This pool was not included in the enhancement of forest carbon stock activity due to the 
unavailability  of information regarding the rate of dead organic (DOM) matter accumulation in areas converted 
to native forest.  
  
In the original FREL/FRL presentation Chile included the SOC pool, but then it was excluded in the modified 
submission due to the lack of in formation at national level and also to guarantee consistency with the GHG -I 
which also excludes SOC, hence consistency between these two reports is maintained. This exclusion is due to 
the lack of accuracy of existing information at continental level sour ces, leaving this pool out of the FREL/FRL. 
This omission of the SOC pool was justified by the TTE due to the lack of national data to describe the rates of 
changes in this pool (paragraph 42 of the TAR). Another difference between the original and the mod ified 
submission of the FREL/FRL occurred in the dead organic matter (DOM) pool, that was included in the 
estimation of the enhancement of forest carbon stock activity in the original submission, but then, in the 
modified FREL/FRL, Chile decided to exclude this pool because significant changes are not expected in the 
activity of forest carbon stock enhancement  during the reference period.  
 
Despite the TA comments that emissions from SOC could be significant when forest lands are converted to 
other land us es, the exclusion of SOC was considered as conservative in the case of enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks, because this pool is not expected to decrease in this activity. In order to support this decision, an 
estimation of the emissions from soil organic carbon (SOC) for deforestation was done using Tier 1 
methodology which determined that emissions from SOC were 128.005 tCO 2e/year, compared with the 
1.653.819 tCO 2e/year emitted from the living biomass and dead organic matter pools. representing 7,7 % of the 
total emissions. In addition to that, the exclusion of this pool is in compliance with criteria nº 4 of the Carbon 
Fund Methodological Framework, of which Chile is a participant, that highlights the fact that the exclusion of 
this pool can underestimate  the estimation of emission reductions.  
 
In summary, there is a recognition for the efforts made to have better information regarding DOM and SOC, 
with the aim to include these pools in a stepwise process and in future submissions or exclude them if there is 
evidence that changes in these pools are not significant. An improvement area has been identified and Chile 
stated that continuous efforts are underway in order to include emissions factors and activity data related to 
SOC fluxes.  
 
 
(x) Emissions from gases:  Please provide any additional information that supplements the information contained


---
*Page 11*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 9  OF 67 
 
 
 
 
in the Technical Assessment Report in relation to the inclusion of all gases that are significant sources of emissions. 
If not all of the gases were included, justi fy whether gases that are significant sources of emissions were not 
included due to lack of data and/or whether the omission overestimates emissions or underestimates removals. 
Provide also a plan to include all significant pools in future FREL/FRL submiss ions.  
 
The GHG gases included in the FREL/FRL are emissions/removals of CO2 for the four selected REDD+ activities, 
and additionally, an estimation of non- CO2  (CH 4 and N 2O) from forest fires was included and  was considered as 
a sub -activity of the forest degradation activity. The inclusion of non -CO 2 GHG was done by using the 
appropriate equations and factors of the IPCC 2006 Guidelines. In the case of gases, the TTE noted that 
significant emissions were not excluded.  
  
(xi)  IPCC guidance for FREL/FRL : Please indicate if the whether the construction of the FREL/FRL (data, 
methodologies and estimates) was guided by 2003 GPGs or 2006 GLs.  
 
The IPCC 2006 guidelines were applied for the construction of the FREL/FRL as a basis for the estimation of 
emissions and removals resulting from the four REDD+ activities.  
 
(xii) Issues related to applying IPCC guidance:  Please mention any significant issues related to the application of 
IPCC GLs/GPGs as raised in the TA report. Include any significant issues that are material to the alignment with the 
methodologies of the IPCC GLs/GPGs that were raised in the TA report and whether significant issues were raised 
and resolved. If applicable, provide a plan to address and overcome  issues raised in TA Report that were not 
material to the application of IPCC guidance and that couldn’t be resolved due to time and data restrictions.  
 
The TAR of the FREL/FRL mentions, in paragraph 11, that Chile used the guidelines and guidance provided in 
the IPCC Guidelines for National GHG -I as a basis for the estimation of changes in carbon stocks and non -
CO 2emissions, regarding the four reported activities.  
  
One of the main aspects discussed during the original FREL/FRL submission was the possibility of using the 
same reference p eriod for all REDD+ activities in the selected regions. This is because historical data availability 
is different for the different activities in each region, which resulted in a FRL/FREL matrix. Due to this 
complexity, the TTE suggested that Chile could u se the same reference period by using the tools described in 
the IPCC Guidelines. In response to that, Chile presented a modified version with two reference periods: 2001 -
2013 for activities and sub activities that are due to land use changes, and 2001 -201 0 for activities in 
permanent forest (forest land remaining forest land), this was possible by using the IPCC 2006 guidelines 
regarding interpolation of data, allowing to have a single reference period (2001 -2013) for activities that are 
due to land use ch anges. The modified submission standardized the historical reference period and reduced the 
number of references periods, but in future submissions Chile could present a single common reference period 
for all REDD+ selected activities.  
  
With regard to th e SOC, even though the TA commends Chile’s efforts to obtain better information, the TA noted 
that the IPCC 2006 Guidelines include a method for estimating changes in carbon stocks using default emission 
factors, although the exclusion of the SOC was justi fied by the high uncertainty of the default emission factors 
and because of the lack of national information on the rate of changes in this pool, identifying this issue as an 
area for future improvement (paragraphs 31 and 42 of the TAR).  
 
B.1.2. Additional criteria related to FREL/FRL  
(xiii) Reference period for the FREL/FRL: Please indicate the reference period (number of years) applied for the 
construction of the FREL/FRL.  
 
The subnational NREF/NRF presented by Chile considers two reference periods, that use different 
interpolation methods:  
1. 2001 -2013 (13 years) for activities and sub activities related to changes in land use (deforestation, 
substitution, increase in forest area and restitution): The interpolation was performed using  the 
following equation, that allowed to obtain an annual area of change for the activities:


---
*Page 12*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 10 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Where:  
  
Ai = Annual area of change (ha)  
Ap = Area of change in period p (ha)  
b = Interpolation time  
t = Period time p (years)  
 
2. 2001 -2010 (10 years) for activities that occur in permanent forest (conservation, degradation in 
permanent forest and recovery of degraded forests): In this case the activity data was estimated by 
dividing the total emissions/removals by the number of years of the reference period (10), obtaining 
an annual estimate.  
 
(xiv) If previous reference level submitted: Please indicate whether a previous reference level applying to the 
same area was submitted. If so, describe the difference between the emissions and removals used for the previous 
one and the current one. Describe any adjustments made to the current FREL/FRL compared to the previous one, if 
applicable.  
 
 
(xv) Uncertainties: Please indicate whether the country has provided information on aggregated uncertainties of 
the emissions or removals estimate, taking into account national capabilities and circumstances, and if so, indicate 
the percentage of aggregate uncertainties and provide information on assumptions and sources. If applicable, 
indicate the process implemented t o minimize systematic and random errors.   
 
The FRL/FREL submitted by Chile presents an aggregated uncertainty of 33.4%. This analysis uses non -
weighted error propagation when the parameters are multiplied directly to estimate the final result (i.e. in 
order to estimate the emissions from deforestation a direct multiplication between the loss of forest lands with 
the emission factor of the land use change); while the weighted error propagation was applied when the 
parameters were added to estimate the final result i.e. removals due to carbon increment resulting from the 
direct sum of increases from non -forest land to forest land and increment in forest land remaining as forest 
lands (IPCC Guidelines 2006, equations 3.1 and 3.2). The uncertainty calculation w as presented separated by 
activity, subactivity, region, carbon pool, and parameters utilized to estimate emissions and removals of carbon 
pools. The aggregated uncertainty (33.4%) was calculated by performing an error propagation through each 
individual a ctivity and weighting the uncertainties.  
. 
   
Among the assumptions considered for the uncertainty calculation, the FREL/FRL considers, for instance, that 
for the annual mean increment for the adult Alerce forest type, the highest error of the mean annual increment 
was used in order to be conservative. The same criterion was applied with the annual mean increment of the 
young Alerce forests and all Araucaria forest types. These assumptions were taken into account to consider a 
conservative scenario regardin g uncertainty, taking into consideration the highest possible value of error. As 
another example, for the mixed forest type it is assumed that the mean annual increment is the average of all 
forest types due to the lack of specific information.  
 
(xvi) Pl ease indicate whether different FREL/FRLs have been used for different funding sources or other 
purposes, and if so, list and describe them.  
 
Chile has not used different FREL/FRL for different funding sources or for other purposes. The same FREL/FRL 
was u sed as reference level to participate in the REDD+ approach of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility


---
*Page 13*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 11 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
(FCPF)  
 
 
B.2. REDD -plus Results reporting     
 
Please provide link to the BUR technical annex containing REDD+ results:  
https://unfccc.int/documents/185269    
 
Please provide link to the UNFCCC Technical Analysis Report: https://unfccc.int/documents/199734     
B.2.1. UNFCCC Technical Analysis  
(i) Consistency of results with FREL/FRL: Please provide any addit ional information that supplements the 
information contained in the Technical Analysis Report in relation to the consistency of the reported results in the 
technical annex to the BUR with the FREL/FRL (including the inclusion of same pools, activities and gases).   
  
Chile reported the results of the implementation of the four activities (for the periods 2014 –2016 for activities 
resulting in a land -use change and 2011 –2015 for activities occurring in forests remaining forests), which 
amount to a total reduc tion of emissions of 6,136,475 t CO2eq per year and were measured against the assessed 
FRELs/FRLs for the activities during the corresponding reference periods, 2001 –2013 when there is a land -use 
change and 2001 –2010 when there is no land -use change.  
 
The data and information provided in the technical annex are in overall accordance with the guidelines 
contained in the annex to decision 14/CP.19. The TA concluded that the data and information provided by Chile 
in the technical annex are transparent and, to the extent possible, consistent with the assessed FRELs/FRLs 
established in accordance with decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 71(b), and decision 12/CP.17.   
  
During the technical analysis process of the technical annex (TA) ,  the technical team of experts (TTE) noted 
that Chile was using different emission factors for the activities that involve land use change when comparing 
the FREL/FRL with the Technical Annex. These emission factors were used because of the new availabilit y of 
data coming from the National Forest Inventory (NFI) . Despite the existence of updated data, the experts 
considered that this could compromise the consistency with the assessed FREL/FRL. In response to that, Chile 
made recalculations using the same emission factor as in the FREL/FRL, this recalculated data was submitted in 
a revised technical annex on August the 9th of 2019, the revised TA presented updated results consistent with 
the assessed FREL/ FRL.   
 
The experts noted that, with the revised versi on of the technical annex, Chile ensured consistency to the extent 
possible with its assessed FREL/FRL. Furthermore, Chile ensured overall consistency between its  assessed 
FREL and estimation of results by:   the inclusion of the same gases, the same area s , the same forest definition, 
the inclusion of the same carbon pools and activities and using consistent  emission factors for above and below -
ground biomass for deforestation and forest degradation by substitution, these EF were derived from the same 
source: the first cycle of the National Forest Inventory.  
 
The experts also noted that Chile used consistent methodologies to estimate carbon stocks, using a mixture of 
IPCC tier 2 and 3 approaches. To determine the degradation activity, Chile used a consiste nt tier 3 method 
defined by stock chart of the Roble -Rauli -Coihue forest type. Despite the fact that currently Chile has stock 
charts for other forest types, the country decided to use a single stock chart for the estimation of results in 
order to maintain  the consistency with the FREL/FRL.  
 
Other issues regarding the consistency of the AD were raised during the TA, this topic and the ways Chile plans 
to overcome them are elaborated in the following points (iv and v)  
 
A summary of the Reduced Emission by RE DD+ Activity can be seen in the following table:


---
*Page 14*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 12 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
(ii) Transparency of the data: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Analysis Report in relation to the transparency of the data and in formation provided in 
the technical annex (i.e. whether information has been provided to provide an understanding of how UNFCCC 
guidance on results reporting has been addressed). Include information on significant issues raised in the 
Technical Analysis Re port and whether these were raised and resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to 
address and overcome issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report, that were not material to the transparency of 
the data on results and that could not be resolved d ue to time and data restrictions.  
 
The Technical Annex submitted by Chile provides all the spreadsheets with the necessary data and formulas for 
the reconstruction of the results for all the activities, along with the calculation for the uncertainty. In addition, 
each section of the technical annex provides a detailed explanation of the methodology and the considered 
assumptions, while additional technical information can be found in the footnotes of the document, that contain 
details of t he calculation of the REDD+ results for all the activities, increasing the transparency of the methods 
and AD used (TATR, paragraph 18).  
 
During the Technical Analysis of the Technical Annex Chile provided additional information, particularly 
regarding unc ertainty analysis, the data from the national forest inventory, and the cadastre and land use 
change maps. The technical team of experts commended Chile for its efforts to increase the transparency. The 
experts also commended Chile for making the maps used in the Annex publicly available, via weblinks in the 
footnotes of the document or in the webpage of CONAF’s Territorial Information System8. Giving these 
considerations, the TTE stated that the data and information provided by the party was considered tra nsparent 
to the extent possible  
 
(iii) Completeness of the data: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Analysis Report in relation to the completeness of the data and information provided in 
the technical annex (i.e. whether information has been provided that allows for the reconstruction of the results). 
Include information on significant issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report and whether these were raised 
and resolved. If applicable,  provide a plan on how to address and overcome issues raised in the Technical Analysis 
Report, that were not material to the completeness of the data on results and that could not be resolved due to 
time and data restrictions.  
 
The Technical Annex provided  by Chile contains all the necessary data to reproduce the calculation of the 
REDD+ results. During the process of technical analysis, the Technical Team of Experts was able to reproduce 
the same results presented by Chile in all of the REDD+ activities. D uring the Technical Analysis, the Technical 
Team of Experts asked for additional information regarding the details of the re -measurements and sampling 
design of the National Forest Inventory. Chile responded by sending the documents with all the requested 
details. In addition, details about the uncertainty calculations were asked and the worksheets with the 
calculations were delivered. The LULUCF commended Chile for its efforts to ensure the completeness of the 
data and information provided, that included a ll the necessary information for the reconstruction of the results   
 
 
8 http://sit.conaf.cl


---
*Page 15*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 13 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Consistency of the data: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information 
contained in the Technical Analysis Report in relation to the consistency of the data and information provided in 
the technical annex (i.e. data and methodologies were applied consistently over the results time series). Include 
information on significant issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report and whether thes e were raised and 
resolved. If applicable, provide a plan on how to address and overcome issues raised in the Technical Analysis 
Report, that were not material to the consistency of the data on results and that could not be resolved due to time 
and data re strictions.  
 
The data used for the construction of the Technical Annex of REDD+ results comes, in the case of the Emission 
Factors (EF), from the National Forest Inventory, and in the case of the Activity data (AD) related to land use 
changes, from the cad astre maps and the maps of land use change.  
 
In the case of the EF, the experts noted that, Chile used different emission factors in the FREL/FRL and the 
Technical Annex, that were derived from the first and the second cycle of the National Forest Inventor y 
respectively. After the Technical Assessment week, Chile decided, in order to maintain consistency with the 
FREL/FRL, to resolve the issue delivering a revised version of the technical annex, that was recalculated using 
the same emission factor used in t he FREL/FRL for the results estimation. With these changes, the experts 
noted that Chile ensured consistency with the EFs applied.  
 
In regard to  the activity data, the experts noted that Chile used an alternative methodology to gather the 
information regarding land use changes for the estimation of results.  The methodology that was used for the 
FREL/FRL was based on the data of the “Cadastre and e valuation of vegetation resources of Chile” project, 
while for the estimation of the results, land use change maps were derived from spectral classification. During 
the technical assessment, Chile explained that the polygons from the cadastre were used as a base map on 
which the land use changes were detected. Additionally, the collection of imagery for both the cadastre and the 
land use change maps used for the technical annex is also consistent during the dry period months (from 
November to March). This a pproach was used because it was not possible for Chile to generate AD biennially 
using the cadastre methodology, mainly because of the higher costs that it presents, the view of these 
considerations, the technical experts considered that the results presen ted by Chile were consistent to the 
extent possible with the FREL/FRL, and according with the current national capacities and capabilities. See 
section (v) below on how Chile plans to implement and improve the second FREL/FRL regarding this issue.  
 
(v) Ac curacy of the data: Please provide any additional information that supplements the information contained in 
the Technical Analysis Report in relation to the accuracy of the data and information provided in the technical 
annex (i.e. whether it neither over - nor under -estimates emissions and/or removals). Include information on 
significant issues raised in the Technical Analysis Report and whether these were raised and resolved. If applicable, 
provide a plan on how to address and overcome issues raised in the  Technical Analysis Report, that were not 
material to the accuracy of the data on results and that could not be resolved due to time and data restrictions.  
 
The Technical Analysis Report showed that Chile has made several efforts to increase the accuracy o f the data 
used for the construction of the Technical Annex of REDD+ results. These efforts are reflected in the National 
Forest Monitoring system that, via an intersectoral institutional arrangement, is able to produce and deliver 
transparent and accurate information and data on activities that involve land use change and activities in 
permanent forest, together with emission factors extracted from the National Forest Inventory. The experts 
commended Chile for these efforts, acknowledging the long -term eff orts of Chile to build a robust NFMS.  
Regarding the accuracy of the Activity data, the experts noted that the methodologies for estimating land use 
changes were different. In response to that, Chile clarified that, the methodology used to estimate land use  
change in the results period is an update of the methodology used in the reference period AD estimated for the 
FREL/FRL that is based on high and medium resolution imagery. The AD estimation for the FREL/FRL has 
three steps: 1) estimate land used applying  visual interpretation and establishing a 0,5 ha minimum map unit 
2) land use maps are intersected to identify land use change areas without setting a minimum map unit 3) 
activity data is derived from the initial and final land uses of the land use changes  maps.  
To estimate AD for the results period medium resolution imagery is used on (i.e. 30 m Landsat imagery) with a 
spectral index combination to identify land use changes. The minimum map unit was 0,27 ha (3 pixels of 
Landsat ) to ensure the exclusion of potential artefacts. The thresholds chosen to define land use change for the 
spectral index were set using the ground truth data and high -resolution imagery for the training phase, to


---
*Page 16*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 14 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
ensure the AD was reliable and accurate. These land use change maps ar e based on the information and the 
geometry of the polygons contained in the cadaster, detecting the land use changes and modifying (e.g. splitting 
or changing the attributes) of the existing polygons, hence decreasing the chance of falling in an under or over 
estimation. Then, the changes in land use of the maps used in the results period are validated using high 
resolution data, ensuring the accuracy of the results.  Furthermore, AD estimated in both (FREL/FRL and 
Results period) share common criteria, a nd the same land use categories.  
The experts noted, as an area for future technical improvement, that Chile might want to consider recalculating 
the entire set of AD using satellite imagery with the same classification approach to enhance the accuracy in 
future submissions of the FREL/FRL . 
 
To address this issue, Chile is currently calling, via public tender, for a consultant to develop land use change 
maps for the period 2001 -2013, that will allow to have a consistent reference period (not using interpolation) 
and to have a complete time series made of spectral- based land use change maps. The name of the consultancy 
is “Update of Historical Maps of Land Use and Land Use Change for the update and expansion of the FREL / FRL, 
period 2001 -2013”. Once these new maps are elaborated, this Activi ty Data will be included in the updated 
FREL/FRL, following the stepwise approach suggested by the Technical Team of Experts.  
 
(vi) Indicate the number of years that took place between the last year of the FREL/FRL period, and the year 
corresponding to th e results being proposed for payments:  
 
The last year of the FREL is 2013, and the years corresponding to REDD -plus results submitted to the GCF for 
payments are 2014, 2015 and 2016, respectively 1, 2, and 3 years from the last year of the FREL.  
 
B.2.2. Additional criteria related to the achieved results  
(vii) Uncertainties: Explain whether the country has provided information on aggregate uncertainties of the 
results, taking into account national capabilities and circumstances. Include the percentage of aggregate 
uncertainties and provide information on assumptions and source s. If applicable, indicate the process implemented 
to minimize systematic and random errors.   
 
Chile presented an aggregated uncertainty of the results of 38.43%, just as in the FREL/FRL, this analysis was 
performed using weighted error propagation when t he parameters were added to estimate the final result, 
while non -weighted error propagation was used when the parameters were multiplied directly to estimate the 
final result. For these calculations, the equations 3.1 and 3.2 of the IPCC 2006 Guidelines were applied.  
 
The uncertainty calculation was presented separated by activity, sub activity, carbon pool and region, including 
the and parameters utilized to estimate emissions and removals of carbon pools. The aggregated uncertainty 
was calculated by perfo rming an error propagation through each individual activity and weighting the 
uncertainties.  
 
(viii) Preventing double payments:  
- Provide information on payments that have been, or  are expected to be received from other sources of 
funding for results recognized by the country for the same area for the same period, for which the country 
is applying for payments from the GCF.  
 
- Include relevant information regarding the payments paid or expected to be paid, including the year(s), 
results volume in tCO2e, quantities for which payments were received/are expected to be received, and 
entity/entities paying for the results as well as any type of agreement involved.  
 
- Provide sufficient assur ances that the results that have been paid, or are expected to be paid for by other 
sources (or are under any type of analogous agreement) been excluded from the volume offered to the 
GCF.  
 
- Provide a description of measures to ensure that the results paid by the GCF will not be transferred, 
offered for future payment or otherwise used (for example for offsets) and information on how the results 
proposed for payment by the GCF will be treated or used.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 15 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
- Provide information on how different financing contributed to the achieved results.  
 
The years included in the period considered for the current results -based payments from the GCF (2014, 2015 
and 2016), are not being offered to other instances of results -based payments and are neither going to be 
offered in the future. This will be ensured given the official designation of CONAF as the national agency in 
charge to manage REDD+ RBP, and the legal and institutional arrangements established at regional and local 
level with relevant counterparts through bi lateral agreements, might be considered as relevant measures to 
mitigate the risk of competing ER title among different agencies.  As an additional measure to avoid any risk of 
competing ER title among different agencies or any other arrangement, CONAF has  agreed with the FCPF of the 
WB that the negotiation of an Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) will take into account 
mitigation results ulterior to 2017.  
 
 
After the submission of the ER Program to the FCPF’s Carbon Fund, Chile started the negoti ation of and 
Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) with the World Bank. This ERPA considers the same area as 
the GCF results -based payments (Maule to Los Lagos Regions) but different periods. The total volume of 
emission reduction that are being con sidered for this agreement is 5,000,000 tCO2eq. The periods considered 
for the ERPA goes from 2018 to 2025. The details of the periods for the different funds can be found in the 
following figure:  
 
 
 
Regarding the private voluntary market, CONAF, as focal point for REDD in Chile, has to be informed when a 
private organization or NGO has the intention of participating in the private carbon market. This is in the 
process of being formalized as a requirement for projects through the Ministry of Foreign Affair s. Additionally, 
CONAF is continuously monitoring platforms as the IHS Markit Environmental Registry. There are two recorded 
private initiatives that matched the period and area considered for GCF results -based  payments. The first one is 
the project called  “Avoiding planned deforestation and degradation in the Valdivian Coastal Reserve, Chile (ID: 
103000000003275)”, developed by The Nature Conservancy and registered in IHS Markit’s Environmental 
Registry9. There are no other projects identified outside the 5 regions. According to the verification reports 
under the VCS standard, this project has verified emission reductions from November 4, 2013 to November 3, 
2014, that corresponds to 16,724 tCO2eq, that were validated as GHG credits eligible for issuance as  VCUs 
(Verified Carbon Units). The second one is the project called “Reforestation of degraded lands in the Valle 
California of Patagonia, Chile (ID: 100000000001189)” with a total of 17 tCO2 eq for  the years 2014,2015 and 
2016, these ERs were also register ed in the IHS Markit’s Environmental Registry10. These credits were 
subtracted from the total volume of the archived REDD -plus results and  considered in the calculation of the 
achieved volume of REDD -plus results offered to the pilot programme (section A of  the FP).  
 
The archived results presented in this proposal were made possible mainly using national resources, focused 
on the budget of CONAF, as well as with support from other international funds. Currently, this institution has 
offices all across the country’s Regions and Provinces and it manages a total of 101 State -Protected Wilderness 
Areas among National Reserves, National Parks and Natural Monuments, which add up to 14.56 million 
hectares. More than 1,800 employees, including professionals, technica l and administrative workers, forest 
rangers and janitors work in the promotion of forest activities, protected wilderness -area centers, prevention 
and combat of forest fires, environmental education, management and supervision of forest legislations and 
general management.  
 
The budget of CONAF is continuously increasing, giving it the capability to enforce the forestry laws and 
 
9 Weblink: https://mer.mark it.com/br -reg/public/project.jsp?project_id=103000000003275  
10 Weblink: https://mer.markit.com/br -reg/public/project.jsp?project_id=100000000001189


---
*Page 18*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 16 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
prevent deforestation and degradation, producing the results presented in this proposal. In 2014, at the 
beginning of the monitori ng period, the budget of CONAF summed a total of 105.023.262 USD, increasing to 
122.985.511 USD in 2016 (the last year of the results period). Of the total budget, 24% is used for institution 
management, 31% for the Fire Management Program, 21% for managem ent of Protected Wilderness -Areas, 
22% for Forest Management (administration of regulatory development legislation) and 2% for the Urban Tree 
Planting Program.  
(ix) Tracking emissions reductions: Indicate whether the achieved results are included in a registry or similar 
system that tracks emissions reductions and corresponding payments, and ensures that there is no past or future 
double payment or use of such results, including information to identify the area where the results were achieved, 
the entity eligible to receive payment, year(s) generated, source(s) of payments received, and identifying code, 
where possible. Provide the link or information where to find the registry or similar system  
 
The emission reductions submitted to the GCF are currently not in a public registry, but a tracking system called 
“Emission Reduction Registry System” is being developed and tested by a consortium formed by IHS Markit and 
Santiago Climate Exchange, in a con sultancy for CONAF (Financed by the FCPF Readiness program). This 
Registry System is currently being tested and the expected result is to have a public platform were the emission 
reductions generated by Chile and by private organizations can be available f or potential buyers, avoiding 
double payment situations and increasing transparency. After the end of the consultancy, this national 
alternative will be evaluated by Chile, along with other alternative registry/tracking systems provided by the 
interested i nternational organizations. This decision is still pending review of the international platforms 
available.  
 
Despite these considerations, the ERs achieved by Chile and submitted to the GCF will be registered in the Lima 
REDD+ Information Hub (Infohub), al lowing the public registry of Chile’s results. As stated in the decision 
9/CP.19, the information on this public registry will include, among other elements: the FREL/FRL and the 
results for each relevant period expressed in tons of carbon dioxide equivale nt per year, together with links to 
the technical reports, the national strategy of Chile (ENCCRV), information on the addressing and respect of 
safeguards and the national forest monitoring system. The information provided to the Infohub will also 
include  the quantity of results for which payments are being received, and the entity paying for results (in this 
case, the GCF). This information will allow the public and interested buyers to be informed on the details of the 
results -based  payments received by Chile, increasing the transparency and avoiding double payment situations.  
 
While this work is proceeding, Chile is operating an interim procedure whereby every two months the 
Monitoring Measurement System (MMS) monitors existing public registries under ex isting forest carbon 
standards (including Verified Carbon Standard, Gold Standard, Plan Vivo, Climate Action Reserve, American 
Carbon Registry). Any REDD+ Project found in the registries will be uploaded to the database. It will facilitate 
future tracking and ensure that there is no past or future double payment.  
 
The current status of the interim registry publicly available at https://www.enccrv.cl/medicion -y-monitoreo , 
this database is linked to the Monitoring Measurement System (MMS).  
C. Non -carbon elements  
 
Please provide a link to the summary of information on safeguards: 
https://redd.unfccc.int/files/reporte_salvaguardas__pc.pdf   
 
C.1. Cancun safeguards  
C.1.1. Compliance with Ca ncun safeguards . Please provide any additional information that supplements the 
information included in the “summary of information on safeguards” that allows understanding how each of the 
safeguards below was addressed and respected in the full period dur ing which results were generated in a way 
that ensures transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness:  
(i) That actions complement or are consistent with the objectives of national forest programmes 
and relevant international conventions and agreements.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 17 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
This safeguard refers to the complementarity or compatibility of the action implemented and of the overall 
National Climate Change and Vegetation Resources Strategy’s (ENCCRV) policies and measures,  with the 
objectives of  national forest and environmental programmes, and with the Conventions and International 
Agreements related to forests and vegetation resour ces ratified by Chile.  
 
The safeguards were applied consistently in a broader context than the pilot projects of the strategy, including 
activities that led to emission reductions, based on compliance with national legislation and the international 
agreeme nts ratified by the country, both in the development of pilot projects and in the execution of the 
activities associated with the ER. The safeguard was addressed and respected throughout the preparation of 
the ENCCRV and in obtaining the ER results.  
 
For addressing the safeguards, complementarity, compatibility and articulation of the actions with the 
Programmes and National Action Plans on climate change, as well as with International Conventions and 
Agreements ratified by Chile, and the current national legislation related to forests was analyzed. While a full 
description of the documents analyzed and generated is available in the "First Summary of Information: 
Approach, Respect and Compliance with the Safeguards for the Formulation of Chile's National Cl imate Change 
and Vegetation Resources Strategy (ENCCRV), Reporting Period 2013 - 2017" (hereinafter the Safeguards 
Summary of Information, SoI) the main international conventions  and other relevant instruments to which the 
ENCCRV contributes to are:  
    
● Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 2015 -2030, specifically, goal 13  on climate action and goal 
15 on life on land . 
● United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)  ratified by Chile on 11 November 
1997  
● The United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (UNFCCC) ratified by Chile on 22 
December 1994,  and subsequent Protocol of Kyoto and Paris Agreement ratified on 26 August 
2002 and 10 February 2017(CONAF is the focal point to the UNFCCC).  
● Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)  ratified by Chile on 9 September 1994 and Aichi Targets 
(Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011 - 2020)  coordinated by the Ministry of the Environment, in its 
capacity as focal point.  
● United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF), adhering to the UN Strategic Plan for Forests (2030).  
CONAF fulfills the role of National Focal Point.  
● Indirectly, the ENCCRV contributes to other international agreements, such as: the  Ramsar 
Convention ratified by Chile on 27 November 1981; the Man and the Biosphere Program (MaB) , 
which is par t of the Biosphere Reserve Network of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) for which CONAF is the focal point. The Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)  ratified by Chile on 
14 February 1975, for which CONAF is the management authorities of forest products.  
 
At the national level, the main legal instruments relevant in the context of the ENCCRV include : 
 
● Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile (1980)  
● Law No. 19.300 / 1994, on General Environmental Provisions  
● Decree No. 40/2013  of the Ministry of the Environment, corresponding to the Regulation of the 
Environmental Impact Assessment System.  
● In the forestry sector, the main regulations are:  DL No. 701/1974, on Forest Development and its 
Regulation (Decree No. 259/1980), the Law No. 20.283/ 2008, on the Recovery of Forest Native 
Forest and Forestry Development  and other related decrees, as well as specific decrees related to 
protect  native species ( Decre e No. 13/1995, Decree No. 490/1976, Decree No. 43/1990, Decree 
No. 427/1941, Decree No. 366/1944, Decree No. 4,363/1991).  
 
In addition, the preparation of the ENCCRV and the achievement of the ER kept in full consideration the 
following national plans, pro grammes and policies -  all developed through joint efforts of various national and 
subnational stakeholders (including the Ministry of Environment and other units of the Ministry of 
Agriculture):  National Biodiversity Strategy (2003) , National Action Plan  on Climate Change (PANCC) 
(2008 -2012) ; Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Silvoagricultural Sector (2013) , Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan in Biodiversity (2014) , National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change (2014) ; National 
Action Plan for Climate Chan ge 2017-2022 (PANCC -II); National Action Program against Desertification, 
Land Degradation and Drought 2016 -2035 (PANCD) ; Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  of 
Chile, submitted to the UNFCCC on September 2015; Forest Policy (2015 -2035)  in which fores t development


---
*Page 20*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 18 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
guidelines are established under the criteria of economic, social and environmental sustainability; and the 
Wood energy Strategy (2015)  of CONAF.  
 
The safeguard was then  fully respected,  by applying the national and international policies, laws and 
regulations towards the preparation of the ENCCRV and implementation of actions to achieve the ER reported. 
To further respect and comply with this safeguard special actions have been identifie d to enhance existing 
national legislation or establish a new forestry regulation that includes aspects related to climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. In particular, the reform of Law 20.283/2008 is foreseen to reach a larger number of 
beneficiaries through its incentive schemes, include payment for environmental services (PES) schemes to 
implement a sustainable management model linked to vegetation resources. In addition, land holders which do 
not have yet regular land titles might be included as pot ential beneficiaries of national programmes aiming to 
implement the ENCCRV.      
 
the ENCCRV actions focus on resolving the need to enhance the current legislation or establish a new forestry 
regulation, in the specific: action MT1, Include provisions rela ted to climate change,  desertification, land 
degradation and drought in a new law on forest development; MT2 Modify and strengthen Law No. 
20.283/2008 and its regulations; IF5 Include elements of preventive management and restoration after fires in 
Law Nº 20.283/2008 and regulations; RH1, Amendment of Law No. 19,561/1998 that exempts reforestation to 
agricultural recovery; RH2, Incorporation of forest conservation variables in Law Nº 18.450/1985; RH3, Limit 
the application of Law No. 20.412/2010 in soils w ith forest preferential capacity. (further details are available 
in the ENCCRV document , figure 11)  
 
Fully complying with this safeguard, the ENCCRV includes -  among others  - actions related to   forest 
management plans, which are key instruments  for the sustainable management of forest resources.  
 
To date, the following pilot projects, funded by various sources and corresponding to the early implementation 
phase of the ENCC RV, have been prepared and implemented taking into consideration the key international 
agreements and national legal framework. CONAF, as executing and coordinating entity of the ENCCRV, 
ensured compliance with the corresponding safeguards.  
 
The pilot pro jects that have been completed to date are:  
 
● 4 projects aiming to improve the production chain for sustainable biomass, with an area of 4,337.6 
hectares under different types of forest management, in the regions of Araucanía, Los Ríos, Los Lagos 
and Aysé n, financed by the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF).  
● 4 projects of hydrological restoration, in the regions of Bío- Bío and Los Ríos, covering an area of 446.8 
hectares funded by the UN- REDD Programme Targeted Support.  
● 2 preventive silviculture p rojects, in Valparaíso and Maule regions, covering an area of 843.1 hectares, 
funded by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC).  
 
Other projects that support respecting and compliance of safeguards i) and are currently ongoing are:  
● 5 projects associated with Sustainable Land Management, funded by the Global Environment Facility 
(GEF), in the regions of Arica -Parinacota, Coquimbo, O'Higgins, Araucanía and Aysén.  
● 5 restoration projects in the Regions of Coquimbo, Metropolitana, Araucanía  (2) and Magallanes 
financed by the  UN -REDD National Programme.  
● 1 water restoration project in Araucanía funded by SDC.  
● 2 restoration projects for burned areas of Valparaíso and Metropolitan regions, funded by Mountain 
GEF  
 
Further information on the acti ons included in the National REDD+ Strategy (ENCCRV) and that in their 
implementation support the respect of the safeguards i) (and others) are available at the following link: 
National Strategy on Climate Change and vegetation Resources ( https://www.enccrv -
chile.cl/index.php/documentos/item/335 -estrategia -nacional -de-cambio- climatico- y-recursos -
vegetaciona les-2017 -2025 ) 
Full details on the and in the REDD+ Safeguards Summary of Information: 
https://redd.unfccc.int/files/sistema_de_informaci__n_de_salv aguardas_enccrv__chile_.pdf   
 
(ii) Transparent and effective national forest governance structures, taking into account national 
legislation and sovereignty.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 19 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
All the phases of REDD+, throughout the preparation and implementation of the ENCCRV and including the 
achievement of the ER results, ensured (and will keep on ensuring) the promotion of  transparency and 
effectiveness of national forest and environmental governance structures, and that national legislation and 
sovereignty is taken into account.  
This safeguard, in the national context of Chile, is understood to refer, firstly, to the forest governance 
structure, defined through the institutional arrangemen ts that were and will be used to implement the 
emission reductions action. In these terms , the Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA), 
which sits under the Gerencia de Desarrollo y Fomento Forestal  of CONAF, has the role of executing entity and 
coordinator of activities carried out within the framework of the ENCCRV. In this role, the UCCSA maintains a 
permanent technical link with CONAF's Interagency Committee on Climate Change, made up of CONAF's 
technical managers. Similarly, CONAF maintains its link with the Inter -ministerial Technical Committee on 
Climate Change (CTICC) led by the Office of Agricultural Studies and Policies (ODEPA) of MINAGRI, with the aim 
of strengthening the technical decision s that are adopted within the framework of the ENCCRV. Finally, the 
highest decision -making body t is the Council of Ministers for Sustainability, which validates multisectoral 
documents, such as national communications to the UNFCCC, NDCs, and Action Plan s on Adaptation, among 
others. The  structure, as described, maintains its transparency through the publication of the advances and 
agreements reached in the pages of corresponding organizations. In this sense, The Council of Ministers of 
Sustainability pub lishes the summary of the sessions, matters discussed and agreements reached 
(https://mma.gob.cl/consejo- de-ministros -para -la-sustentablidad/  ).   
Transparency of Chile gove rnance structure in this regard is also addressed by national laws and by the 
ratification of international instruments, such as the United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) on 
13 September 2006, the Inter -American Convention against Corruption  of the American States on 22 
September 1998. At national level, the Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile (1980), Law No. 
20.285/2008, the Council for Transparency, and Law No. 19,886/2004 are the most relevant instruments 
aiming to enact transp arency measures in the country. To ensure the effectiveness of forest and environmental 
governance structures, reference is made to Law No. 18.575/1996 and Law 19.880/2003. Detailed information 
concerning the national and international regulations ratified  by Chile can be found in the Safeguards Summary 
of Information11. 
The country fully respects and complied with this safeguard. In light of the international and national legal 
framework,  transparency and access to public information was guaranteed by CONA F, which has a 
Comprehensive Information and Citizen Service System (SIAC), aiming to provide various fora  across the 
country to bring attention to public requests; these include Information, Claims and Suggestions Offices (OIRS). 
Regarding the effectiven ess of forest governance structures, CONAF also has an Internal Regulation on Order, 
Hygiene and Safety, which also contributes to compliance with transparency and efficiency.  
To ensure compliance with this safeguard, the SIAC and the institutional attention places OIRS were the base 
for the Mechanism of Complaints and Suggestions (MRS) of the ENCCRV, which comply with all the 
requirements established by international organizations for an MRS. It  serves as a mechanism for citizens to 
register their claims/ grievances and suggestions related to the implementation of the action measures of the 
ENCCRV (more information in the Information Note N ° 22, Mechanism of Claims and Suggestions of the 
ENCCRV, available in the link: https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/notas -informativas/item/487 -nota -
informativa -n-22) 
Between January 1, 2014 and December 31, 2017, 93,469 applications were registered at the OIRS at national 
level, of which 58.81 were made by men and 41.9% by women. Of these, the majority corresponds to queries 
(74%) and requests (21%). The main topics of the applications refer to protected areas, urban tree planting, 
native forest and plantations. Re garding the resolution of these queries and requests, 93,22712 requests 
received a response over the same period, with an average response time of 1 to 2 days (96%).  
 
11 https://redd.unfccc.int/files/reporte_salvaguardas__pc.pdf  
12 The difference between the number of applications and the number of answers is due the applications on december 2017 were 
answered in january 2018


---
*Page 22*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 20 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
To promote transparency of the formulation and validation of the ENCCRV, an official website was created 
(https://www.enccrv.cl ), in addition to the institutional website of CONAF ( www.conaf.cl ). The website 
contains relevant materials, publications and news about th e ENCCRV. In addition, every official document 
generated within the framework of the ENCCRV, related to the Warsaw Framework for REDD+, has been 
officially consigned to the Secretariat of the UNFCCC, through a formal note from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of Chile, which acts as Focal Point.  
(iii) Respect for the knowledge and the rights  of indigenous peoples and members of local 
communities, by taking into account relevant international obligations, national circumstances 
and laws, and noting that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted the United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  
 
The ENCCRV protects the respect for the knowledge and the rights of indigenous peoples and members of local 
communities, complying with international obligations ratified by Chile and the circumstances and national 
legislation, considering the General Assembly of the United Nations has approved the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which has been ratified by C hile.  
 
ER in the reported period were achieved in full compliance with this safeguard. Further implementation of the 
ENCCRV will continue addressing and respecting this key safeguard.  
 
National legislation established institutional structures and internati onal agreements in force that allowed to 
address this safeguard are reported below. For international agreements:  
 
● United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UN, 2007) with Chile voting in 
favour of the adoption of the proposal on 13 S eptember 200 7 
● American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples of the OAS (2016)  
● Convention No. 169 of the ILO , Convention on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent 
Countries of the International Labor Organization, ratified in Chile by means of Supreme Decree No. 
236/2008.  
● Convention on Biological Diversity  promulgated as the Law of the Republic through Supreme Decree 
No. 1963/1995.  
● The Equity and Social Inclusion strategic area of the Chilean Forest Policy (2015 -2035) foresees the 
estab lishment of a relationship based on Good Faith with indigenous peoples’ communities in the 
forestry sector in order to achieve agreements that allow generating a coherent development with the 
rights that derive from the pluricultural nature of the country,  considering free, prior and informed 
consultation and participation  
 
Chile’s legal instruments that allowed addressing the safeguard:  
 
● The Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile (1980)  
● Law No. 19,253 / 1993  on protection, promotion and developme nt of indigenous peoples, which 
creates the National Indigenous Development Corporation (CONADI).  
● Law No. 19.300 / 1994, in article 4 referring to citizen participation in environmental evaluation.  
● Law No. 20.249 / 2008, which creates the marine coastal sp ace of the original peoples.  
● Law No. 17.288/ 1970 on National Monuments, which regulates the protection, conservation 
and investigation about the cultural heritage of the country.  
● Decree 236/2008, which promulgates Convention No. 169 on indigenous and trib al peoples in 
independent countries of the International Labor Organization.  
● Decree No 40 / 2013 of the Ministry of the Environment, in article 85 referring to Consultation with 
indigenous people.  
● Decree No.66 / 2013 which approves Regulation Governing the Procedure for Indigenous 
Consultation under Article 6 No. 1 letter a) and No. 2 of ILO Convention No. 169.  
 
In order to respect the safeguards, and taking into account existing legal framework, Chile generated, through 
CONAF, specific policies that promote Equity and Social inclusion and seeks, among other aspects, to respect 
the tradition and cultu re of the peasant and indigenous communities that depend on forests (Forest Policy 
2015 -2035).


---
*Page 23*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 21 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
In addition, CONAF also served to develop territorial management instruments with an eco -cultural approach, 
based on ancestral knowledge and contributions of cu rrent technical knowledge. These include:  
 
● Andean Intercultural Environmental Model (MAIA) , a conceptual and practical work model that 
includes the comprehensive Andean vision that combines production, environment and culture, 
oriented towards the Aymara, Quechua and Atacameñas (Likan antai) communities of northern Chile 
(Elaborated on 2011).  
● Mapuche Intercultural Forest Model (MOFIM) , a model and approach of community work in 
forestry development, management of natural resources and territorial development  according to the 
Mapuche culture (Elaborated on 2011).  
 
The ENCCRV also manages  instruments to ensure respect for the dignity, human rights, economies and 
cultures of Indigenous Peoples and provide social and economic benefits that are culturally appropr iate, such 
as the Indigenous People's Participation Framework (MPPI), Annex 5 of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (MGAS) of the ENCCRV ( https://www.enccrv.cl/salvaguardas  ). 
 
In the for mulation process of the ENCCRV, a Dialogue and Participation Process with Indigenous Peoples was 
developed (2016)13 adapting the procedures to the regional context and incorporate the corresponding 
cultural relevance to each local indigenous town. Likewise,  when the Wood Energy Strategy was developed, the 
characterization of the actors involved the firewood supply chain was carried out, and potential impacts and 
mitigation measures related to indigenous peoples were identified.  
 
Respect for the indigenous pe oples within the framework of the formulation of the ENCCRV, was ensured 
through the participation of the communities in the SESA workshops, under which the apprehensions, concerns 
and demands of the indigenous peoples regarding the causes of degradation, deforestation and no increase in 
forest stocks of vegetative resources were collected. Conforming 4 focus groups that raised information on 
indigenous peoples: indigenous peoples, indigenous women, small and medium- sized forest landowners, 
indigenous Colla  women and Diaguita indigenous women.  
(iv) The full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in particular indigenous  peoples 
and local communities, in the actions referred to in paragraphs 70 and 72 of 1/CP.16.  
 
This safeguard refers to the full and effective participation of stakeholders, particularly indigenous peoples and 
local communities, in the planning, design, implementation and monitoring of the ENCCRV actions.  
 
This safeguard was addressed by stressing the participation of indigenous peoples and women in development 
and implementation of the ENCCRV, as there has been a strong interest in mainstreaming minorities in the 
implementation process. Each of these forms of participation have associated national and international 
legislation and regulations, from which management instruments are derived that allow for "respecting" this 
safeguard and  achieving co mpliance. The approach to address, respect and comply with this safeguard is 
detailed below:  
 
Chile has developed appropriate legal instruments which relate to this safeguard, in respect to three  identified 
areas. Regarding Citizen Participation, reference  is made to the Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile 
(1980), Law No. 20,500 / 2011 and Presidential Instruction No. 007 on Citizen Participation (2014) under 
which the Unit and the Regulation of Citizen Participation was created in CONAF. With r espect to the 
participation of indigenous peoples, the Supreme Decree No. 66/2014 regulates the entry into force of ILO 
Convention No.  169. Likewise, Law 19.300 / 1994 and its Regulation promote citizen participation and 
consultation with indigenous people  in the process of Environmental Impact Assessment.  
 
In order to mainstream gender equality, the Ministry of Women and Gender Equality, was created by Law No. 
20,820 / 2015. In addition, the National Women Service was created by Law No. 19.023 / 1991 and is currently 
operational. The National Women's Service provided guidelines for the constitution of Gender Units by sector 
to all state agencies, according to which The Gender Equality Unit was created in CONAF...Details concerning 
the gender legislation an d its scope and links with the ENCCRV can be found in the  Safeguards Summary of 
Information.  
 
In addition, the country has ratified a series of international legally binding instruments as well as adopted 
 
13 https://docs .wixstatic.com/ugd/902a1e_ad7345181a2e41a895f0fac5e75eefc8.pdf


---
*Page 24*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 22 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
guidelines and operational requirements developed by the UN and other international agencies which have 
supported the formulation of ENCCRV, incl uding the participation of indigenous peoples and women.  
 
Hereby, relevant international instruments are listed:  
 
Indigenous participation and consultation:  
 
● ILO Convention No. 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples14. In Chile, this instrument entered into 
force on 15 September 2009, through the promulgation of Decree 236 by the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, which approves the Indigenous Consultation procedure.  
● Convention on Biological Diversity, ratified by Chile on 9 September 1994, article  8, letter j) re ferring 
to indigenous peoples and other related articles.  
● United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2007).  
 
The following guidelines and operational requirements of institutions that have supported activities in the pilot 
phase of the  ENCCRV, and in the achievement of ER, have  been consulted and put into practice:   
 
● Free, Prior and Informed Consent Guidelines of the UN- REDD Programme.  
● Environmental and Social Standard 9 (ESS 9) of the FAO. This norm recognizes that the traditions and 
knowledge of indigenous people’s  present opportunities for many of the challenges that humanity will 
face in the coming decades.  
● Operational Policy 4.10 of the World Bank on Indigenous Peoples.  
 
Participation of Women  
Among the international legal instrume nts ratified by Chile addressing the participation of women, the 
following stand out:  
● Resolution adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 2011, referring to the Political 
Participation of Women (A/RES/66/130)  
● Convention on the elimination o f all forms of discrimination against women (CEDAW) . This was 
ratified by Chile through Decree No. 789/1989  
● Resolution of the UN General Assembly, which established UN Women (A / RES / 64/289) . 
The Plan for the Implementation of Social and Environmental Safeguards for Public and Indigenous 
Consultation a Self -assessment15 has been prepared, taking into consideration the guidelines established at 
international and national level on this matter, (available online at CONAFs site). This document guided the 
development of the entire participatory formulation process of the ENCC RV, between 2015 and 2016. The Plan 
included the organization of regional workshops and a national workshop, ensuring local, regional and national 
representation, considering a multi -stakeholder, multi -sectoral and multi -stakeholder approach and including 
the mainstreaming of the gender approach and pluricultural participation.  
In addition, and in an integrated manner with the Plan, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(2016)  has been developed (SESA), incorporating the necessary environmental an d social considerations to 
ensure the sustainable implementation of the action measures.  The measures are in line with the national 
commitments assumed by Chile under the UNFCCC and other international bodies.  
In the context of the Safeguards Plan and SES A, between 2013 and 2016, 15 regional workshops were held, 
involving 1,266 people, 36.4% of women and 9% indigenous peoples. In addition, a national workshop 
involving125 people, 31% of women and 8% indigenous peoples, was held. In these workshops, the gen der 
approach was manifested from the gathering of information through the identification of key actors; formation 
of focus groups, determining a minimum percentage of participation of 30% and when appropriate, specific 
focus groups for women were formed (a dditional information can be found in the Information Note N ° 8, on 
Mainstreaming the gender approach)16. 
 
14 https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ ---americas/ ---ro-lima/documents/publication/wcms_345065.pdf  
15 https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/documentos/item/352- plan- sis 
16 https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/notas -informativas/item/427- nota- informativa- nr8


---
*Page 25*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 23 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Other instances of participation were:  
● The Process of Dialogue and Participation of Indigenous Peoples, held between June and September 
2016, which in cluded the indigenous peoples of the entire territory of continental Chile, focused on 
rural areas of the 10 regions with the presence of indigenous populations and where their ways of life 
and customs are directly and indirectly related to forests and veg etation resources (Information Note 
No. 17. Process of Dialogue and Participation with Indigenous Peoples in the formulation of the 
National Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV) of Chile)17. 
● Citizen consultation held between June 20 to September 20, 2016, with the participation of 506 people, 
41% women (Information Note N ° 12, Citizen Consultation Process for Validation and Strengthening 
of the ENCCRV)18. 
● For the formulation and validation process of the ENCCRV, the Guide for the Eval uation of Programs 
and Projects with a gender, human rights and intercultural perspective of UN- Women (2014) was used 
as a guiding document.  
● For the stages of implementation of the ENCCRV, there is a Planning Framework for Indigenous 
Peoples included in th e ESMF, which provides guidance to ensure indigenous participation in the 
activities to be developed by the Strategy.  
(v) That actions are consistent with the conservation of natural forests and biological diversity, 
ensuring that the actions referred to in paragraph 70 of this decision are not used for the 
conversion of natural forests, but are instead used to incentivize the protection and 
conservation of natural forests and their ecosystem services, and to enhance other social and 
environmental benefits.  
 
This refers to the prevention of ENCCRV action measures from promoting the conversion of native vegetation 
resources, in addition to promoting their protection and conservation to favor the ecosystem services and co-
benefits that these generate. Chile fully addressed and respected this safeguard in the achievement of its ER.   
 
To address this safeguard, the ENCCRV considers the integration of ratified international agreements, 
conventions and agreements signed by the country, where CONAF participates as a focal point are taken into 
account. Also integrating with other national coordinating entities; and the current national legislation, in 
regards of conservation of natural forests and biodiversity. This information is presented in detail in the SoI. 
The fo llowing international agreements ratified by Chile are worth to note:  
 
● UNCCD ratified by decree 2065/1998 and the UNFCCC  promulgated by Decree 123/1995 with the 
REDD+  approach, in which CONAF is the focal point.  
● CBD and the Aichi Targets  ratified in Decree  No. 1.965 / 1995. In 2010, the CBD urged countries to 
update their National Biodiversity Strategies (NBS) according to the " Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 
2011 -2020 and the Aichi Targets".  
● The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) , in its "Environmental 
Perspectives to 2050".  
● Sustainable Development Goals 2015 -2030, specifically objective 15  
● United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) , where CONAF fulfills the role of National Focal Point.  
● The Ramsar Convention , the UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere Program  and the Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)   
 
National legislation and regulatio ns regarding the conservation of natural forests and biological diversity, 
preventing the detriment of ecosystems and conversion of natural forests:  
 
●  The Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile (1980).  
● Law No. 20.283 / 2008 , on Recovery of Native Forest and Forest Development, aims to protect, 
recover and improve native forests, in order to ensure forest sustainability and environmental policy . 
● Law No. 19.300 / 1993 establishes the right to live in a pollution -free environment, the protection of 
the environment, the preservation of nature and the conservation of environmental heritage. Under 
this law, the administration of a National System of Protected Wild Areas of the State (SNASPE) has 
been regulated.  
 
17 https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/notas -informativas/item/43 9-nota- informativa- 17 
18 https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/descargas/publicaciones/378- nota- informativa- n-12/file


---
*Page 26*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 24 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
Regarding policies, programs and national plans focused on the conservation of forests and biological diversity, 
the ones listed below are the main ones:  
  
● National Biodiversity Strategy 2017 -203019 to conserve the country's biodiversity by guaranteeing 
fair and equitable access to ecosystem goods and services, fostering the capacities to safeguard, restore 
and sustainably use the heritage and natural heritage.  
● The National Action Plan on Climat e Change (PANCC II) 2017 -2022, within its objective to enhance 
adaptation, seeks to reduce vulnerability and increase the adaptive capacity of the country's human 
and natural systems, including a specific action measure on biodiversity.  
● The National Plan of Adaptation to Climate Change (2014)20 seeks to strengthen Chile's capacity to 
adapt to climate change through transversal and sectoral action plans in Silvo -agricultural and 
Biodiversity sectors.  
● Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Silvo -pastoral sector (2008 -2012) , includes the 
genetic conservation of forest resources and the development of new silvicultural methods to face 
climate change.  
● Adaptation to Climate Change in Biodiversity Plan (2014)21, seeks to promote the conservation of 
biodiversity and its adaptation to climate change through research and capacity building, promotion of 
sustainable practices, incorporation into instruments of territorial planning and strengthening of the 
System National Wildlife Protected Area.  
● Nation al Action Program against Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought 2016 -2035 
(PANCD)  aligned with the National Climate Change and Vegetation Resources Strategy (ENCCRV)  
 
Also, the Forest Policy (2015 -2035)  indicates within its strategic axes, the protection and restoration of the 
forest heritage, for which it seeks to conserve and increase the State's forest heritage, develop environmental 
goods and services and restore and protect the biodiversity that provide forest resources and ecosystems.  
 
In issu es related to ecological restoration, the National Policy and Strategy for the Ecological Restoration of 
the National System of Protected Wild Areas of the State (2012)  was elaborated to guide the execution of 
plans, projects and actions tending to ecologically restore damaged territories within the National System of 
Protected Wild Areas of the State (SNASPE).  
 
Respect for this safeguard was carried out through the integration of the REDD + policy guidelines of the 
UNFCCC, UNCCD, CBD, and national program s, plans and policies. Together with the input of the participatory 
process of the ENCCRV, corresponding to the identification by the key actors of the causes of deforestation, 
devegetation, degradation of vegetation resources and the difficulties to incre ase the coverage and quality of 
these. This technical and participatory process resulted in the definition of Forests for REDD + policies, 
together with definitions of Deforestation, Forest Degradation and Forest Conservation. From which the action 
measures of the Strategy were developed.  
 
The action measures of the strategy aimed at preventing the conversion of native forest and other vegetation 
resources correspond to: MT.7. Strengthening of forestry and environmental control programs; RS.1. Targeting 
restoration and inspection program in areas with substitution risk; RH.1. Modification Law No. 19,561 that 
exempts agricultural recovery from reforestation; RH.3. Limit the application of Law No. 20,412 on 
Preferentially Forestry Aptitude soils.  
 
The action m easures of the strategy aimed at promoting the protection and conservation of vegetation 
resources and enhancing ecosystem services are: T.8. Strengthening and updating of Management Plans of 
SNASPE areas in the context of the ENCCRV; RH.2. Incorporate for est conservation variables into Law No. 
18,450; MT.5. Strengthening of ecological restoration program in communes / prioritized areas; IF.2. Program 
of restoration of ecosystems post Forest Fires; GA.1. Adaptation program for the management of vegetation 
resources in the framework of climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought. For more 
information, review the Safeguards Summary of Information.  
 
In relation of the compliance, the ENCCRV has a specific strategic objective  focusing on conser ving biological 
 
19 https://mma.gob.cl/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/Es trategia_Nac_Biodiv_2017_30.pdf  
20 https://mma.gob.cl/wp -content/uploads/2016/02/Plan- Nacional -Adaptacion- Cambio- Climatico -version- final.pdf  
21 http://metadatos.mma.gob.cl/sinia/PDF008.pdf


---
*Page 27*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 25 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
diversity, for example by strengthening the National System of Protected Wild Areas (SNASPE). Regarding the 
Protected Wild Areas of the State administered by CONAF, each of them has a Management Plan22. Since 2016, a 
new methodology has been  implemented, incorporating zoning and territorial analysis, cultural conservation 
and human welfare objects, participation aspects, analysis of vulnerability to climate change, logical framework 
matrix, operational plans, monitoring, among others. This im plementation has been developed in various 
Protected Areas of the SNASPE in 2016 and 2017, including the Nonguén National Reserve in the Bio Bio 
Region. There are  also preservation management plans oriented to protect the biological diversity of forest 
resources. It is worth mentioning the execution of the restoration plan for the Malleco National Reserve 
immediately after the 2002 fire.  
 
In relation to specific terms associated to forest conservation and biological diversity, the Corporation 
through the Pr ogram for the Conservation of Endangered Flora and Wildlife of Chile (1999)  has executed 
28 species conservation plans23. It also highlights the National Program for the conservation of Wetlands 
inserted in the National System of Wild Protected Areas of the  State (2010).  
 
 
(vi) Actions to address the risks of reversals.  
 
 
Actions that allow to face the risks of reversal that could be generated with the implementation of the ENCCRV, 
as well as those that could affect the planned results, ensuring the permanence of the reduction of emissions.  
 
To address this safeguard, the procedure established in the document "Guidelines for buffering the ER 
Program" of the FCPF is being applied. This process includes i) the identification of risks of reversals, where  
four risk factors their description and valuation are analyzed, corresponding to: the lack of broad and sustained 
support to key actors, the lack of institutional capacities and / or ineffective intersectoral / vertical 
coordination, the lack of long -term  effectiveness in addressing the underlying factors, and exposure and 
vulnerability to natural disturbances (risks of disturbances and natural disasters). And ii) the elements are 
defined to prevent and minimize potential reversals. The details of this analysis are presented in the Safeguards 
Summary of Information.  
 
The Law No. 20,283 / 2008 and Decree Law No. 701/1974 allow addressing some of the risks associated with 
reversals, favoring the activities leading to the reduction of deforestation and sustain able management of 
forests.  
 
On the other hand, forest fires are one of the main causes of degradation of vegetation resources, and in Chile, 
99.9% of them are anthropogenic. In this case, the national legislation considers the following regulations:  
● Decree No. 4363/1931 (text approving the Forest Law), of the Ministry of Lands and Colonization, 
whose art. Nº22 establishes penalties for those who cause forest fires, and Law No. 20.653, of 2013, 
which amended Art, No. 22 of the Forest Law.  
● Supreme Decre e 276/1980, Ministry of Agriculture, to prevent the occurrence of forest fires 
establishes that the use of fire, to eliminate plant waste in agricultural and forestry lands, will only take 
place in the form of controlled burning and Supreme Decree 100/1990  of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
which prohibits the use of fire to destroy vegetation in winter.  
 
Reversal Management Mechanisms  
The same methodology used to estimate reference levels in the ENCCRV was proposed to be used to monitor 
the emissions associated with reversals. This safeguard, therefore, will be addressed through the Measurement 
and Monitoring System (SMM) of the ENCCRV which includes elements of early warning and of Measurement, 
Reporting and Verification as part of the National Strategy.  
 
As a result of the analysis of reversal risk potential of the Strategy, a reserve fund of 21% of the ERs is 
established as a buffer for reversals, which will remain in place during the validity of the Strategy. This fund 
will be generated only from emissions reductions due to deforestation and degradation, since increases in 
removals due to increased stocks or conservation are exposed to natural and anthropogenic risks that may 
 
22 http://www.conaf.cl/parques -nacionales/normativa- y-reglamento/planes -de-manejo- parques -nacionales/  
23 http://www.conaf.cl/parques -nacionales/conservacion- de-especies/


---
*Page 28*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 26 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
affect their permanence over time. The methodology to estimate the buffer is based on the FCPF WB’s 
guidelines24. The details for the buffer estimation are provided in the annex 6.  
  
(vii) Actions to reduce displacement of emissions.  
 
Those actions that prevent territorial displacement of activities that generate GHG emissions associated with 
deforestation and forest degradation.  
 
The UNFCCC establishes that the implementation of REDD+ activities might generate a risk if the reduction of 
deforestation and forest degradation in a specific site would push drivers of deforestation and activities that 
would generate GHG in a different territory, outside the ENCCRV execution borders. Therefore, although the 
Strategy has a national scope, there is a risk of displacement of emissions associated with the subnational 
implementation in five regions of the south of the country.  
 
In terms of regulations, to address this safeguard, the country refers to:  
● Decree No. 4363/1931, of the Ministry of Lands  and Colonization, which sets the definitive text of the 
forest law and whose implication with the ENCCRV is that it defines the Preferential Forestry Aptitude 
(APF) lands to those who because of their soil conditions and climate, should not be plowed 
perm anently, excluding those who, without suffering degradation, can be used for agriculture, fruit 
growing or intensive livestock. It is also defined that lands classified as APF, in addition to natural and 
artificial forests, will be subject to the CONAF app roved management plans.  
● Decree Law No. 2565/1979, which replaces Decree Law No. 701, of 1974. The purpose of this Law is to 
regulate forest activity in APF soils and degraded soils and encourage afforestation, especially by small 
forest owners and to fores ee the necessary measures for  the prevention of the degradation, protection 
and recovery of the soils of the national territory.  
● Law No. 20.283 / 2008, on Recovery of the Native Forest and Forestry Development, a legal instrument 
whose objectives are the p rotection, recovery and improvement of native forests, in order to ensure 
forest sustainability and environmental policy, in line with the ENCCRV. This Law, among other 
regulations, defines and regulates forest types, management plans, environmental protec tion norms, 
the Conservation, Recovery and Sustainable Management Fund of the native forest and the procedures 
and sanctions in cases of violation of its norms.  
 
In the Summary of Safeguards displacement risks associated with the most relevant deforestatio n and 
degradation causes are identified for the ENCCRV, among them:  
 
● Expansion of agricultural -livestock activity and urban and industrial expansion  
● Unsustainable use of vegetation resources for production  
● Forest fires  
● Unsustainable management of forest cr ops 
● Unsustainable use of vegetation resources for livestock  
 
The risks associated with the displacement of emissions are linked to the reduction of the causes and agents of 
deforestation and forest degradation. Thus, if a territory is suffering from illegal agricultural activities in 
forested areas, increasing the vigilance and application of regulations can reduce deforestation in the places to 
which they are directed. In this way, like the previous safeguard, in this case the monitoring will be done  
through the Measurement and Monitoring System of the ENCCRV, which includes elements of Measurement, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV).  
 
C.1.2. Stakeholder involvement.   
Please describe and provide evidence that the Cancun safeguards information was made transparently available 
to stakeholders.  
 
The design process of the ENCCRV considered as a priority to ensure the effective and inclusive participation of 
all groups and key actors linked to vegetation resources, with special emphasis on local communities, 
indigenous peoples, women and other vulnerable people. Specifically, it was considered small owners, social 
 
24 https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2019/July/FCPF%20Buffer%20Guidelines_2015.pdf


---
*Page 29*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 27 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
organizations (neighborhood associations, farmers' associations, among others), associations and groups of 
civil society, univ ersities and study centers, non -governmental organizations (NGOs), government institutions, 
local governments and anyone interested in contributing to the formulation and future implementation of the 
ENCCRV. In order to guide and implement the participator y process, carried out between 2015 and 2017, a 
Plan for the implementation of Social and Environmental Safeguards for Public and Indigenous Consultation 
and Self -Assessment was created (available at the link: https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/downloads/enccrv /7 -
plan -safeguards -enccrv/file  ). 
 
Once the stakeholders were identified, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) was developed, 
which allowed obtaining basic information on the causes of deforestation, degradation and difficulties for the 
increase of carbon stocks. It was also possible to generate proposals for the action measures of the ENCCRV, 
with their respective risks and adverse impacts, potential benefits, and proposals for the maintenance and / or 
increase of biodiversity.  
 
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) allowed to comply with the international guidelines 
issued by the different agencies that provided technical and financial support in the formula tion of the ENCCRV. 
This methodology also has the advantage of incorporating safeguards that not only provide environmental 
sustainability to the ENCCRV and its activities, but also social sustainability, with emphasis on issues related to 
indigenous rights, and the right to citizen participation. Thus, the SESA integrated national and international 
guidelines and regulations that will give socio -environmental sustainability to the ENCCRV in its 
implementation phase.  
 
In order to achieve compliance with the  safeguards, in addition to a solid environmental and forestry 
institutional framework, a participatory process was applied throughout the country with the support of 
national and international agents who actively collaborated. Added to this process was th e consideration and 
compliance of guidelines for effective inclusion in a framework of ethical considerations that allowed for direct 
linkage with representatives of different Focal Groups (FG), which, through their empirical and technical 
knowledge, provi ded relevant information and relevant to support the formulation of the ENCCRV in order to 
generate a public policy instrument with long -term environmental and social sustainability to face the effects of 
climate change.  
 
The ENCCRV has the support and com mitment of civil society. During the design and formulation phase of the 
ENCCRV, the inclusion of social and environmental safeguards, which follow national and international 
guidelines, was carefully established, including the potential risk associated wi th its implementation.  
 
The participatory process in the formulation phase of the ENCCRV, carried out through regional workshops and 
a national workshop, had more than 1,200 active participants from all regions of the country, and included:  
 
● Indigenous peo ples  
● Institutional sector  
● Private sector  
● NGOs  
● Academy  
● Small and medium size forest landowners  
● Groups of women  
● Consultants and extension agents.  
 
More information on participatory processes can be found in the following link:  
 
https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/participacion/proceso- de-formulacion  
https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/participacion/proceso- de-validacion  
 
 
In line with the participatory process, the evaluation considered cross -cutting analysis that allowed classifying, 
weighing and prioritizing the risks and potential adverse imp acts identified, as well as ensuring compliance 
with the environmental and social safeguards that accompanied the participatory process.  
 
Among the most relevant results for this particular point is the classification and standardization of potential 
adver se impacts and risks, as well as the benefits and proposals for maintaining and / or increasing 
biodiversity, presented in five categories:


---
*Page 30*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 28 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
● Governance and operational management capacity for the implementation of the ENCCRV,  
● Effects on the environment, iii) social and cultural effects,  
● Limitations on the amounts and scope of existing financing mechanisms, and non -monetary retribution 
of benefits,  and 
● Education and capacity building.  
 
More information regarding the participatory process and SESA can be found at the following link: 
https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/documentos/item/350 -sesa   
 
Regarding t he Grievance and Redress Mechanism, Chile has the Information Offices, Claims and Suggestions 
(OIRS), created by Supreme Decree No. 680/1990, of the Ministry of the Interior, and which are operating in 
public services according to Law No. 18,575, Organic C onstitutional Bases of State Administration. Therefore, it 
is possible to ensure that according to current legislation and institutions, the OIRS comply with national and 
international standards and has the following structure to process information:  
 
● Coll ect demands, suggestions, claims and proposals from all over the national territory, strengthening 
the ENCCRV in its different phases, from formulation to implementation and evaluation,  
● Responding to potential beneficiaries, especially indigenous peoples, local communities and other 
vulnerable social sectors, who face difficulties in accessing the information,  
● Report to the corresponding agencies and  
● Strengthen the Safeguards Information System of the ENCCRV, for the improvement of the monitoring 
system and the compliance with safeguards.  
 
More information on the OIRS as MRS of the ENCCRV can be found at the following link:  https://www.enccrv -
chile.cl/index.php/notas -informativas/item/487 -nota -informativa -n-22      
 
C.2. Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  
C.2.1. General description:  
Provide a description on how the proceeds will be reinvested in activities consistent with the country’s NDC, 
national REDD- plus strategy and/or low carbon development plans and policies. The description should also 
include how the proceeds will be used in  a manner that contributes to the long -term sustainability of REDD -plus 
activities, including non -carbon benefits.  
 
The proceeds of the results based payment are expected to be used as set out in this section and in a manner 
consistent with the restrictions set out in paragraph 14 of the terms of reference for the for the REDD+ RBP 
Pilot Programme adopted by Decision B.18/07.  
 
The Ministry of Agriculture of Chile, through the National Forestry Corporation (CONAF), has prepared the 
National Strategy on Clim ate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV) 2017 -2025, whose main objective is 
to increase the resilience of ecosystems and contribute to mitigate climate change by promoting the reduction 
of emissions from greenhouse gases in Chile by reducing the social , environmental and economic vulnerability 
generated by climate change, such as increased risk of desertification, land degradation and drought in forest 
areas and human communities that depend on them. The ENCCRV proposes 26 action measures impacting 
264, 000 hectares, defining a total budget of USD 433 million, which differentiates between already existing 
resources and resources that need to be leveraged from different financing sources (called conditional), such as 
international funds or agencies. The latter corresponds to 84% of the total budget.  
 
Considering the fundamental role of vegetation resources in climate change mitigation and adaptation, the 
ENCCRV was proposed as a public policy instrument developed to comply with the national commitments 
made  in the Paris Agreement and the submission of Chile's NDC to the Secretariat of the UNFCCC. The specific 
contribution of the Forest Sector to the NDC considers the sustainable management and recovery of 100,000 
hectares of forest which is conditional to th e extension of Decree Law 701 and the approval of a new Forestry 
Promotion Law. The NDC also includes the afforestation of 100,000 hectares of mainly native species subject to 
the approval of the Native Forest Recovery and Forestry Promotion Law. In additi on to its alignment to 
international commitments established in the UNFCCC, the ENCCRV is also aligned with the UNCCD, especially


---
*Page 31*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 29 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
the commitment of Land Degradation Neutrality (LDN) and the SDGs. At the national level, it contributes to the 
four strategic axes and the goals set out in the Chilean Forest Policy 2015 -2035 and in the National Climate 
Change Plan 2017 -2022.  
 
The ENCCRV was formulated in three phases following the orientations of REDD+:  
  
Phase 1, corresponding to the preparation of the Warsaw F ramework, has been fulfilled and is always 
maintained in constant improvements and updates. During this phase, the policy framework related to the 
conservation of native forests was also being implemented. Phase 2 begins with the execution of demonstration  
projects in the territory financed with international cooperation and small advances in the institutional actions 
associated with the activities that address the underlying causes of forest loss, with the aim of accessing result -
based  payments as phase 3 of REDD.  
 
The ENCCRV establishes eight activities containing 26 action measures, which are intended to address the 
drivers of deforestation, de -vegetation, degradation of forests and other vegetation resources, as well as those 
barrier s that prevent or interfere negatively in implementing activities on restoration, conservation, 
sustainable management, enrichment and regeneration of vegetation resources. These activities include: 
adaptive management25 to climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought; sustainable 
management of vegetation resources; farm and livestock management for protection of vegetation resources; 
preventative management on forest fires; sanitary plant protection; restoration of substituted areas by exot ic 
species; crosscutting management measures that include legal issues, regulatory, enforcement, outreach and 
environmental education, among others.  
 
The estimated total budget for administration and implementation of the activities included in the ENCCRV is 
USD 433 million, for a planning horizon of nine years. This budget includes unconditional costs of 16% of the 
budget, for which there is a budget in the respective institutions nationwide. The remaining 84% corresponds 
to costs subject to availability of funding from various national and international sources. MINAGRI, CONAF and 
other institutions of the Estate are already managing to leverage this additional funding. CONAF will both 
execute and coordinate the implementation of the ENCCRV, maintaining cl ose coordination with the 
Interagency Committee on Climate Change, preceded by the Ministry of the Environment.  
 
The entire estimated budget for the implementation of the ENCCRV will generate as main concrete results: 
140,000 hectares planted/re -vegetated;  30,000 hectares restored (10,000 hectares associated with affected 
areas by forest fires); 8,000 hectares with forestry protection for reducing effects from forest fires over 
vegetation resources; 70,000 hectares intervened under sustainable management plans and 16,000 hectares 
associated with production for firewood of quality obtained in accordance with legal provisions, directly linked 
to the international commitments of the country; in addition for strengthening of areas such as institutional 
managemen t, enacting regulations, enforcement, support, territorial planning, capacity building or transfer of 
skills, environmental education, awareness rising and research.  
 
Due to the limited availability of resources to support the implementation phase of the ENCCRV, funds raised 
from results -based  payments (Phase 3 REDD+) will be fully used for implementation of the ENCCRV. In 
addition, it is expected to trigger public -private financing that achieve greater environmental impacts and 
social projects in developm ent. Consequently, the results -based payments received by Chile from the GCF will 
contribute to the implementation of the forest sector actions of Chile's NDC and the ENCCRV. The use of the 
proceeds will contribute to the achievement of the ENREDD+ overall objective and the country’s NDC.  
 
As indicated in the ENCCRV, adaptation and mitigation actions include elements of innovation in its design, 
especially changes and improvements in operational practices of afforestation, restoration and sustainable 
manag ement, promoting associations among communities vulnerable to climate change and also fostering 
inter -institutional work, with the inclusion of the private sector (including small and medium sized owners, 
private companies and financial institutions), whic h is expected to trigger a paradigm shift that catalyzes the 
long -term impacts of the project.  
 
 
25 The Manual for the planning of natural protected areas ( http://www.conaf.cl/wp -
content/files_mf/1515526054CONAF_2017_MANUALPARALAPLANIFICACI%C3%93NDELASAREASPROTEGIDASDELSNASPE
_BajaResoluci%C3%B3n.pdf  ) defines adaptive management as the incorporation of a formal learning process to a conservation 
action. Specifically, the integration of a testing, learning and timely information for decision making into de design, management and 
monitoring of protected areas.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 30 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Specifically, the proceeds will be distributed among the various activities of the ENCCRV in accordance to the 
Benefit Sharing System and linked to phase 2 of the ENCCRV as shown in the following figure:  
 
 
 
 20% of the resources will be directed to the national level in supportive and enabling activities for the local 
investments in the regions. They are reflected in the diagram above as national level since these activities will 
also have broader benefits fo r all regions These activities will promote sustainability and ensure the effective 
and efficient use of the funds, in addition to ensuring the complete operation of the elements established in the 
Warsaw Framework. Action measures of the ENCCRV related to  the strengthening of institutional capacities, 
law enforcement and providing technical services will also be implemented. These actions and measures  are:  
 
● Environmental Education and Dissemination Program (MT.6)  
● Strengthening of forest and environmental enforcement (MT.7)  
● Programme for the technological transfer of management alternatives and silvoagricultural waste 
(IF.6)  
● Adaptation programme for the management of vegetation resources in the context of climate change, 
desertification, land degradation an d drought (GA.1)  
 
The remaining 80% of the funds will be used to support investment activities at the local level as indicated by 
the ENCCRV. This will be done in accordance with relevant financial and technical guidelines ( 
https://www.enccrv.cl/medidas -de-accion -de-la-enccrv  ): 
 
● Afforestation and revegetation program (MT.4);  
● Strengthening the ecological restoration program (MT.5);  
● Program of restoration after forest fires (IF2);  
● Preventive forestry program with emphasis on rural urban interface (IF.3);  
● Forest management program. Arrangement and comprehensive management of the native forest in 
buildings or groups of buildings that incorporate multiple forestry activities (US.1);  
● Strengthening the wood energy program (US.3)  
 
These 80% of the funds will be allocated to the five regions of the project (Maule, Biobío26, Araucania, Los Ríos, 
Los Lagos) , as follows:  
 
● Basal Allocation (Equity). 50% of the funds will be divided equally across the regions where the 
reductions and forest carbon sequestrations are generated, without distinction of any type of 
mitigation result.  
● Performance Allocation (Efficiency). This allocation, corresponding to 20%, will be provided according 
 
26 Since the Nuble region was created in 2018 and used to be part of the Bio Bio region, for the purposes of this FP, Nuble is 
considered as part of the Biobio region.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 31 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
to the emission reductions and/or increase in forest carbon absorption generated in each of the 
regions, compared with the respective FREL/FRL. The allocation will be proportional to the number  of 
tons of emissions reduced and/or increased absorption per region and the financing available.  
● Buffer Allocation (Solidarity). The remaining 10% of the funds is meant to assign resources based on 
the total emissions divided by regional surface. This will equate those regions that, by any 
circumstances, like force majeure (fires, plagues or other situations), require more intense 
intervention and therefore of greater duration and cost.  
 
The allocation described above is based on three criteria, correspon ding to:  
 
● Equity. To homogenize and allow the normal implementation of ENCCRV's action measures in the 
regions where the project will operate, without their particularities (social, productive vocation, type 
of plant resources, etc.), affecting negatively or positively this first distribution, a base financing will be 
provided that levels out the efforts deployed by the technical teams and institutions in each region, as 
well as by the owners themselves involved, without limiting it to the specific capacities for reducing 
emissions and/or increasing forest carbon absorption of each one (Basal Allocation, 50% of the total).  
● Efficiency. To encourage the correct use of resources in the territory, prioritizing the most cost-
efficient activities of the ENCCRV, as  well as field operation, a distribution criterion will be considered 
based on performance measured in emission reductions and/or increase in carbon absorption 
generated at regional level (Performance Allocation, 20% of the total).  
● Solidarity. Given that t here may be catastrophic events of force majeure that affect regional 
performance associated to emission reduction and/or increasing forest carbon sequestration, for 
example forest fires, volcanic eruptions, plagues and diseases, among others, an allocatio n has been 
considered to alleviate these situations by avoiding that a region suffering from these phenomena 
reduce significantly the possibility of accessing resources from results -based payments, not only in the 
present but also in the future (Buffer All ocation, 10% of the total).  
In addition, the allocation percentages are proportional to the forest area, therefore the risk is minimal. All 
assignments are based on the net ERs generated at the regional level as shown in the table:  
 
 
Considering these values, a positive performance is considered if the region presents in its net balance captures 
or positive balance. Performance is assigned at regional level.  
 
The project will support the establishment of the regional REDD+ Groups with the expanded membership with 
the aim to ensure the benefit sharing. The REDD+ Group will be created by the SEREMI of Agriculture in each of 
the regions and will be composed of the SEREMI of Environment, CONAF, INFOR, INDAP, SAG, SERNATUR, 
NGOs, Indigenous peoples (when they exist), Private sector, Civil society and Academy, all relevant actors 
within the regional forestry sector.  
 
The regional REDD+ Groups will provide transparency and efficiency to the distribution of resources according 
with the Benefit S haring System27.  CORECCs, decentralized working groups existing at the regional level in 
each of the regions, and chaired by the highest regional authority (intendente), will be informed of the activities 
to be carried out in each of the regions after the prioritization carried out by the REDD+ Group.  
 
The allocations per regions will be divided in the two equal parts, the first half for activities identified by 
 
27 https://www.enccrv.cl/sdb


---
*Page 34*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 32 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
CONAF and FAO that will generate impact at an ecological and social level and sustainability ov er time. The 
second half will be allocated through call for proposals (selection criteria to be identified during the inception 
phase).  
 
 
Beneficiaries  
 
Small forest owners , as per criteria in table 1, will be the prioritized beneficiaries of the project.  Other forest 
landowners will only be considered by exception.  
 
Table 1 Definition of landowner for the purpose of receiving support under project  
Criteria  Reference value  
Small forest 
landowner  Up to 200 ha in all Regions of the project, except:  
Up to 800 ha in Lonquimay Comune in Araucanía and Palena Province in Los Lagos  
Assets  Up to 3,500 Unit of Account ( about 138,000 USD)28 
Income  Mainly from agricultural or forest activities  
Workforce  Landowner must work directly on its land  
Legal  Small land holders,  Agricultural communities, Indigenous communities, communities on 
common land, “secano ” communities, societies (when 60% of capital under original 
partners or small forest landowners)  
Beneficiaries will comply with the Chilean legal framework on land tenure rights or being 
in the regularization process as per the provisions of the Decree Law No. 2,695 that  
establish the rules  to regularize the possession of small -size properties.   
 
 
The maximum investment per recipient will be 20,000,000 Chilean  pesos (about 28,812 USD29). 
 
During the allocation process the consideration will be given to:  
a) Vegetation and soil present conditions suitable for implementation of action as defined in ENCC RV  
b) Record of  well executed Management Plans, supported by the forestry extension program  
c) Accessibility to land through most of the year  
 
 
C.2.2. Expected outputs and outcomes:  
 
This financing will be distributed in two outputs and a program management component; Implementation and 
Investment (Output 1), supportive and enabling activities to ensuring the complete operation of the elements 
established in the Warsaw Framework: Safeguard Information System, Forest monitoring system and 
improvemen t of the Measurement, Reporting and Verifying process (Output 2) and Program management.  
 
 
 
 
 
28 The Unidad de Fomento (UF) is a  Unit of account  that is used in Chile . The exchange rate between the UF and the Chilean peso 
is constantly adjusted for inflation so that the value of the Unidad de Fomento remains almost constant on a daily basis duri ng low 
inflation  
29 Exchange rate of 694.16 chilean pesos per US dollar. Consulted on 26 July, 2019,  
https://www.imf.org/external/np/fin/data/rms_rep.aspx


---
*Page 35*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 33 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Outputs  Activities  Outcomes  
Output 1 
Implementation 
and investment  Afforestation and revegetation program (MT.4) - 
Strengthening the ecological restoration program (MT.5);  
Program of restoration after forest fires (IF2);  
Preventive forestry program with emphasis on rural 
urban interface (IF.3);  
Forest management progra m. Arrangement and 
comprehensive management of the native forest in 
buildings or groups of buildings that incorporate multiple 
forestry activities (US.1);  
Strengthening the wood energy program (US.3)  MT.4 - 7,688  ha 
MT.5 & IF.2 -  4.271  ha 
US.1. & US.3 -  9,738  ha 
IF.3 - 3.844  ha 
 
 
Output 2. 
Enabling 
conditions for 
ENCCRV 
implementation  Environmental Education and Dissemination Program 
(MT.6) 
Strengthening of forest and environmental enforcement 
(MT.7) 
Programme  for the technological transfer of management 
and use alternatives for silvoagricultural waste (IF.6)  
Adaptation programme for the management of vegetation 
resources in the context of climate change, 
desertification, land degradation and drought (GA.1)  
 
Technical assistance to support continuity of the technical 
areas providing sustainability of Warsaw Framework 
elements established in Law.  Consolidate elements on the 
Warsaw Framework for 
REDD+; Reduced illegality; 
Improved forest 
management practices; 
enha nced resilience.  
 
Output 1. Direct implementation in territory  
Under this output, the actions in the territory will be carried out for 6 years and support the following actions 
of the ENCCRV:  
 
● Afforestation and revegetation program (MT.4): This activity's objective is to form permanent native 
vegetation cover that generates ecosystem services and enhancement of carbon stocks.  
● Strengthening the Ecological Restoration Program (MT.5): The objective of the activity is the recovery 
and enhancement of forests and other native vegetation formations that are under degradation 
processes.  
● Program of restoration of affected ecosystems post Forest Fires (IF.2): Activity destined to the 
implementation of ecological restoration projects in areas affected by for est fires.  
● Preventive forestry program with emphasis on the rural urban interface (IF.3): Activity for the 
implementation of preventive management cords in native forests, plantations and other vegetation 
formations, with emphasis on the rural urban interf ace. The preventive forestry of forest fires seeks to 
reduce the potential damage of the fire by acting in advance on the vegetation.  
● Institutional forest management program (US.1) and Strengthening the wood energy program (US.3): 
A functional forest manag ement model will be designed, consistent with the silvicultural requirements 
of forests and other vegetation resources, and in a context of change climate change, combating 
desertification, land degradation and drought and multi- causal pressure on vegetati on resources, as 
well as supporting value chains and energy markets.  
 
These actions will be implemented in public or private areas, thus proving associative actions in the different 
territories that promote a sustainable market for the native forest and ge nerating new emissions reductions, 
protecting environmental and social resources. (see example of zoning for different activities in Figure 1 
below).  
 
The beneficiaries of this financing and who are associated with the private land must correspond to small  or 
medium owners, as established in Law No. 20,283.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 34 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Example of selected property for running multiple measures.  
 
 
Output 2. Enabling conditions for ENCCRV implementation  
The resources received from the GCF through REDD+ payments will give sustainabili ty and ensure the 
complete operation of the elements established in the Warsaw Framework (the Safeguard Information System, 
the Forest monitoring system and improvement of the Measurement, Reporting and Verifying process, etc). 
Action measures already iden tified in the ENCCRV will also be implemented in the context of training and 
technical assistance such as enforcement, education and forestry extension measures.  
● Environmental Education and Dissemination Program (MT.6)  
● Strengthening of forest control and e nvironmental programmes (MT.7)  
● Programme for the technological transfer of management and use alternatives for silvoagricultural 
waste (IF.6)  
● Adaptation programme  for the management of vegetation resources in the context of climate change, 
desertification, land degradation and drought (GA.1)  
  
Project management  
Administrative and technical management of the project, which will be carried out by FAO in its role as EE, 
ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives.  
 
The Program Management includes i) Project management; ii) Direct project costs, iii) Provision of supervision 
services to the project.  Specifically, the project manage ment includes the Project Management Unit, direct costs 
to ensure the necessary support services to deliver the outputs set out in the Project Results Framework (ex. 
procure equipment and supplies, organize travel, pay commitments of the projects, prepare certified financial 
reports, and ensure project personnel are safe and have access to FAO systems) and the costs of supervision 
and quality assurance of project documentation and implementation throughout the cycle associated with 
FAO's role as an EE, ensu ring the quality of project monitoring.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 35 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
C.2.3. Timeframe of implementation (for monitoring and reporting purposes):  
 
The execution of the project d will be over 6 years, where it is expected that the first two years will be used to 
carry out the preparation actions, linked for example with the extension, preparation of the institutionality, 
preparation of the projects an d territories, including agreements with local and institutional stakeholders, as 
well as mapping and cadastre of the territory in order to plan implementation activities in the six regions. This 
includes all the enabling actions necessary to develop high -scale projects, addressing an associative approach. 
The other 4 years will be dedicated to implementation of the specific actions of the ENCCRV.  
 
Outputs  Expected year to be 
achieved  
Preparation of portfolio of projects and owners interested in the actions of 
Forestation, Restoration, Sustainable Management and Preventive Forestry  2 years  
Preparation and generation of inputs to execute the projects  2 years  
Execution of projects in the territory  6 years  
Training, technical assistance and control  6 years  
Technical and administrative management  6 years  
 
 
C.2.4. Budget estimate (for monitoring and reporting purposes):  
 
Following the procedures of the Terms of Reference for the REDD+ pilot programme for Results -Based  
payments, the iTAP recommended that  THE Board consider the following  
 
1. Total score achieved 41/48  
2. GCF volume of ERs : 12.411.229.6 tCO2 eq  
3. Additional 2.5 per cent for use of proceeds and non -carbon elements  
4. Proposed REDD -plus results -based payments (USD 5/tCO2eq): USD 63,607,552  
 
The Table below provides a detailed budget for the project at the Output and Activity levels.   
 
Component  Output  Indicative acti vities  Indicative costs 
(USD)30 
Forest sector 
actions contribute 
to the 
implementation of 
Chile’s Nationally 
Determined 
Contributions  Output 1: 
Implementation and 
investment  Preparation              2.263.788  
Reforestation (MT.4)           16.434.788  
Restoration (MT.5 & IF.2)           9.607.469  
Sustainable management (US.1 & US3 )          15.717.733  
Forest fire prevention (IF.3)              4.287.913  
Total Output 1           48.311.691  
Output 2: Enabling 
conditions for 
ENCCRV Technical assistance to support consolidation of 
Warsaw Framework elements and part of MT.6, 
IF.6, GA.1 and MT.7              5.399.788  
 
30 To ensure gender mainstreaming within the implementation activities, it has been est ablished that 40% of the budget will be used 
to comply with the indicators of the Gender Action Plan.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 36 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
implementation  Capacity Building (MT.6, IF.6, GA.1)              1,074,836  
Enforcement (MT.7)              2.079.788  
Total Output 2              8,554.412  
Project management 
expenses  Project management Unit              2,288,920  
Direct program costs              2,226,2 64 
Provision of supervision services to the program              2,226,2 64 
Total Project management expenses              6,741,449  
Indicative total cost             63,607,552  
 
C.2.5. Implementation arrangements:  
List and describe the institutions involved in the activities that will be funded with proceeds from this pilot 
programme, and explain their anticipated roles and interactions with one another, including the flow of funds.  
  
The Government of Chile, throug h CONAF has requested FAO’s technical assistance for the design and 
implementation of the REDD plus Result Based Payments. It has also specifically requested that FAO act as 
executing entity for this project.  Responding to this request, FAO will serve both as Accredited Entity and 
Executing Entity.  
 
As an accredited entity of the GCF, FAO’s overall role is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its 
Headquarters and the Chilean Regional Office. FAO will carry out both operational and administrative support 
activities, as well as advisory and technical support functions during the implementation of the Project. As 
Executing Entity, FAO Chile Country Office will carry out operational and administrative support activities 
which include th e provision of the following services:  
  
● Payments, disbursements and other financial transactions.  
● Recruitment of staff, project personnel, and consultants.  
● Procurement of services and equipment, including disposal.  
● Organization of training activities, con ferences, and workshops, including fellowships.  
● Travel authorization, visa requests, ticketing, and travel arrangements.  
● Shipment, customs clearance, vehicle registration, and accreditation, among others.  
  
GCF and FAO will enter into an FAA, under which F AO shall administer the relevant GCF Proceeds to be used for 
the financing of the Project, in accordance with the FAA  and AMA. As Executing Agency, FAO shall spend  the 
GCF Proceeds in the project directly and will be implementing under FAO's Direct Implementation modality.  
FAO may also enter into agreements with other organizations and entities which may carry out project 
activities and produce project outputs on behalf of executing entity. These arrangements seek to facilitate and 
enhance the effectiveness  of the implementation of the project.  These entities are accountable directly to 
Executing Entity and will be selected by FAO and CONAF, as per FAO Rules and Regulations.  
 
FAO may use the following instruments  when entering into agreements with other partners:  
● UN to Un Agreement , used when it exists the need of transferring funds from FAO to another UN 
Agency for the purpose of programmatic activities.  
● Letter of Agreement : It is a contractual arrangement with academic or nonprofit organizations to 
obtain specific technical services that cannot exceed US D 500,000. - and ruled by the Procurement 
regulations of FAO.  
● Contracts : It’s a contractual arrangement with private institutions to purchase goods or specific


---
*Page 39*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 37 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
technical services and ruled by the procurement regulations of FAO.  
 
FAO will act in close coordination with CONAF as the technical entity responsible for forest public policies and 
the ENCCRV, in addition to its status as a National Focal Point to the CNULD,  and the CMNUCC 's REDD+ 
approach. CONAF will also support technical oversight and management through its role on the Project Board, 
as well as for its participation in the Intra -ministerial Technical Committee on Climate Change; though the 
representatives  of the Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA).  
  
The UCCSA, which was  validated by CONAF's Board of Directors through Resolution No. 581 of December 24, 
2014, has  a multidisciplinary technical team of professionals of different specialties  capable of developing the 
activities framed in the ENCCRV. In addition, in each CONAF Regional Office there is a Regional Coordinator 
trained in related matters as part of the permanent team of the institution.  
 
The Green Climate Fund and the Food and Agr iculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), shall enter 
into a Funded Activity Agreement (“FAA”) in due course. The FAA shall  (A) incorporate the relevant  terms and 
conditions of the  Terms of Reference for the REDD+ RBP Pilot Programme adopted by  Decision B.18/07 
(“TOR”), and (B) the terms of the Accreditation Master Agreement entered into by the Parties on 8 June 2018 
and effective as of 4 October 2018. The arrangements to be entered into by the Accredited Entity with the Host 
Country are describ ed in more detail in the term sheet and will be reflected in the project agreement.  
   
The implementation arrangements  described below and summarized in the figure below constitute the Project 
Board; Intra -ministerial Technical Committee on Climate Change,  Project Management Unit, Project Assurance 
and at the subnational level the REDD+ Group and the Regional CONAF Offices.  
 
Project management arrangements  
 
 
Project Board  
The Project Board is the government body that will provide overall guidance and direction to the project and 
approve the Annual Work Plans (AWP).  It is responsible for making management decisions by consensus or 
majority, when guidance is required by the Project Manager, including recommendations for FAO approval of 
project plans and revisions, and addressing any project level grievances. To ensure FAO’s ultimate 
accountability, Project Board decisions should be made in accordance with standards that shall  ensure 
management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective


---
*Page 40*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 38 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
international competition. The specific responsibilities of the Project Board include:  
● Provide overall guidance and direction to the project, ensu ring it remains within any specified 
constraints;  
● Address project issues as raised by the project manager;  
● Provide guidance on new project risks, and agree on possible countermeasures and management 
actions to address specific risks;  
● Agree on project manag er’s tolerances as required;  
● Analyze and discuss the development of the Project activities and recommend changes as required 
based on project monitoring and evaluation processes and products and in line with FAO policies;  
● Discuss and approve the Annual Wor k Plans ensuring that required resources are committed;  
● Appraise the annual project implementation report, including the quality assessment rating report; 
make recommendations for the workplan;  
● Provide ad hoc direction and advice for exceptional situations  when the project manager’s tolerances 
are exceeded; and  
● Discuss and approve the Progress Reports and Final Report of the Project;  
● Analyze Project achievements and assure these are used for performance improvement, accountability 
and learning; and  
● Settle controversies arbitrating on any conflicts within the project or negotiating a solution to any 
problems with external bodies.  
 
The Board shall be composed of FAO, the Designated National Authority (NDA) and CONAF and their respective 
alternate members. The Board may be enlarged by agreement between the Parties.  FAO will represent the 
main executing agency of the project, chairing and organizing its meetings at least once a year or at the request 
of either Party.  
  
Intra -ministerial Technical Committee on C limate Change (CTICC)  
The CTICC will be a Technical reviewer of the Project and will have within its functions the following tasks: i) 
the strategic and technical orientation of the project; and ii) the review of the final version of the progress 
reports.  
The CTICC is composed of all MINAGRI services including representatives of ODEPA, CNR, SAG, INDAP, CIREN, 
CONAF, INFOR, DGIR, AgroSeguros, FIA and is coordinated by ODEPA.   
  
Project Management Unit (PMU)  
Under the overall guidance of the Project  Board, according with the technical guidance of the CTICC, the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for overseeing the day -to-day execution of Project activities. The 
PMU will have responsibility for, among others: (i) operational planning, m anaging and executing the project 
including the direct supervision of project activities subcontracted to specialists and other institutions, as well 
as those that are to be implemented through the MMA, if applicable; (ii) coordinating the management of 
financial resources and procurement; (iii) reporting on the application of resources and results achieved; (iv) 
preparing management reports for the Project Board, Intra -ministerial Technical Committee on Climate 
Change, GCF, NDA and FAO including annual rep orts and any proposals for the adaptive management of the 
Project, if required and based on inputs from the Project M&E plan; (v) promoting inter -institutional linkages; 
and (vi) disseminating project results.  
  
The PMU will consist of one Project Manager,  Project Technical Advisors (PTAs), Administrative Financial 
Assistants, and technical consultants responsible for specific deliverables and hired with GCF resources The 
PTA will include a Safeguards Specialist to support the PM to oversee the implementation of the ESMF, the 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) and the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).  FAO will require 
certification that those persons have completed the Environmental and Social Risk Management Training


---
*Page 41*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 39 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Module31.  This with the aim of ensurin g project staff capacity to identify and evaluate environmental and social 
risks and to promote improved environmental and social performance of the project. Likewise, the 
implementation of gender -related work will be guided by CONAF Unit for Gender Equali ty (UGE), coordinated 
with the CONAF safeguards team.  The PTA will support project implementation, channeling technical inputs 
and guidance into the planning and execution of project activities. The PTA will hold internal meetings in 
CONAF as needed to in tegrate the CONAF specialists' guidance into project implementation and ensure 
consistency between the various project elements and activities provided or funded by other donors. Upon 
request of CONAF implementation will be through FAO's Direct Implementation modality with FAO providing 
direct project services, such as procurement and hiring of consultants following best value for money, 
transparency and effective competition. These will follow current FAO policies and procedures including those 
for cost re covery. Upon request of the CONAF, FAO will also provide technical backstopping during the 
implementation of the project. The costs corresponding to this technical support towards project execution will 
be recovered following FAO’s policy.  
  
The PMU will b e led by the Project Manager (PM) and will be responsible for the overall management and 
implementation of the project’s activities and requesting disbursement of the Project ́ s resources for their 
execution.  The PM is recruited by and reports to the Budg et Holder (FAO Representative in Chile) on 
operational and managerial matters.  The PM leads the management of the project activities as per approved 
AWPs, including financial, budget and human resources,. S.he also prepares detailed project annual work plans 
in collaboration with the project management unit and according to logical framework.  
  
Under the Project Manager’s lead and guidance the PMU team will support the Intra- ministerial Technical 
Committee on Climate Change in the preparation of the Annual  Work Plans (AWP) for the effective and efficient 
implementation of the project activities to achieve stated objectives; will be responsible for all substantive 
reports from the Project, to be submitted to approval of the Intra -ministerial Technical Committee on Climate 
Change; will prepare and/or oversee the development of Terms of Reference for consultants, subcontractors 
and partnerships hired for specific technical assignments and their close monitoring, in accordance with the 
Intra -ministerial Technica l Committee on Climate Change guidance, ensure consistency between the various 
project elements and activities provided or funded by other donors; and develop reports on project progress 
on the project for the PB and technical meetings, and other appropria te fora. The PM is a full -time position 
continuing for the duration of the Project, reporting directly to FAO.  
  
The Project Manager has the authority to run the project on a day -to-day basis on behalf of the Project Board 
within the guidance laid down by the Board and in accordance to the guidelines of the Intra -ministerial 
Technical Committee on Climate Change. The Project Manager is responsible for day -to-day management and 
decision -making for the project. The Project Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project 
produces the results specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality and within the 
specified constraints of time and cost.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 FAO has developed an e- learning on Environmental and Social risk Management to support the 
implementation of the guidelines by building the capacity of staff on the risk management process in FAO


---
*Page 42*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 40 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Benefit Distribution System  
 
 
  
This management arrangement includes two instances of validation, evaluation, prioritization and selection  
  
Disbursement arrangements and funding flows  
  
For the execution of the ENCCRV's incentive and investment program (Output 1), FAO will directly purchase 
goods, services and equipment for the beneficiaries, with the option of subcontracting to other entities as 
mentioned in Section C 2.5.  For the imple mentation and governance of the National REDD+ Strategy (ENCCRV) 
associated with Output 2, FAO will hire administrative and technical staff to manage the operational aspects of 
the programme.  The following diagram summarizes disbursement arrangements and f lows.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 41 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
Disbursement arrangements and flows  
 
C.2.6. Non -carbon benefits:  
Provide information on the non -carbon benefits associated with the implementation of REDD+ activities, 
explaining their nature, scale and importance for the long -term sustainability of REDD -plus activities and 
providing evidence to this regard.  
 
Since the beginning of the design of the demonstration projects of implementation, Chile has considered the 
development of these projects in areas where not only carbo n capture is enhanced, but also where the multiple 
benefits of the forest are generated. From the beginning of these works, three indicators of environmental co-
benefits linked to the action measures of the ENCCRV and the REDD+ approach were considered, wh ich 
corresponds to: (1) improve the regulation of the water resources, as well as the water quality; (2) promote 
soil conservation and reduce the erosion; (3) improve the landscape, conservation and biodiversity. Due to this 
approach, some of the experienc es of demonstration projects have been carried out in rural areas that have a 
Rural Drinking Water committee (APR, acronym in Spanish). These APRs capture drinking water that is 
generated in springs and distribute it to downstream communities. The committe e has its own internal 
governance as well as representation at national level. Using the advantage of having an installed governance 
structure, forest areas were restored upstream of the APR facilities, contributing to the three mentioned 
indicators. In ad dition, through the use of hydrological models, soil erosion models and landscape 
fragmentation indexes, it was estimated that these restoration actions contributed favorably to these 
indicators.  
 
The quantitative economic valuation of the benefits of the  ENCCRV was undertaken considering the following 
flows of benefits for the 5 regions: carbon capture, water provision, timber production, non -timber forest 
products, biological control and biodiversity. The estimates were made for three of the activities ( ecological 
restoration MT.5, Forest management Programme (US.1) and Reforestation (MT.4). A with -ENCCRV and 
without- ENCCRV scenario was developed and the economic valuation was made for the range of benefits. The 
estimate not only finds a positive net bene fit from the implementation of the ENCCV, but that the estimated 
non- carbon benefits for the ENCCRV are 1.2 times larger than the carbon benefits (valued at USD 32.5 /tCO2, as 
can be seen from the table below.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 42 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 Ecological 
restoration 
(MT.5)  Forest 
Management 
Programme 
(US.1)  Reforestation 
(MT.4)  Total  
Area (ha)  98,188  88,880  123,131  310,199  
     
Carbon  221,782,587  151,956,197  411,110,277  784,849,061  
Timber  130,833,602  298,972,597   429,806,199  
Non -timber forest products  10,040,243  5,324,151  41,963,574  57,327,968  
Biodiversity  38,083,161  20,194,781  159,192,636  217,470,578  
Water provision  34,769,239  18,701,850  67,775,695  121,246,784  
Tourism  10,421,307  5,245,862  18,906,773  34,573,942  
Nutrient regulation    59,194,612  59,194,612  
Erosion control    16,924,667  16,924,667  
Biological control    2,504,894  2,504,894  
Total Benefits (USD 2015)  445,930,139  500,395,438  777,573,128  1,723,898,705  
Total costs (USD 2015)  213,339,710  183,797,805  290,589,849  687,727,364  
     
Net total benefits (USD 2015)  232,590,429  316,597,633  486,983,279  1,036,171,341  
Net total benefits / ha (USD 
2015/ha)  2,368.83  3,562.08  3,955.00  3,340.34  
Benefit/cost ratio  2.09  2.72  2.68  2.51  
     
Carbon benefits  221,782,587  151,956,197  411,110,277  784,849,061  
Non -carbon benefits  224,147,552  348,439,241  366,462,851  939,049,644  
Non -carbon/carbon benefit ratio  1.01  2.29  0.89  1.20  
  
Currently, to expand this methodology at national level, a consultancy is being initiated, whose objective is the 
development of an environmental and social Co -benefits System (SCB, acronym in Spanish) at national level 
and that will include the systematization of official data for the implementation of territorial baselines of at 
least six co- benefits indicators, consisting on three environmental and three social indicators. These products 
will be linked to the ENCCRV Platform, making the information available to interested persons and institutions 
in a transparent and expeditio us manner. The SCB is expected to be operational in June 2020.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 43 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
With the implementation of the RBP funding, it's expected to improve the existing agricultural and forest 
practices and generate new practices under an adaptive framework that considers the new temperatures and 
water availability scenarios that the manager s of vegetation resources will face. Under this logic of adaptation, 
a key element will be the valorization and understanding of the multiple supplies, support, cultural and 
regulatory services that ecosystems provide to society as a whole. Therefore, demo nstrative areas of adaptive 
management of native forests and other ecosystems will be created throughout Chile, which would be virtuous 
nuclei of associativity, productive and conservation chaining in a climate change scenario, and technical 
referents for owners who will be able to replicate the activities to be included in the ENCCRV.  
In the above -mentioned scenario. The ENCCRV will enhance co -benefits such as the protection of water 
resources in watersheds and micro -watersheds, improving the production of this vital resource in quantity and 
quality, considering a scenario of scarcity and lower availability of water resources. There will also be a 
concrete impact in the recovery of degraded soils and in the reduction of the risk of floods and mass removals 
in the intervened watersheds and micro -watersheds, all of these phenomena are associated with Chile's 
vulnerability to climate change, thus, their mitigation is a key factor of Chile’s adaptation to global change.  
 
More information can be foun d in the following links:  https://www.enccrv -
chile.cl/index.php/descargas/publicaciones/669 -nota -informativa -18-pc-1/file  ; https://www.enccrv -
chile.cl/index.php/descargas/publicaciones/708 -nota -informativa -19/file  . 
D. Investment Framework  
Describe in this section how the proposed REDD -plus results -based programme aligns with each of the criteria of 
the Investment Framework for the activities that lead to the achieved results for the full period over which the 
results being submitted in this proposal were achieved.  
D.1. Impact potential  
Describe the potential of the programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and results 
areas.  
 
Between 2014 and 2016, Chile has generated significant REDD+ results for the following REDD+ activities: 
deforestation, degradation, incre ase in carbon stocks and conservation. In total, this amounts to 18,409,425 
tCO2e, making Chile transition from an almost carbon neutral country in terms of these activities, into a 
significant net- sink for carbon.  
 
Annual reduction in emissions per REDD+ Activity (tCO2e/year)  
  Deforestation  Degradation  Increase in carbon 
stocks  Conservation  Total  
Reference period         3,452,885         9,149,392         (10,012,012)         (2,430,348)        159,917  
Monitoring period         3,304,373       13,680,124         (19,010,937)         (3,950,207)    (5,976,648)  
Reduced emissions          148,513         (4,530,732)           8,998,925         1,519,769    6,136,475  
  
As highlighted above, a significant change in the Monitoring period in contrast to the reference period refers to 
a significant increase in carbon stocks and a reduction in deforestation that more than offset the increase in 
degradation.  
 
In addition to these impacts, the eventual proceeds to be received from the GCF would be devoted to the 
implementation of the ENCCRV and contribute to its achievement. The potential mitigation benefits associated 
with these measures are 1. 147 .800  tCO2e accumulated at 2025 and 1.975 .812 tCO2e accumulated by 2030.  
 
Within the framework of the N ationally Determined Contribution, Chile is committed to the sustainable 
management and recovery of 100,000 hectares of forest, mainly native, which will represent catches and


---
*Page 46*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 44 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
reduction of greenhouse gases in about 600,000 tons of CO2 equivalent per year, starting in 2030 This 
commitment is conditional upon the approval of amendments to the Law on Native Forest Recovery and Forest 
Development. The activities of sustainable management and forest recovery of the proposed project could 
reach 40,000 tCO2e per y ear by 2030.  
 
Additionally, Chile undertakes to afforest 100,000 hectares, mostly with native species, which will represent 
catches of between 900,000 and 1,200,000 tons of CO2 equivalent per year, starting in 2030. This commitment 
is conditional upon the extension of Decree Law 701 and the approval of a new Forestry Development Law. The 
afforestation and forest restoration activities of the proposed project could reach 256,000 tCO2e per year by 
2030. In addition, after the submission of the ER Program to t he FCPF’s Carbon Fund, Chile started the 
negotiation of and Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) with the World Bank. This ERPA considers 
the same area as the GCF results -based payments (Maule to Los Lagos Regions) but different periods. The total 
volume of emission reduction that are being considered for this agreement is 5,200,000 tCO2eq. The periods 
considered for the ERPA goes from 2018 to 2025.  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
Describe the degree to which the REDD -plus activity catalysed impact beyond a one -off programme investment.  
 
According to the 2016 GHG Inventory of Chile, the LULUCF sector represented - 37.0 % of the GHG emissions 
balance in 2016. These results in avoided emissions are in part the result of a new legal framework as well as 
positive incentives in line with REDD+ objectives, such as the Law 20283 on the Recovery of Native Forests and 
the Promotion of Forestry issued in 2008. This legislation reinforced the me asures to conserve forest, 
expanded the inspection functions of the CONAF, improved land planning and imposed measures to improve 
forest management plans and regulates the transport of timber and non -timber forest products. In addition, it 
established the Conservation, Recovery and Sustainable Management of Native Forest Fund, as well as fiscal 
incentives.  
 
While it should be noted that REDD+ results cannot be directly attributed to a specific policies or measures, the 
aforementioned reformed legal framewo rk and its implementation is likely to have contributed, alongside 
other factors, to emission reductions.  
 
The analysis of drivers of deforestation32 conclude that most of the deforestation and degradation is linked to 
the unsustainable use of forest for p roduction, followed by forest fires and the expansion of land for agriculture 
and livestock. The underlying causes of deforestation and degradation were found to include: weak forest 
institutions; deficient economic model for native forest production; lack  of producer associations; low 
economic return from native forests; limited inspection; and limited incentives. Some of these aspects were 
started to be addressed through Law 20283, including: economic incentives (bonuses), the technical support 
(generatio n of management plans) in the design and management of the native forest, the elaboration and 
updating of the cadastre of Native forest, and research incentives.  
 
Between 2009 and 2016, the newly Conservation, Recovery and Sustainable Management of Native Forest 
Fund supported 148,538 ha of forest, nearly half of it corresponding to small forest landowners, in the five 
provinces covered under the subnational reference levels. The total sum of investments in these regions was 39 
million USD during the same p eriod.  
 
In the ENCCRV, a goal of 264,000 hectares of implementation in the territory is proposed, which is aligned with 
the goals established in the NDC for the sector Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF), which 
establishes a goal of afforestati on of 100,000 hectares and a management goal for another 100,000 hectares, in 
both cases the objective is to generate a reduction of CO2eq emissions, which presents the first major paradigm 
change for the Chilean forestry sector, which has been boosted due  to the positioning of the wood and cellulose 
industry.  
 
Therefore, to achieve the objectives and goals set, the ENCCRV would contribute to reduce gross emissions of 
the LULUCF sector in accordance with the provisions of the INGEI and to fulfill an importa nt part of the 
national commitments established in the NDC. In addition, the proposed actions include important elements of 
innovation and adaptation in the design and operational practices of afforestation, restoration and 
 
32 https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/descargas/publicaciones/344- nota- informativa- n-7/file


---
*Page 47*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 45 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
management, which are expected t o trigger a paradigm shift that catalyzes the long -term impacts of the project. 
This effort involves all the administrative regions of the country and different types of property, however with 
this pilot will begin to test the necessary institutional arran gements in six of the sixteen regions of the country.  
 
It is also expected to generate a significant amount of environmental, social and economic co- benefits, which 
will result in an increase in ecosystem services in the intervened areas, which will be ref lected in an 
improvement in the quality of life of local actors, in the improvement of management practices of native 
vegetation resources, and an increase in the natural capital of the country, reducing the vulnerability to climate 
change of these resourc es and their communities.  
 
In the execution in the territory, the reinvestment of financing from the GCF is sought to be a trigger for 
investment and achieve the scalability of the projects due to the great potential of more than 20 million 
hectares available for the activities described above, considering the link public -private approach associative 
actions to sustainably manage the native forest in the different prioritized territories.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development potential  
Describe the wider benefits and priorities, including environmental, social and economic.  
 
The Law of the native forests was drafted with a number of environmental, economic and social considerations 
in mind:  
 
a) Environmental co- benefits: Native forests constitute an ecological, genetic and even cultural national 
heritage that, in many respects, is unique worldwide. Similarly, native plant formations play a role as 
environmental regulators that includes even global climatic stability; They protect the soil against eros ion and 
regulate water flows, allowing the slow melting of snow and in general the orderly and regular delivery of 
rainwater.  
 
The application of the law addressed the incentives for environmental deterioration due to poor resource 
management where there are insufficient incentives to invest in the long term.  
 
b) Economic co- benefits: The native forest has a high productive potential. It is -  if taken in comparative terms -  
of one of the most productive forests in the world. When they are under adequate ma nagement techniques, 
their productivity can be between 2.0 to 7, 0 m3 / ha / year. Therefore, by encouraging its management and 
exploitation, Chile is also promoting a significant wealth that will be added to the one that exists in forest 
plantations.  
 
c) Social co- benefits: The timber and firewood have a double significance both for the forest and for the rural 
inhabitants. From the point of view of the latter, the vegetative resources constitute almost their only source of 
energy supply, in an environment  where there are no other sources.  
 
d) Educational co- benefits: the proposal includes resources to be directed at supportive and enabling activities 
at local level in the regions, including environmental education and dissemination program. These activities 
will promote sustainability in the long term of the solutions being implemented.  
 
 
The Law of native forest supports technification and forest planning for timber and fuelwood production 
purposes, creating economic incentives for the development and con servation of the native forest, addressing 
the needs of forest landowners and their families for energy and income.  
 
These three dimensions provide the sustainability of the policies and actions triggered by the Native forest Law 
and that were significant for the achievement of the reported mitigation results by Chile.  
 
The proposed investments in the present project seek to generate incentives for the owners of land with native 
forest in the intervention areas of the project that would not otherwise occur . These investments are mainly 
aimed at (1) improving the environmental services provided by native forests, (2) ensuring the sustainability of 
productive activities in the forests, (3) improving the private profitability of these activities and (4) improv ing 
control. in order to discourage informal activities. These four results derived from the use of resources will


---
*Page 48*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 46 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
generate social and economic benefits.  
 
The magnitude and scope of these measures will depend in large part on the territorial focus of the direct and 
indirect activities, which, according to the ENCCRV, will be based on a technical and strategic analysis that 
considers various variables associated with environmental, social and economic criteria. These criteria will 
allow directing action s towards actions that maximize environmental, social and economic benefits.  
 
Environmental benefits (for specific estimates see also section on co- benefits above)  
● The Greater sustainability of use and conservation of the ecosystems and natural resources associated 
to the territories and zones of silvoagricultural use will be promoted with the increase of surfaces 
under sustainable management of the native forest, xerophytic formations and other vegetation 
resources that are incorporated through the measure s of action of the ENCCRV related to the 
promotion, forestry extension, technical and technological transfer, environmental education, control 
and adequacy of forest management instruments that favor the protection of natural resources and the 
conservation  of the natural and cultural heritage of the country.  
● Production of environmental services or co- benefits of the forest with a high valuation of local and 
indigenous communities as the continuity and composition of the landscape, the greater quantity and 
quality of water, increase of biodiversity, leisure areas, etc.,  
● To contribute to the Greater conservation and increase the biodiversity associated to the vegetation 
resources with the measures of action that foster the restoration and the increase of the s urfaces of 
native forest in silvoagricultural lands.  
● Contribute to the increase in the regulation of hydrological processes through the conservation and 
increase of forested areas, generating more quantity, higher quality and a longer period of water 
availability for domestic consumption, irrigation and for the associated flora and fauna to forests and 
vegetation resources.  
● Recovery and protection of soils in the process of degradation, eroded and abandoned due to their low 
productivity, favoring that with the implementation of action measures of the ENCCRV, these are 
incorporated again into the production cycle, dunes and hillsides are stabilized, the turbidity of the 
water, avoid micro and macro landslides, among others.  
● Increased resilience of ecosystems, the arrest of land degradation and drought, improvement in 
environmental services, the reduction of pollution, as well as the reduction of natural risks such as 
floods and fires, among others.  
 
Social benefits  
● Contribute to improving the quality of life of the rural population in the long term by increasing the 
sustainability of the natural resources of the territories through the implementation of action 
measures of the ENCCRV that ensure the permanence, conservation and use of said natural res ources 
by part of the next generations.  
● Restoration of the "use value" that forests and vegetation resources provide to local communities, 
indigenous people and society in general.  
● Contribution to the conservation of the traditional and cultural activities of the indigenous peoples, 
associated to the native forest and vegetation resources of their territories, as for example; the 
collection of non -wood forest products, the protection and protection of areas of ancestral and 
patrimonial use.  
● Reduct ion of the occurrence of fires in areas of urban -rural interfaces through the management 
measures promoted by the ENCCRV to lower the probability of risk of accidents that affect the life of 
the population, their homes, and goods in general.  
● Improvement in  the conditions of the fiscal territories through the increase of the forest mass and the 
reduction of fire risks (Wild Protected Areas and others) that will allow to ensure the enjoyment of the 
environmental services that society demands in an increasing way together with the increase in your 
valuation.  
 
Economic benefits  
● Increase in the quality of life of the rural population through higher income derived from economic 
activities associated with the sustainable use of native forests, as well as non- monetary benefits such 
as greater resilience of production systems, improvement of environmental services. .  
● Training and learning of the owners with technical knowledge that will allow them to be better 
qualified for the productive -sustainable managem ent of their properties.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 47 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
● Generation of jobs for the implementation of the action measures that the owners decide to execute 
within the framework of the ENCCRV, being common that for forestry activities that are implemented 
at the level of small owners and of small scale, it is they who carry them out. 
● Incentive and increase of the formal commercialization of firewood and other wood products of the 
forest through the sustainable management of the native forest and the increase of its productivity, 
bringing w ith it a greater economic benefit for the owners.  
 
Impact on development with a gender perspective 
● Effective incorporation of women in the actions of the ENCCRV through specific indicators that will be 
included in the Safeguards Information System to monitor the gender aspects with the purpose of 
ensuring that these are not left out of the benefits they generate with the different measures of action, 
since it is essential that this initiative does not replicate, deepen or create new forms of discrimination 
against women, considering that according to the World Economic Forum and its Global Gender Gap 
Index 2014, better known as "WEF Ranking" , Chile is located in the No. 66 place among 142 countries 
that present reduction of gaps between men and women.  
● Addit ional consideration is that actions that are programmed to contribute to mitigation from the 
perspective of women, will generate jobs in that same direction.  
 
D.4. Needs of the recipient  
Describe the vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population.  
 
Chile is vulnerable to climate change because it meets seven of the nine characteristics of vulnerability 
according to Article 4 of the UNFCCC, of which four are linked to the objectives of the ENCCRV, which 
correspon d to:  
 
● Areas prone to natural disasters  
● Areas prone to drought and desertification  
● Arid and semi- arid zones, wooded areas and areas susceptible to forest degradation  
● Fragile ecosystems, including mountainous ecosystems  
 
Reducing the vulnerability of fragil e ecosystems as well as increasing resilience based on the implementation of 
the action measures of the ENCCRV, avoiding degradation, deforestation and establishing new forests, is 
directly related to and contributes to the provisions of the 5th Evaluation  Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change that highlights for the country the severe impacts it faces on its resources and 
ecosystems, in particular for fisheries and aquaculture, water resources, biodiversity, the forestry -agricultural 
sect or, temperature and rainfall. These vulnerabilities and impacts have also been documented in national 
communications to the Secretariat of the UNFCCC and are being duly internalized in the National Action Plan on 
Climate Change.  
 
The ENCCRV will contribute  to reducing social vulnerability in the areas with the largest rural population in the 
country, which coincidentally contain the largest forest formations at the national level, this because, according 
to the data of the 2002 Census, more than half of the  national population ( 53%) corresponds to people living in 
the rural sectors of the country, concentrating mainly between the Maule and Aysén regions. It should be 
mentioned that among the most vulnerable groups in the country are indigenous and non -indig enous rural 
communities, added the gender factor, and even more so if it is an indigenous woman.  
 
With a comprehensive approach and with the intention of favoring the most vulnerable groups since the 
formulation of the ENCCRV is that a series of social and environmental safeguards constituted by the guidelines 
of international conventions such as the UNFCCC, the Convention on Diversity, have been considered. Biological 
and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, guidelines for international  donors such as the 
World Bank's Operational Policies, the UN- REDD Program guidelines, among others, in addition to the current 
national legislation as a pillar for safeguarding and protection of such vulnerable groups, namely; Law No. 
20,500 on citizen pa rticipation, ILO Convention 169, Transparency Law 20285, Indigenous Law, Laws related 
to the protection of forests, etc.  
 
It should be noted that the most vulnerable groups in Chile correspond to indigenous peoples and rural local 
communities, together with the gender factor that increases socioeconomic vulnerability. In relation to 
indigenous peoples, there is a total of 2.1 85.792 inhabitants, which corresponds to 12.8% according to the


---
*Page 50*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 48 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Population and Housing Census of 2017. According to data provided by the National Institute of Statistics (INE), 
the population distribution according to indigenous peoples, mostly corresponds  to Mapuche with 79,8%, 
followed by 7.2% by the Aymara population and 4.1% Diaguita., with the  Colla, Quechua, Rapa Nui Lickanantai, 
Kawashkar, Yamana constituting the rest.  In conclusion and according to the key data provided by the INE, the 
largest indi genous population lives in rural areas. Another relevant factor to consider, that indigenous peoples 
represent 4.4% of the Economically Active Population (EAP) of the country.  
 
According to the gender factor in the economic characterization, in the rural s ector the participation of 
indigenous women is lower than in the urban sector, being similar to the non -indigenous population, according 
to data provided by INE.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  
Describe the beneficiary country ownership of, and capacity to implement a funded project or programme 
(policies, climate strategies and institutions).  
 
The project is consistent with national environmental policies, and the agreements acquired by the coun try 
with instances such as the UNFCCC and UNCCD. The project, in turn, contributes to the reduction of CO2e 
emissions and increase of forest carbon stocks, committed by the country in its NDC, for the sector associated 
with vegetation resources. The ENCCRV  build upon the framework of the Law on Native Forests to enhance its 
impact in a way that also maximizes its contribution to mitigation efforts.  
 
For this, CONAF is in charge of the coordination and implementation of the actions and the necessary work to 
be able to carry out the ENCCRV, it also has a long history, technical knowledge and presence in all the regions 
of the country, which allows to operate local in the territories according to the objectives of the ENCCRV.  
 
In the development of the ENCCRV, since its inception has had the support and participation of civil society, 
ensuring respect for environmental and social safeguards throughout the processes and to date.  
 
The NDA has led the definition and development of this proposal by providing feedbac k. In particular, the NDA 
has been involved in the definition of the institutional arrangements for the program execution and has 
provided technical recommendations through the convening of a Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) for the 
review of the draft proposal, as per their internal procedures to review proposals to be sent to the Green 
Climate Fund. After reviewing the proposal, the TAP recommended that the NDA issue the non -objection letter.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
Describe the economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the programme.  
 
The results reported by Chile are reflective of a first wave of implementation of policies, programmes and 
actions for the conservation and sustainable management of Native F orests. While important, these measures 
have been found still insufficient to address the challenges associated with conserving the entire native forests, 
and lessons have been learned and incorporated into the ENCCRV and the proposed programme under this 
proposal. It can be argued that the incentives generated by the Law have so far reached the easiest tranches of 
landowners  and easiest conditions, but that further investments need to enable additional more -difficult- to-
reach forest landowners to receive s upport. Actions to promote land- owner associations are an example of 
enabling actions to ensure that small property owners are also supported efficiently.  
 
The effect of the new legal framework can also be seen in the increased budget of the CONAF, which h as been 
increasing at a higher rate since 2008, the average budget between 2001 and 2007 was 26 million Chilean  
pesos, while for the period between 2009 and 2016, this average was 59 million Chilean  pesos. As a very rough 
guide to the cost- effectiveness of  the avoided emissions in Chile between 2014 and 2016, the average 
investment in CONAF (at national level) per ton reduced in the subnational areas covered by the FELS and the 
REDD+ Technical Annex amounts to some 16.25 US dollars per ton.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 49 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chile expec ts to have access to 98 million, which will allow it to continue with the work that has been done 
since the formulation of the ENCCRV and to deepen its impact on the environment and society, as tools to stop 
or reduce the impacts of deforestation and degra dation of natural resources. vegetation resources, together 
with the reduction of socio- environmental vulnerability in the face of climate change that affects the world.  
 
For this purpose, the implementation costs that have been used correspond to referenc e values established in 
the environmental (forestry) regulations in force in Chile (Law No. 20.283 on Development and Recovery of the 
Native Forest and Forest Development, DL N ° 701 on Forest Development), while the calculations and 
estimates of the emission reductions emitted, were carried out with the reference levels (NREF / NRF) and the 
Technical Results Annex of REDD + reported by the country to the UNFCCC.  
  
For efficiency and effectiveness in the use of resources, the country has an important pres ence in the territory 
at the regional and provincial level of CONAF, which allows a fluid and correct coordination and articulation for 
the development of activities / projects results of those of the action measures of the ENCCRV, whose objective 
is linke d to the commitments adopted by the country in the NDC, on reducing vulnerability and mitigation 
associated with the reduction and capture of GHG by the Forestry sector. In addition, the project has the 
participation of FAO -Chile, as technical support for the fulfillment of these objectives.  
  
To this is added that the country is developing two systems to have an accounting of emissions and a 
distribution of benefits. The registry system allows the accounting of the emissions traded and will avoid a 
double accounting of emission reductions; while the benefit distribution system follows the agreements and 
guidelines obtained in the phases of development and implementation of the ENCCRV and ensures a 
reinvestment and distribution in the regions and localities in a transparent and equitable manner.  
E. Compliance with GCF policies  
Describe how the REDD -plus results -based programme  that generated the results submitted in this proposal or 
will be supported with the proceeds earned by them aligns with GCF policies for the activities that led to the 
achieved results and for the use of proceeds.  
E.1. Environmental and social safeguards  
E.1.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Summarize the main findings of the environmental and social assessment (ESA) report describing the extent to 
which the measures undertaken to identify, assess, and manage environmental and social risks and impacts, in the 
context of the REDD -plus proposal,  were consistent with the requirements of the applicable GCF ESS standards. 
This supplements information about the country’s own assessment as to how the Cancun safeguards were 
addressed and respected in the REDD -plus activities.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 50 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
The approach used for th e Environmental Social Assessment (ESA) (See Annex 2) allowed for an analysis of 
how, during REDD+  readiness and initial implementation in Chile (i.e. during the time frame of the evaluation), 
key environmental, social, legal and public policy issues asso ciated with deforestation and degradation  were 
considered in the development of the national REDD + strategy.  These issues have been confronted with FAO 
ESS, since FAO is a GCF accredited agency there is an equivalence in the approach and compliance with  
environmental and social safeguards (Performance Standards as per IFC/GCF). The table below extracted from 
the ESA presents the equivalence 
 
Table of Safeguard Equivalence 
 
 
IFC - Performance Standards  FAO Environmental and Social Standards  
PS 1: Assessment and Management of environmental 
and social risks and impacts  ESS 1: Natural Resource Management  
ESS 8: Gender Equality  
PS 2: Labor and Working conditions  ESS 7: Decent Work  
PS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention  ESS 5: Pests and pesticides management  
PS 4: Community health, safety and security  ESS 7: Decent Work (partially)  
PS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement  ESS 6: Involuntary Resettlement and Displacement  
PS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable 
managem ent of living natural resources  ESS 2: Biodiversity, Ecosystems and Natural Habitats  
ESS 3: Plant genetic resources for food and 
agriculture  
ESS 4: Animal -  Livestock and Aquatic -  Genetic 
Resources for Food and Agriculture  
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples  ESS 9: Indigenous Peoples and Cultural Heritage   
PS 8: Cultural Heritage  
 
  
The ESA is also based on an ex post evaluation of the participatory process through which feedback from the 
different key actors was sought and integrated into the design and implementation of the national REDD+ 
strategy, and compliance of this process with FAO ESS.  
 
Of note,  potential social impacts of REDD + measures have been identified as posing a greater risk for conflict 
than potential environmental impacts, since avoiding forest degradation and promoting the conservation and 
sustainable management of forest resources may be in direct competition with other activities and needs of the 
communities and productive sectors of the country. Theref ore, the ESA reviewed all of the safeguards with 
special emphasis on PS1 Risk Management, PS4 Communities, PS6 Biodiversity and PS7 Indigenous Peoples.  
 
The ESA (presented as an annex to the proposal) contains, among others, the following aspects:  
 
● Evalu ation of the legal and institutional framework applicable to the activities related to the 
implementation of the REDD+ strategy embodied mainly in the activities leading to the design and 
implementation of the National Strategy for Climate Change and veget ation Resources  
● Identification of the main stakeholders and a sound GRM  
● Preparation of specific participation and consultation plans for indigenous peoples and peasant 
communities.  
● Sustainable forest management and compliance with applicable national leg islation  
● Review of the different categories of natural areas in the area of influence 
● Compliance with FAO ESS, Cancun safeguards and GCF/IFC Performance Standards at the subnational 
level (prioritized regions) and during the time frame of the evaluation p eriod


---
*Page 53*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 51 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
E.1.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide adequate and sufficient information describing how environmental and social risks and impacts will be 
identified, screened, assessed and managed in a manner consistent with the GCF’s ESS standards, including the 
determination of the relevant enviro nmental and social risk category of the proposed activities and the 
appropriate environmental and social assessment tools and management plans.  
 
The System of Safeguards of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) is based on the Performance Standards on 
Environmenta l and Social Sustainability (PS) of the International Financial Corporation of the World Bank 
Group. The social and environmental evaluation takes as a starting point the design and implementation of the 
REDD + policies in the period prior to the work of the FCPF of the WB, this is in the years 2014, 2015 and 2016.  
 
The identification and evaluation of the main impacts is based on the cabinet study of the main documents 
associated with the REDD+ implementation process, the consultations with the parties involved, the applicable 
national legislation, and interviews with representatives of the government, civil society, indigenous peoples 
and NGOs  
 
The preliminary environmental and social risk rating of the evaluation in line with the GCF categories  is 
category B; However, a more detailed review of the process in line with the GCF safeguards is still pending in 
order to have greater support in the appreciation of the category and the possible social and environmental 
impacts expected.  
 
The proposal i ncludes a detailed Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) (See Annex3) 
providing information on how the environmental and social risks identified will be addressed in consistency 
with FAO ESS and GCF/IFC Performance Standards. The purpose of the FAO ESMF is to ensure that 
environmental and social management is integrated into the development cycle. Nevertheless, since exact sub -
projects are not determined at the onset of project, the ESMF is a living document that needs to be updated 
during pr oject implementation based on potential new risks and impacts. Thus, the ESMF is intended to serve 
as a practical tool to guide identification and mitigation of potential negative environmental and social impacts 
of proposed investments and serve as a plat form for consultations with stakeholders and potential project 
beneficiaries.  
 
The preliminary environmental and social risk rating of the evaluation in line with the GCF categories for the 
proposed Results Based Payment in the so -called  South Zone (region s from Maule to Los Lagos) during years 
2014 - 2016 is Moderate. However, a more detailed review of the process in line with the GCF safeguards needs 
to be done during the implementation phase in order to have greater support in the appreciation of the 
category and the possible social and environmental impacts expected  
 
According to FAO Environmental and Social Management Guidelines screening to identify specific 
environmental and social risks at the project level is the process of identifying and classifyi ng E&S risks 
associated with individual projects. For each project, at project identification stage, FAO uses its own 
Environmental and Social Screening Checklist that has a number of questions intended to guide the user in 
classifying the project risk. Ba sed on the project activities and on the nature and significance of potential 
environmental and social impacts, three categories for field projects are given: low, moderate, and high.  
 
In the context of the  mandatory  requirements for managing  environmen tal and social  performance of  FAO  
projects   throughout  the life  of  a  project   and  optimizing   sustainability  and equity post project; and based   
on   the   project   activities   and   on   the   nature   and   significance   of   potential env ironmental  and  social  
impacts, the proposed project is classified as  Moderate.   
 
FAO classifies projects with Moderate Risk:  
 
● Projects with identified potential adverse environmental and /or social impacts.  
● Potential impacts are not unprecedented in the project area.  
● Potential impacts are limited to the project’s footprint.  
● Potential impacts are neither irreversible nor cumulative.  
● Potential adverse impacts can be addressed by the use of recognized good management or pollution 
abatement practices, and there is a demonstrated record of their successful use in the project area 
(upstream and downstream).


---
*Page 54*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 52 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
The level of risk may not always be immediately apparent or may change during project preparation when 
projects sites are being identified. Projects therefore need to be systematically screened during identification 
and preparation and systematically monitored during implementation in order to identify indirect, cumulative 
and associated impacts, as relevant.  
 
E.1.3. Consultations with stakeholders  
Provide adequate and sufficient  information on the consultations undertaken with all the relevant stakeholders, 
describing who are the identified stakeholders, what the issues and concerns raised and how these are responded 
to and considered in the proposed activities. Information on th e stakeholder engagement plan or framework will 
also need to be provided, describing how the activities will continue to engage the stakeholders, further 
consultations, communication and outreach, and process for grievance redress.     
Between 27 June and 11 July 2019, Information and Participatory Workshops were held within the framework 
of the application to the Green Climate Fund. The date and city where each of the workshops were held were as 
follows:  
- June 27, Temuco, Araucanía region.  
- July 2, Puerto Montt, Los Lagos region.  
- July 4, Valdivia, Los Ríos region  
- July 9, Concepción, Biobío region  
- July 11, Talca, Maule region  
 
The objective of the workshops was to inform and receive feedback of the relevant actors regarding the 
mechanisms and criteria for the equitable, transparent and efficient distribution of the resources obtained in 
the Payment for Results phase. The workshops also served to identify the risks and potential impacts 
associated with the implementation of the activities to be financed through the resources obtained by this 
project.  
 
The workshops were part of the participatory processes that the ENCCRV contemplated since its formulation, 
allowing all interested parties, especially vu lnerable actors, to be informed and consulted. In this case, through 
the development of this process, we sought to strengthen the design, strategic decisions and benefit 
distribution arrangements in the payment for results phase, thus ensuring the environm ental and social 
sustainability of the initiative.  
 
A core team was formed for the planning and development of the workshops, composed of professionals from 
the Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit of CONAF's Central Offices, Indigenous and Socia l Affairs 
Unit, Climate Change coordinators of the five regions contemplated in the project (Maule, Biobío, Araucanía, 
Los Ríos and Los Lagos) and regional support professionals.  
 
The methodology used in each workshop was based on the guidelines established in the Plan for the 
Implementation of Social and Environmental Safeguards of Public and Indigenous Consultation and Self -
Assessment, of the ENCCRV, a guide document for the participatory process in the preparation phase of the 
ENCCRV. In this c ontext, the stages contemplated in the development of the workshops were the following:  
1. Criteria for stakeholder selection  
The groups convened for the development of these workshops were:  
a) Indigenous peoples  
b) Academia  
c) Government Sector (Other tha n CONAF) 
d) Forest Consultants / Extensionists  
e) Non -Governmental  Organizations (NGOs)  
f) Women's Organizations  
g) Private Sector  
h) Small and Medium forest landowners  
i) Indigenous women, small and medium -sized forest landowners, and


---
*Page 55*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 53 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
j) Regional CONAF staff.  
The criteria used to develop the regional actors map included:  
Ideally, the Actors Map should be made up of those who have already participated in the ENCCRV formulation 
process. This consideration responds to several objectives, on the one ha nd, it ensures the coherence of the 
process and allows an operational continuity, since these are people who are already aware of the issues that 
will be addressed, it ensures that they are people who know the initiative. In addition, it will be possible t o 
identify how those considerations that arose during the previous process were embodied in the action 
measures of the ENCCRV, and finally, it complies with the commitment established during the formulation, 
regarding considering participation also in the implementation phase of the ENCCRV  
 
Participation of women: for each sector identified, a minimum participation of 30% of women was established. 
In this way, it is also ensured that the minimum participation of women on the day of the workshop is at least 
30%.  
 
The conformation of the Map of Actors must also consider local, sub regional  and regional geographical 
representation, since, due to their scope of action, the former tends to make operational proposals, the sub 
regional  strategic type and the latter  has a more political vision.  
 
A participation between 30 and 40 people per workshop was defined. This number is agreed to facilitate the 
instances of discussion and analysis in focus groups.  
2. Focus group settings  
 
According to the map of actors in each region, the configuration of the focus groups was established 
considering that each of them was representative of a sector of the population/society. Each group consists of 5 
to 8 people according to the number of attendees and focus groups represented. Ac cording to the attendance in 
each of the workshops, the formation of specific focus groups of Indigenous Peoples and women were 
considered.  
 3. Workshop development  
The planning and development team developed a topic for the workshops, defining the context  information 
(national and regional), the contents that would be subject to discussion and the participatory activities 
through which the feedback on the design and implementation of the Benefit Distribution System in the 
ENCCRV payment for results phase w ould be received.  
In this context, participatory activities were carried out that allowed to gather the view of the attendees 
regarding the causes of degradation, deforestation and non -increase of forest cover in their region (prioritizing, 
from the local / regional point of view those that are already defined in the ENCCRV) and direct action 
measures (prioritizing those that would allow addressing the causes mentioned above). We also consulted on 
aspects related to governance, benefit distribution of finan cing and potential risks in the implementation of 
activities in the territory.  
4. Preliminary results  
A total of 157 people, 64 women (41%) and 54 representatives of indigenous peoples (29%) participated in the 
5 workshops. In this case, it should be noted  that the Maule region does not register indigenous communities or 
associations in its territory.  
 
The invitations, based on the map of actors made in each region, in general met the proposed objectives in 
terms of participation recording, on average, an a ttendance of 30 people. This allowed the creation of between 
4 to 5 focus groups at each workshop, among which are: (1) small owners and / or indigenous peoples; (2) 
forestry extension consultants; (3) academic -public institutions; (4) NGOs and private.  
 
Regarding participatory activities, forest fires were highlighted as one of the main causes of deforestation, 
degradation and non -increase in forest cover. However, the action measure that was prioritized by the actors


---
*Page 56*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 54 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
was the Forestation and Revegetation P rogram, followed by the Restoration Program.  
Regarding governance structures, in general, the role of CONAF as a coordinating body for processes related to 
climate change was supported, and the participation of other representative bodies of the public area (services 
and institutions related to the forest / environmental sector, were highlighted), academy, of civil society (NGOs, 
municipalities, indigenous communities and other social organizations) and the private sector (forestry 
companies).  
 
Regarding the potential risks and impacts identified in the implementation of activities, it is possible to detect 
in the first instance, that risks related to governance are identified (bureaucracy in the processes of distribution 
of resources, lack of te chnical capacity, poor planning of activities, inadequate monitoring and lack of continuity 
of the actions to be implemented), environmental (low availability of seeds and plants, use of unsuitable 
species for certain sectors) and social (not considering the participation of neighboring, indigenous, local and / 
or women, labor shortage).  
 
With the information collected, inputs will be generated that will strengthen the design, decisions and 
distribution of the funds that will be obtained in the payment phas e for results of the ENCCRV.  
E.2. Risk assessment  
E.2.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Provide adequate and sufficient  information that allows for an assessment of the historical performance of the 
activities undertaken and their track record against the risk tolerance levels specified in the Risk Appetite 
Statement and the criteria outlined in the Risk Guidelines for Fun ding Proposals.  
Please note that you should consider only the applicable and relevant parts of the two above documents to the 
feedback you provide.  
 
It was applied the FAO’s corporate Environmental and Social Guidelines that detail  the mandatory 
requireme nts for managing environmental and social performance of FAO field programmes, projects and sub -
projects throughout the life of a project at field programme and project level and optimizing sustainability and 
equity post project.   
 
The FAO ESS checklist was used in the analysis (see Annex C in Annex 2).  The approach was to look for the 
indirect impacts of policies, strategies and legislation undertook in the pass.   Once the analysis of the risks and 
impacts was made, it was assessed that the safeguards have been complied with during the implementation of 
these policies, strategies etc.  
 
● The ESA concludes that there is strong confidence and substantiation in the assessment of the 
consistency with the GCF REDD+ RBP pilot program requirements. The ESA presen ted concrete 
evidence focused in policies laws and regulations existing at the moment of the evaluation and during 
the time frame and regions included in the proposal. Each FAO ESS as well as each of the Cancun 
Safeguards presented national and internation al regulations applicable for the activities performed 
during the implementation period of the ENCCRV.  
● The ESA not only found information that pointed out in that direction but also find out that in many 
cases the participation of stakeholders was proactive and transcended to participation improving the 
ownership of the decision agreed.  
● Prior to the implementation of REDD -plus related activities in Chile, the country had already its own 
Grievance and Redress Mechanism in place and the ESA included i nformation about the OIRS, acronym 
of "Office of information, claims and suggestions".  
● The analysis of the pilot project demonstrated that overall, were implemented  within legal and policy 
framework that provided an enabling environment for achieving consistency with the FAO ESS and in 
practice, the pilot projects were implemented with alignment with the FAO ESS.  
 
 
As per the National REDD+ Focal Point, the design and implementation of the National Strategy for Climate 
Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCR V, acronym in Spanish)  leading by the application of measures set 
for in the policies and regulations defined at national level explain the results achieved between 2014 and 
2016.  At the subnational level, with each of the FAO safeguards, the risk assess ment was considered low.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 55 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
With regard Chile’s governance structure, low risk is also addressed by national laws and by the ratification of 
international instruments, such as the United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) on 13 
September 2006, the  Inter- American Convention against Corruption of the American States on 22 September 
1998. At national level, the Political Constitution of the Republic of Chile (1980), Law No. 20.285/2008, the 
Council for Transparency, and Law No. 19,886/2004 are the mos t relevant instruments aiming to enact 
transparency measures in the country. To ensure the effectiveness of forest and environmental governance 
structures, reference is made to Law No. 18.575/1996 and Law 19.880/2003. Detailed information concerning 
the na tional and international regulations ratified by Chile can be found in the Safeguards Summary of 
Information.  
 
Achievement of target impact through the application of several policies, particularly the policy instruments 
established through the legislatio n on native forests, Chile was able to generate the results presented under 
this proposal between 2014 -2016, which contributes to the GCF’s mitigation objectives at global scale.  
 
In general, terms, when risks are identified, the actions that led to the mitigation results that Chile is presenting 
were fully anchored into the national policy and regulatory framework.  
 
E.2.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide adequate and sufficient  information that details how the plan for the use of proceeds does not violate the 
risk tolerance levels specified in the Risk Appetite Statement and allows for performance monitoring and 
evaluation against the criteria outlined in the Risk Guidelines for  Funding Proposals.  
Please note that you should consider only the applicable and relevant parts of the two above documents to the 
feedback you provide.  
 
Risk factors associated with project implementation include mainly technical and operational, institutional, 
political, and social and environmental aspects (Environmental and Social assessment).  
● The risks related to technical and operational capacities may impact the collection and dissemination 
of climate information; as well as the collection of local data necessary for monitoring and reporting. 
The limited availability of qualified staff could delay implementation of project activities; and the 
change of staff and key personnel in implementing agencies and government departments could 
impact the pace of project implementation.  
● An institutional risk is limited to the coordination among agencies and stakeholders that could lead to 
inefficiencies in the implementation and impact of the project. Additionally, regional and local 
governments may lack th e capacity to understand and support the project, limiting the needed support 
to encourage small farmer participation.  
● Risks related to limited interest or capacities of family farmer beneficiaries can limit the adoption of 
technologies and sustainable practices.   
● A political risk is a potential change in government at the national and local levels leading to a lack of 
support for project activities.  
● Social and environmental risks include social violence in the project areas.  
● Extreme weather events and climate shocks can negatively impact small farmers’ investments and 
forest production.  
 
The proposed project includes several mitigation measures to address these risks. The mitigation strategies 
include training and capacity bu ilding, awareness raising of key stakeholders including government officials, 
clear agreements with and between the executing entities, the design of efficient data collection tools, violence 
prevention training, and farm plans and provision of climate inf ormation to help farmers prepare for climate 
shocks.  (More detailed risk assessment in Annex 3, Table 26. Risk matrix and mitigation measures)  
Most high risk - factors and relevant risk mitigation measures from risk matrix related to implementation of 
activity -“Execution of projects in the territory” are the following:  
Under Risk Factor A (Insufficient or non -sustained support from stakeholders), specifically on conflicts 
over land . It has been stated that “…problems between the Mapuche people and the Chil ean state are 
considered a “severe obstacle” to the implementation of REDD+ activities”, and that “…Mapuche wish to reclaim 
their ancestral land, which is primarily located in the subnational area of the ER Programme”. Moreover, it is


---
*Page 58*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 56 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
stated that “…in orde r to avoid setting up REDD+ activities in disputed territories, it will be necessary to 
evaluate the risk of conflict posed by each proposal and that due to the nature of the Mapuche conflict, it will 
not be feasible to identify and avoid problematic areas  in advance”.  
The risk is not considered high, since an evaluation of the risks associated with land tenure was carried out 
during 2017 (https://www.enccrv.cl/informative -note -10), showing that there is a total area of 1,438,011 
hectares that are regularly  owned by indigenous communities in the program area, in which activities of the 
ENCCRV could be implemented if there is an interest of the owners, and the latter has been continuously shown 
in several participative preparatory workshops  
Both the CONADI La nd and Water Fund and the INDAP Land Tenure Consolidation Program support the 
regularization of the land tenure titles for the interested users. Those programs can be linked with the people 
interested in participating in the Benefits Distribution System th at will be applied, which further reduces the 
risks associated with land tenure.  
Under Risk Factor B (Lack of institutional capacity and / or ineffective vertical / cross-sector 
coordination) : The level of risk has been set as Low (0%).  
CONAF has significa nt experience in forestry  extension programs, addressing territorial management with 
small forest owners and indigenous communities. This experience has been developed through the 
development instruments that CONAF has historically managed. Therefore, in t he Benefits Distribution System, 
it is expected that CONAF will maintain and strengthen the technical assistance with interested parties and 
thereby, avoid risks associated to the vertical coordination of the actions to be carried out.  
Under Risk Factor C (Lack of long -term effectiveness in confronting underlying factors) : the information 
contained in this section refers to the status of projects and programmes back in 2016, when the ERPD was 
submitted. However, it is now possible to see the effects of such  initiatives (e.g. the projects on firewood at 
jurisdictional level and through implementation of ENCCRV).  
Currently this risk has been reduced, since Chile went through a change of government and the present 
government has demonstrated an increased ambiti on associated with mitigation activities in line with its 
carbon -neutrality target by 2050, where forests represent a relevant sector on these efforts. Work is being 
done on obtaining new resources linked to REDD+ results -based payments, but also work is b eing done on a 
new law on forest development, and modifications to the regulation of the law of recovery of the native forest, 
which seeks to increase actions on management and increase of forest vegetation resources.  
Under Risk Factor D (exposure and vuln erability to natural disturbances) . The medium level of risk is 
justified, since, despite the exceptional events that occurred in 2017, where 42,482 hectares of native forest 
were burned during the firestorm, mitigation measures have been identified for th is risk. Firstly, developing 
prevention campaigns, secondly, modifying the regulations associated with the use of fire and finally, 
improving the actions for firefighting . 
E.3. Gender considerations 
E.3.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Provide adequate and sufficient information in the assessment describing the extent to which the measures 
undertaken complied with the GCF gender policy.  
 
Chile has made great legislative advances towards equality and social inclusion. The international- level 
instruments with the highest relevance and which have applicability in the country are the Convention  on the 
Elimination of all forms of discrimination against women (CEDAW) ratified by Chile on 7 December 1989, the 
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development (1994), the Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for Action (1995) and the “UN General Assembly Resolution” of 2 011, on women’s 
political participation, which reinforces that “the active participation of women, on equal conditions than men, 
in all levels of decision -making is essential for achieving equality, sustainable development, peace and 
democracy. The country  has also ratified and/or signed many key international conventions and treaties on 
gender equality, women ‘s empowerment and human rights.  
 
At the national level, the State Constitution of Chile includes the principle of gender equality in its article 19,


---
*Page 59*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 57 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
number 2, which states “Equality before the Law (…) men and women are equal before the law”, (National 
Congress, 1980). Additionally, Law No. 20,609/2012, establishes measures against discrimination and in its in 
Article no.1 states that every State admin istration -body, within their field of competition, will be responsible 
for creating and implementing policies destined to guarantee every individual, without arbitrary 
discrimination, the enjoyment and exercise of their legitimate rights and freedoms recog nized by the Political 
Constitution of the Republic, and international laws and treaties ratified by Chile which are currently in force” 
(National Congress, 2014).  
 
That called for a new institutional framework for gender matters to bridge any persisting g aps, improve 
legislation and propose further measures to speed up the achievement of substantive equality in all areas 
covered by the Convention (CEDAW, 2016).  Against that backdrop, Act No. 20.820, creating the Ministry for 
Women and Gender Equity and am ending legal provisions specified in the Act, was promulgated on 20 March 
2015 (CEDAW, 2016). Law No. 20,280/2015, establishes in its article No.1, the Ministry’s responsibilities for 
collaborating with the President of the Republic in the design, coordina tion and assessment of policies, plans 
and programs destined to “promote gender equality, equality of rights and ensure the removal of all types of 
arbitrary discrimination against women”. Likewise, this law provides a definition of gender equality, statin g 
that “gender equality considers the identical or differential treatment between men and women and results in a 
total absence of any mean of arbitrary discrimination against women for being such, with regard to the ability 
of enjoyment and exercise of all  their human rights” (National Congress, 2015).  
 
Over the last few years, Chile has made good strides in promoting gender equality. According to the ranking of 
the Global Gender Gap of the World Economic Forum for the year 2018, Chile has an index core of 0,717, 
ranking it 54 out of 149 countries (World Economic Forum, 2018).[1] The country has taken concrete actions 
to promote and integrate gender equality into the broader policy -making agenda of the “ Sustainable 
Development Goals” and the commitments of the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the 
Caribbean. Some of those actions have meant progress in the situation or status of women, while others have 
revealed the persistence of discrimination and of obstacles to full equality of opportunity between men and 
women in the country. Additionally, the progress that has been made often hides geographic differences in 
different dimensions of gender equality.  
 
Specifically,  with regards to gender in the National REDD+ Strategy and its implementation, a central axis of the 
ENCCRV is mainstreaming the gender approach in all its phases: preparation, implementation and payment for 
results, in constant feedback from the continuou s strengthening of the initiative (UCSSA, 2016). The objective 
of this approach is to address the necessary broad and equal inclusion interests, needs and proposals of 
women, thus assuring that benefits arising from implementation of the strategy are equitable between men and 
women (ENCCRV, 2017).    Additionally, the gender mainstreaming strategy of the ENCCRV integrates a 
methodological perspective based on interculturality principles proposed by the UN "Guide for the Evaluation 
of Programs and Projects w ith a Gender Perspective, Human Rights and Interculturality", which contains 
guidelines to evaluate this process in the different phases of the ENCCRV (UCCSA, 2016).  
 
A Plan for the Implementation of Social and Environmental Safeguards for Public and Indig enous Consultation 
was prepared and guided the entire participatory formulation process of the ENCCRV, between 2015 and 2016. 
The Plan included the organization of regional workshops and a national workshop, ensuring local, regional 
and national representation, considering a multi- stakeholder, multi -sector and multi- stakeholder approach and 
including the mainstreaming of the gender approach and pluricultural participation. Further, in the context of 
the Safeguards Plan and SESA, between 2013 and 2016, 15 regional workshops were held, involving 1,266 
people, 36.4% of which were women and 9% indigenous peoples. In addition, a national workshop involved 
125 people, 31% of which were women and 8% indigenous peoples. In these workshops, the gender approach 
was ma nifested from the gathering of information through the identification of key actors; formation of focus 
groups, determining a minimum percentage of participation of 30% women and when appropriate, specific 
focus groups for women were formed (additional inf ormation can be found in Information Note N ° 8, on 
Mainstreaming the gender approach in the ENCCRV at 
https://redd.unfccc.int/uploads/4833_23_nota_informativa_8_pc _ingles.pdf ). 
 
Further, effective incorporation of women in the actions of the ENCCRV will be monitored through specific 
indicators included in the Safeguards Information System with the purpose of ensuring that these are not left 
out of the benefits they generate with the different measures of action, since it is essential that this initiative 
does not replicate, deepen or create new forms of discrimination against women.  
 
[1] In 2006 Chile had an index core of 0,645, ranking it 78. World Economic Forum ( 2018), Global Gender Gap Report 2018, Geneva, World


---
*Page 60*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 58 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Economic Forum.  
 
E.3.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide adequate and sufficient  information on how the AE will undertake activity -level gender assessments and 
action plans once the details of the activities become known.  
 
Chile has made progress in recent years in integrating gender perspectives and awareness into forest policies 
and ENCCRV strategies. Guidelines for REDD+ safeguards are available, and the national REDD+ strategy 
includes several references to gender/women, which reflects the increasing awareness and commitment to 
integrate gender into REDD+ policies and implementation.  
 
In Chile, the progress of mainstreaming gender into the ENCCRV has been based on a widespread participative 
process that included proposals of all sectors of society, focusing on women, indigenous peoples, and 
vulnerable communities (formulation and v alidation stage of the ENCCRV and its SESA). The national -level 
territorial coverage, the total of key stakeholders engaged, the methodology used, the characteristics of the 
implementation of the participatory process, the mainstreaming of the gender appro ach and cultural relevance: 
all of these are unprecedented measures for the formulation of public policies that seek to represent the 
country’s territorial vision with regard to forests and vegetation resources.  
 
Through this participative process, gender considerations and women’s and indigenous peoples demands, 
regarding the causes of degradation and deforestation, were integrated into the ENCCRV’s design and action 
measures. They contributed to identify the target groups of the ENCCRV: vulnerable groups in rural areas of the 
country, indigenous and non -indigenous rural communities, indigenous woman, small and medium- sized forest 
landowners, among other  stakeholders. The participative process was used for defining the benefits likely to be 
generated with t he implementation of the activities contemplated within the ENCCRV.  
 
The Gender Action Plan aims to support the effective participation of women within the ENCCRV’s 
implementation and empower women through recognition, assimilation, capacity -building and leadership for 
ensuring gender consideration into REDD+ actions.  In the gender action plan, the monitoring of all activities 
implemented by the ENCCRV will consider a general indicator related to the percentage of women's 
participatio n.  Other gender indicators have also been defined with regard to the ENCCRV action measures that 
include education/training and audit activities; and the action measures related to afforestation, restoration, 
soil management and preventive forestry activi ties, which will be implemented directly in the territory. The 
indicators are related to the integration of the gender approach in all the cycle planning of ENCCRV projects 
(gender -sensitive programming, gender responsive project results framework). (See A nnex 4 and Annex 5)  
E.4. Interim policy on prohibited practices  
E.4.1. For the period of the achieved results  
Provide appropriate and sufficient information to demonstrate that no Prohibited Practices occurred during the 
implementation of the activities that lead to the REDD -plus results, such as: undisclosed Prohibited Practices, 
including money laundering and the financing of terrorism, which occurred during the implementation of results -
based actions; and double payment or financing for the same results achieved.  
 
The Chilean Financial Intelligence Unit ( Unidad de Análisis Financiero –  “UAF” ), was created by Act. No.19.913. 
The UAF is an independent, public legal person, with its own patrimony and related to the Chilean Government 
through the Public Treasury Secretary ( Ministerio de Hacienda ). The UAF is chaired by a National Director, who 
is appointed by the President of the Nation. The UAF is a member of the Egmont Group.  
 
The UAF has the duty of requesting, receiving, analyzing and forwarding to the competent criminal prosecution 
authorities any financial information that arouses suspicions of money laundering activities. It has no 
jurisdiction regarding the prevention and investigation of terrorism financing. The UAF can also provide 
information directly to the courts that are dealing with asset laundering cases.  
 
Article 3 of Act No. 19,913 imposes a duty for all covered subjects -- including banks, stock exchanges, casinos, 
realtors, among many other  businesses -- to appoint an official or compliance officer responsible for relations


---
*Page 61*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 59 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
with the Financial Intelligence Unit. The role of the compliance officer is to monitor the implementation of 
existing national rules on the issues of money laundering and terrorist financing.  
 
No pay ment for results has been received by Chile, and thus no double payment for the same result achieved 
has occurred.  
 
E.4.2. For the use of proceeds  
Provide appropriate and sufficient information including on control measures that assures that the proceeds will 
be used in a manner compliant with the Interim Policy on Prohibited Practices, such as: undisclosed Prohibited 
Practices, including money laundering and the financing of terrorism; improper subsequent use of GCF proceeds in 
the Prohibited Pra ctices; and double payment or financing for the same results achieved, etc.  
 
As per article 9.03 par. (a), of the Accreditation Master Agreement between FAO and GCF, FAO will apply its 
own fiduciary principles and standards relating to any ‘know your customer’ checks, anti -corruption, AML/CFT, 
fraud, financial sanctions and embargoes to comply with the Policy on Prohibited Practices.  
E.5. Indigenous peoples  
Provide adequate and sufficient information on how the activities to be implemented with the use of proceeds, will 
meet the requirements of the GCF environmental and social safeguards standards and policies relevant to 
indigenous peoples and guided by the prevailing relevant national laws and/or obligations of the countries 
directly applicable to the activities under relevant international treaties and agreements.  
 
The use of proceeds will be in line with the FAO Policy on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples and the FAO 
Environmental and Social Management Guidelines,  in particular subject  to FAO Environmental and Social 
Safeguard 9 (ESS 9) on Indigenous Peoples and Cultural heritage as indicated in the ESMF. As presented in the 
table in section E. 1. 1 there is a correspondence between FAO ESS and GCF/IFC Performance Standards given 
FAO ac creditation with the GCF. Hence, ESS 9: Indigenous Peoples and Cultural Heritage ensures the approach, 
respect and compliance of activities funded with the proceeds with national and international policies laws and 
regulations applicable as well as with th e FAO own standards.  
 
The ESMF guarantees that:  
 
● The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples is respected in all FAO’s projects and 
programmes;  
● Promote the right to self -determination and development with identity of indigenous peoples (right to 
decide the kind of development that takes place among their people and on their lands and territories, 
in accordance with their own priorities and conceptions of well -being);  
● Ensures the application of the principle of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FP IC) of indigenous 
peoples affected by the project.  
● Recognize, respect and preserve the rights, lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, 
knowledge, social fabric, traditions, governance systems of Indigenous Peoples;  
● Protect cultural heritage and  avoid its alteration, damage or removal.  
  
ESS 9 recognizes indigenous peoples’ traditions and knowledge present opportunities for many of the 
challenges that humankind will face in the coming decades. This is of particular significance in relation to 
indigenous food systems in the face of increasing food demand and traditional knowledge with respect to 
adapting to climate change vulnerabilities and impacts.  
 
Indigenous peoples are an important stakeholder in the regions from Maule to Los Lagos, yet they s hare a 
higher that average population poverty rates. An agenda that pursues global food security, sustainable natural 
resources management and poverty alleviation is incomplete unless it addresses indigenous peoples’ needs. 
For this reason, FAO approved in  2010 its Policy on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, which is based on 
international legal agreements, such as the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), 
adopted by the General Assembly in 2007, and ILO Convention 169. The FAO Policy on  Indigenous Peoples 
underpins ESS 9 and provides the ESMF guidance to respect, include and promote indigenous peoples’ issues in


---
*Page 62*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 60 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
Chile . 
E.6. Monitoring and evaluation  
Provide information on the monitoring arrangements that will take place for providing annual monitoring reports 
based on the information provided for the use of proceeds in sections C.2.3 and C.2.4. 
  
The execution of the projects in the territory’ will be monitored using the procedures described in the 
Measurement and Monitoring System (MMS) document of the ENCCRV33. Following the procedures of the MMS, 
each project will have a baseline and the capture of CO2 will be estimated according to the nature of the 
activities and reported on a biennial basis. These measurements and calculations are going to be included in 
the Platform for the Management of Information of the ENCCRV, which is being developed by the Center of 
Information of Natural Resources, CIREN and is expected to be fully functional by 2020.  
 
Using the protocol of monitoring of the abovementioned MMS document, each project will have monitoring 
milestones that will include, among other variables, the type of forest that is being planted or managed, the 
number of trees per hectare, the basal area, number of species. W ith this information, it will be possible to 
calculate and monitor the Emission Reductions generated by the projects financed by the GFC and the 
indicators of the goals of the ENCCRV. This information will be complemented by georeferenced digital 
cartograp hies that also have a protocol defined in the MMS documents.  
 
The measurement in the field will be carried out by the CONAF’s regional offices. The gathered information will 
be introduced to the Platform of the ENCCRV or delivered to the MRV team in the ce ntral CONAF office in 
Santiago. Once the information of the projects is collected, the MRV team will develop a monitoring report of 
the performance of the projects. The time frame of the monitoring will be from 2020 to 2030, with biennial 
reports to show p artial results.  
 
This system will work as a component of the REDD+ monitoring scheme. Efforts to nest both systems will be 
done once a major amount of data is gathered.  
 
Project- level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with FAO poli cies. The project 
inception phase will include the formulation of a Theory of Change describing the causal relationship between 
outcomes that culminates with achieving the desired change and the underlying assumptions about how 
change will happen. FAO will ensure the existence of a well -designed, operational and effective impact 
monitoring and measurement system to measure the causal and attributable change, the contribution and the 
overall causal results of the project. The monitoring system should be desi gned to understand efficacy, 
targeting and verifying the assumptions that the program is making. It should also be used to generate 
information, data and lessons that can feed back into the project implementation and planning components. 
Progress will be m easured against baselines, targets and indicators.  
 
The essential indicators that will be monitored correspond to the ones that allows the reporting of the goals of 
the ENCCRV. In the case of the afforestation and revegetation (MT4), ecological restoration  (MT5), restoration 
after forest fires (IF2), preventive forestry (IF3), forest management (US1), and wood energy (US3) programs, 
the main indicator will be the number of hectares that is directly influenced by each action measure, with the 
goal of reachin g the outcomes described in section 3.2.2. Additionally, the activities that can generate emission 
reductions will be monitored with the guides provided in the annex of the abovementioned MMS document. 
Monitoring indicators such as the number of trees per hectares and basal area (among others) will allow Chile 
to estimate the amount of ER generated.  
 
For the action measures that are related to enabling conditions for the ENCCRV implementation, the indicator 
that will be reported for the environmental educat ion and dissemination program (MT6) will be the number of 
reached persons. For the program of strengthening of forest and environmental enforcement (MT7), for the 
Technological transfer of alternative management and use of silvoagricultural waste (IF6) as well as for the 
Adaptation programme for the technological transfer of management of vegetation resources (GA1), the 
indicators will be the number of communes where the program is implemented.  
 
At the project level impact, two indicators are proposed in li ne with GCF investment criteria (impact potential): 
 
33  https://www.enccrv.cl/sm m


---
*Page 63*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 61 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
1) Total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries; and 2) Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2eq) 
reduced.  The monitoring and reporting plan, including the dates and periods of monitoring will b e provided to 
the Secretariat with the implementation plan.  
 
FAO will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period. FAO has a country presence and 
capacity to perform these tasks.   FAO will implement tools and methods to facilitate monitoring of the project. 
The methods will support vertical monitoring, from the beneficiaries to management, and will facilitate 
comparative and standardized monitoring.  The PMU will use the tools including workplans platform to 
monitor activities and develop reports to the Steering Committee that combining financial reporting and 
progress toward achieving results set out in the Performance Management Framework.   
  
The monitoring system will be comprehensive and entail the Project workplan as well as the action plans for 
gender, indigenous people, biodiversity and the social and environmental framework.  
 
The day -to-day project monitoring and implementation responsibility rests on a national recruited Project 
Manager that will lead the PMU. S/he will be supported by a monitoring and evaluation specialist, who will lead 
the PMU's Monitoring and Evaluation Unit. The M&E Specialist will coordinate the annual work plans to ensure 
the efficient implementation of the project. The PM will inform the PB and F AO Country Office of any delays or 
difficulties during implementation, including M&E plan, so that appropriate and corrective measures can be 
adopted. The PM will ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and 
accou ntability in monitoring and reporting project results. FAO will support the PM as needed, including 
through annual monitoring missions. Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and 
troubleshooting support will be provided by FAO as needed. The C TICC, COSOC, Regional REDD+ Group, the 
CORECC, project beneficiaries and stakeholders will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.  
  
A project inception workshop will be implemented in order to: a) agree on the project theory of change a) build 
a common understanding on the project strategy and discuss any change in the overall context that might 
influence implementation;   b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team and Steering 
Committee, including reporting and communication lines; c) review the results framework and d iscussion, 
reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities, and to finalize the M&E plans; d) review 
financial reporting requirements; and e) planning and scheduling ESC meetings; and f) finalize the first year 
work plan. The final Inceptio n Report will be approved by the Steering Committee and FAO.  
  
The PM and FAO will provide inputs to the Annual Report for each year of implementation. The PM and the 
M&E Specialist will ensure that the indicators in the results framework are monitored ann ually. The Annual 
Reports will be shared with the Steering Committee and other stakeholders. The annual performance reports 
will be due to GCF 60 days after the end of calendar year. The final project annual report and the terminal 
evaluation report will s erve as the final project report package. Mid -term and final evaluations will be 
undertaken under the responsibility of FAO Office of Evaluation (OED)[1].  
 
In summary, monitoring and evaluation at the project level will be carried out in accordance with FAO's 
corporate systems and the evaluation will be undertaken according to the FAO evaluation policy across the 
project life cycle. The Project Cycle establishes institutional standards and procedures for project management, 
improving accountability and quality through the principles of results -based manag ement (RBM), while 
improving the strategic focus of all FAO projects.  The following diagram summarizes the FAO’s quality 
assurance cycle:


---
*Page 64*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 62 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 8. QA in FAO  
  
The Project Cycle sets corporate standards and procedures, including quality assurance criteria for phases 1 to 
3 of all FAO  ́s projects.  These criteria are relevance, feasibility and sustainability which are complemented with 
the performance assessment during the implementation of the project (Initial Installation, Annual Project  
Report, Mid- term and Final Evaluation).  
  
The project team and the FAO Country Office will carry out the M&E Plan in accordance with FAO procedures. 
Performance indicators for project implementation are presented in section C.2. The project document within 
FPMIS will also include additional information, such as the corresponding means of verification. The M&E plan 
includes: an initial report, annual reports to the GCF, project implementation reviews, a mid- term and a final 
evaluation. This information will  be available online.  
  
The following sections describe the main elements of this plan. The project M&E plan will be presented and 
finalized after an adjustment of the indicators, means of verification, and a full definition of the M&E 
responsibilities of the project staff.  
  
Initial installation  
The Project Inception Workshop will be held within the first 3 months of project start, involving those with 
assigned roles in the project organization structure, FAO Country Office and, where appropriate/feasible,  FAO 
regional technical policy and technical advisors as well as key stakeholders. The Inception Workshop is crucial 
to building ownership of the project results and to plan the first- year annual work plan. The Inception 
Workshop will address several key i ssues including:  
●     To assist all partners to fully understand and take ownership of the project.  
●     To detail the roles, support services and complementary responsibilities of FAO Country Office 
and Regional staff vis à vis the project team.  
●   Discussion on the roles, functions and responsibilities within the project’s decision -making 
structures, including reporting and communication lines, and conflict resolution mechanisms.  
●    Based on the project results framework, finalization of the first annual work plan. Review and 
agree on the indicators, targets and their means of verification, and recheck assumptions and risks.


---
*Page 65*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 63 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
●    Provision of a detailed overview of reporting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) requirements. The 
M&E work plan and budge t will be agreed and scheduled.  
●   Discussion of financial reporting procedures and obligations, and arrangements for annual audit.  
●   Planning and scheduling of project Board meetings. Roles and responsibilities of all project 
organization structures will be clarified, and meetings planned. The first project Board meeting 
will be held within the first 12 months following the inception workshop.  
●   An Inception Workshop Report will be a key reference document and will be prepared and shared 
with participants to formalize various agreements and plans decided during the meeting.  
  
Annual Project Report  
  
This important report is prepared by the Project Technical Advisors, consolidated by the Project Manager, 
reviewed by the Intra -ministerial Technic al Committee on Climate Change and final approved by the Project 
Board to monitor progress made since project start and for the previous reporting period.  
  
The format and content of the annual report will be adjusted based on the simplified reporting regi me which 
will be established for RBP by the GCF.  
  
Mid -term evaluation (MTE)  
 
The project will undergo an independent mid -term evaluation at the mid- point of project implementation. The 
mid- term evaluation will determine progress towards the achievement of  outcomes and will suggest corrective 
actions if needed. It will focus on the effectiveness, efficiency and timeliness of project implementation; will 
highlight issues requiring decisions and actions; and will present initial lessons learned about project design, 
implementation and management.  
  
 
Final Evaluation  
An independent Final Evaluation will be launched within six months prior to project’s actual completion date, 
NTE. It will aim at identifying project outcomes, their sustainability and actual or potential impacts, including 
inter alia global environmental benefits. It will also have the purpose of indicating future actions needed to 
assure continuity of the process developed through the project.  
  
Both mid- term and final evaluation will be managed b y FAO Office of Evaluation (OED) and organized in 
coordination with the FAO Regional Technical Advisor and the Project Board.  
  
During the final three months, the project team will prepare the Project Terminal Report. This comprehensive 
report will be mad e available to the public through the CONAF web site. It will summarize the results achieved 
(objectives, outcomes, outputs), lessons learned, problems met and areas where results may not have been 
achieved. It will also lay out recommendations for any fur ther steps that may need to be taken to ensure 
sustainability and replicability of the project’s results  
 
 
[1] Please refer to FAO OED webpage for further d etails: http://www.fao.org/about/who -weare/departments/office -of-
evaluation/en/   
 
F. Legal arrangements  
F.1. Legal title to REDD -plus results  
- Provide an analysis with respect to legal title to REDD -plus results in the country. This should include an 
analysis of entitlement to claim for the results to be paid for by the GCF.


---
*Page 66*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 64 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
- Covenant that no other party has a competing claim to the results proposed to the GCF in accordance with 
national policy, legal or regulatory frameworks.  
 
A national legal definition of emissions reduction titling is not considered to be a precondition to accessing 
results -based payments under the GCF, nor it is necessary to transfer the ownership of the Emissions 
Reductions (ERs) to the GCF itself, but rather it is necessary to guarantee that no competing claims to 
ownership of these reductions will overlap with the results that would be compensated by the GCF.  
 
In this way, Chile will record in the information hub on the UNFCCC web portal the quantity of results obtained 
between 2014 and 2016 for which payments will be received under de pilot program, expressed in tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent per year, as well as in th e “Emission Reduction Registry System” that is currently 
being developed and tested. In addition, Chile will transparently record that GCF is the entity paying for results; 
and corresponding results will no longer be eligible for RBPs under the GCF or in a ny other arrangement.  
 
This task will be guaranteed by CONAF, that according to the national policy and regulations has the mandate, 
as a national entity in charge to implement the ENCCRV of transferring ERs and  subscribing ERPAs.  Official 
communications that support the legal framework has been produced in the context of the participation of 
Chile in the Carbon Fund of the FCPF.   In the Annex 7 of the FP the following official communications from the 
relevant overarching governmental authority are provid ed: 
 
1. Ability of CONAF to Transfer Title to Emission Reductions (ERs) to the Carbon Fund of the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility.  
2. Ministry of National Assets, official resolution No.152 states that CONAF can advance on the third 
phase, allowing it to subs cribe ERPA, and also recognizing the ability to transfer the ownership of 
carbon rights to the fund.  
 
On March 21st 2017, in the context of the ERPA that has been negotiated with the World Bank, the Ministry of 
National Assets, issued an  official resoluti on GABM No.152 mentioning that: “after having analyzed the 
National  Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV),  this Ministry states that CONAF can 
advance on the third phase, allowing it to subscribe such Emission Reductions Purchase A greement (ERPA), 
and also recognizing the ability to transfer the ownership of carbon rights to the fund.”  
 
In summary, the official designation of CONAF as the national agency in charge to manage REDD+ RBP, and the 
legal and institutional arrangements est ablished at regional and local level with relevant counterparts through 
bilateral agreements, might be considered as relevant measures to mitigate the risk of competing ER title 
among different agencies.  
    
As an additional measure to avoid any risk of competing ER title among different agencies or any other 
arrangement, CONAF has agreed with the FCPF of the WB that the negotiation of an Emission Reduction 
Purchase Agreement (ERPA) will take into account mitigation results ulterior to 2017.   
 
It is important to consider that it is difficult to determine the origin and holders of ERs.  To covenant that no 
other party has a competing claim to the results proposed to the GCF, following the experience gained unde r 
the FCPF Carbon Fund when developing a program at national level, three general requirements have been 
analyzed in addition to adopting the necessary safeguards: 1) giving special consideration to the risks 
associated with double accounting, 2) guarantee ing fair compensation to private forest landowners, 3) 
implementing an equitable benefit- sharing mechanism.   The third option was chosen by Chile.  
 
RBPs  will be redistributed  at regional level to implement REDD+ actions, on the basis of a well -established 
benefit- sharing distribution plan designed to implement ENCCRV (REDD+ strategy), in agreement with all the 
parties, through which non -monetary  be nefits will be channeled at regional level and reach small and medium 
forest owners (including agricultural communities and indigenous communities), following specific criteria and 
requirements.   
 
The distribution of RBP is as follows: 20% of the financia l resources that will be received via results -based 
payments are centralized and managed by CONAF Head Office to cover administrative costs.   
 
The remaining 80% will be distributed between the regions where the emission reduction and/or the increase 
in ab sorption have been generated during the reference period, in order to finance projects associated with the


---
*Page 67*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 65 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
action measures of the ENCCRV. In particular, REDD+ actions carried out at local level, which  contributed to 
ERs, are accounted at regional level, an d distributed between regions, according to the following criteria:  
 
● “Equity” between regions (50%)  
●  “Efficiency” in generating ERs and increasing forest carbon stocks (20%),  
● “Solidarity” with regions less advantaged (socio- economically) or that faced spec ial circumstances 
(fires, disasters, pests) (10%) 
 
 
In light of the current legislation cited, the eligibility requirements of both category of projects that are 
prioritized via Regional REDD+ Group or regional public competitions, consider the following a spects:  
 
1) Formal requirements: Legal aspects regarding land ownership of those who apply, whether individual or 
collective, or who are entitled to another type of tenure.  
2) Alignment with the action measures of the ENCCRV.  
3) Technical and budgetary feasibility: The proposal should be technically and financially sound, according 
with the available resources.  
 
Aspects related to land tenure, such as the requirements established by law to regularize property titles over 
land or the relevance o f customary law, certainly cover a relevant function, although it is intended that those 
persons/groups that do not hold tenure rights might also be included in the category of beneficiaries.  
 
The allocation within each region will allow the definition of eligible areas, taking into consideration aspects of 
environmental, economic and social vulnerability. Among the criteria for the allocation of resources, the 
benefit- sharing distribution plan will take into account aspects of gender, the presence of indig enous peoples 
and vulnerable populations, to ensure positive social and environmental impacts.  
 
To conclude, the activities carried out using the RBP will correspond to those indicated in the funding proposal 
and in any case, they must be aligned with the action measures established under the ENCCRV and the 
modalities established under its benefit- sharing distribution plan.  RBP will reach final beneficiaries in the form 
of non -monetary benefits in order to be reinvested in the territory.   
 
The rights and obligations related to RBPs are regulated at territorial level, through bilateral agreements 
(convenios con los propietarios). Each agreement will vary according to the modality chosen, the nature of the 
counterpart, and will contain some elements establi shed within the benefit- sharing distribution plan.  The 
requirements to access RBPs (non -monetary benefits) will not vary depending from the international fund but 
rather be defined through bilateral agreements.      
 
Regarding use of the emission reductio ns, those will be used towards achievement of their NDCs.  The results 
achieved during the reference period (2014 – 2016) will be accounted against the NDC to implement the 
ENCCRV and its benefit- sharing distribution plan, and the crediting will be registe red at national level. The 
General Comptroller of the Republic ( Contraloría General de la República -  CGR ) has a key role in controlling the 
entrance of international funds and guarantees compliance with administrative and fiscal rules.  CGR will also 
perf orm audits to monitor the use of funds internally between the central office of CONAF and the Regional 
Directorates that receive financing, as well as for its execution.  
 
As mentioned above, the ENCCRV, the key public policy instrument to achieve Chile’s NDC objectives, states 
that the action measures that have been developed to implement the ENCCRV have effects on both public and 
private lands, which impedes determining the source of ERs. This is based on technical considerations related 
to carbon accounti ng, as an individual owner cannot be entitled to or demonstrate that it has ERs rights which 
are calculated at regional level.  
 
Therefore, detailed arrangements have been made under the benefit -sharing plan in order to clarify how the 
REDD+ benefits will b e equally distributed among the beneficiaries, which have contributed in generating such 
payments.  
 
On the other hand, based on current legislation, national assets whose use does not generally belong to the 
people, are called State assets or fiscal asset s (article 589 of the civil code). Such goods, especially if derived 
from nature, cannot be owned by private entities.


---
*Page 68*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 66 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
 
To implement the ENCCRV, it is foreseen that interested parties may access competitive funds, according to the 
thematic lines, and criteria established in calls for proposals. The thematic lines refer to afforestation with 
native species, ecological restor ation, forest conservation and sustainable forest management.  The provisions 
of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Operational Manuals for the direct -
action  measures of the ENCCRV will also be taken into consideration.  
 
When  monetary benefits could be distributed to forest landowners in order to implement certain action 
measures of the ENCCRV, pre -existing public mechanisms will be used, most of which are supported by the 
existing legal framework.   
 
With regards to the type of forest landowners that will be eligible to receive benefits, "small forest owners" will 
be prioritized. Equally, those beneficiaries classified as "medium owners" will be considered. The prioritization 
considers aspects of environmental, economic, and s ocial vulnerability to be specified at regional level, taking 
into account aspects such as gender, presence of indigenous peoples and vulnerable population.  
 
Small forest owners include “agricultural communities” according to the law 5/1968, the indigenous  
communities regulated by law 19.253/1993; the “communities on common goods resulting from the Agrarian 
Reform process”; “rain fed companies” formed according to article 1° of the decree 2.247/1978, and the 
companies referred to in article 6  of the law 19 .118/1992 provided that, at least, 60% of the social capital of 
such companies is held by the original partners or people that have the quality of small forest owners, as 
certified by the Agricultural and Livestock Service.  
 
It is not expected or consider ed that the budget aimed at forest landowners would be an issue with recognition 
of ERs if the activities carried out using the RBP are different from those specified in the Funding Proposal (i.e. 
if 80% of the RBP is not transferred to the land holders) s ince most of the funds will be transferred to land 
holders according with the benefit -sharing distribution plan (BSDP).  
G. Accredited entity fee and project management costs  
Provide a list of the activities that are expected to be conducted using the AE fees and project management cost 
with corresponding costs as follows:  
 
Accredited entity fee : 
  
FAO requests 3,5% as accredited  entity fees.  
  
Project management expenses for the full implementation period  
  
Project Management expenses    
Project Management Unit              2,288,920  
Direct Support Cost              2,226,2 64 
Provision of supervision services to the project              2,226,2 64 
TOTAL              6,741,499  
 
H. Annexes  
1. Non -objection Letter  
2. Environmental and social assessment (ESA) 
3. Environmental and Social Management Framework  
4. Gender Analysis  
5. Gender Action Plan  
6. Buffer Estimation


---
*Page 69*
---

 
 
REDD- plus RBP FUNDING PROPOSAL  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND | PAGE 67 OF 67 
 
 
 
 
7. Official communications CONAF's mandate  
 
Acronym  
 
APF              Forestry Preferentially  
CBD             Convention on Biological Diversity  
UNFCCC      United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
CNULD         United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification  
CONADI       National Corporation for Indigenous Development  
CONAF        National Forest Corporation  
CORECC     Regional Committee on Climate Change  
CTICC          Inter Ministerial Technical Committee on Climate Change  
SUN             Dead Organic Matter  
ETICC          Interministerial Technical Team for Climate Change 
FAO             Food and Agriculture  Organization of the United Nations  
FCPF           Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  
GEDEFF      Development and Forestry Development Management  
GHG            Greenhouse gases  
GF                Focus groups  
GFW            Global Forest Watch  
IBA               Biennial Update Report  
INGEI           National Inventory of Greenhouse Gases  
IPCC            Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
MAIA            Andean Intercultural Environmental Model 
MOFIM         Mapuche Intercultural Forest Model 
MRS             Claims and Suggestions Mechanism  
NDC             Nationally Determined Contribution  
NRF/NREF   Forest Reference Level / Reference Level of Forest Emissions  
ODS             Sustainable Development Goals  
OIRS            Information Offices, Claims and Suggestions  
PANCC        National Action Plan on Climate Change  
REDD+       Reduction of Emissions from Deforestation, Forest Degradation and Increase in Carbon Stocks  
SESA           Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment  
SIAC            Comprehensive Information and Citizen Service System 
SNASPE      National System of Protected Wild Areas of the State 
SOC             Organic Soil Carbon  
TAR              Technical Evaluati on Report  
UCCSA        Unit of Climate Change and Environmental Services  
UNFF           United Nations Forum on Forests


---
*Page 70*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 71*
---

Environmental and so cial safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Chile REDD- plus RBP for results period 2014 -2016   
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Food and Agriculture Organization of the U nited Nations  
(FAO)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Chile  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Sunday, October 6, 2019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language in Chile  and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6470en/ca6470en.pdf   
S
panish:    
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6470es/ca6470es.pdf  
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
N
ational Forest Corporation ( CONAF ) website : 
English:  
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -ingles  
S
panis h: 
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -espanol  
Remarks  An ESIA  consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that is available at the 
above -mentioned links.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Sunday, October 6, 2019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language in Chile and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  English:


---
*Page 72*
---

http://www.fao.org/3/ca6470en/ca6470en.pdf  
S
panish:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6470es/ca6 470es.pdf  
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
C
ONAF website : 
English:  
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -ingles  
S
panish:  
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -espanol  
Remarks  An ESMP  consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the ESMF (Annex 1) that is available 
at the above -mentioned links.  
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Environmental and Social Assessment ( ESA ), Gender 
Assessment (GA) and Gender Action Plan  (GAP) / Sunday 
October 6, 2019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Explanation on language  Spanish is the official language in Chile and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/CA6470EN/CA6470EN_Annex.pdf  
S
panish:  
http://www.fao.org/3/CA6470ES/CA6470ES_Annex.pdf   
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao. org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
C
ONAF website : 
English:  
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -ingles  
S
panish:  
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -espanol


---
*Page 73*
---

Remarks  ESA, GA, and GAP have been provided as separate Annexes.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Tuesday, October 8, 2019  
Place  CONAF website, as a location closer to the project 
stakeholders  
E
nglish:  
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -ingles  
S
panish:  
https://www.enccrv.cl/fp -y-anexos -espanol  
The copies of the ESMF and ESA will be available at CONAF 
national or regional offices.  
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Tuesday, November 12, 2019  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Tuesday, November 12, 2019  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 74*
---

G
CF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 74 
Secretariat ’s assessment of FP120 
Proposal name:  Chile REDD- plus results -based payments for results period 
2014 -2016  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Chile  
Project/programme size: Medium  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.1 Project background  
1. The project presents Chile 's REDD- plus  results for the period 2014− 2016, calculating a
v
olume of  around 14.53 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq) in emission
reductions (ER) derived from reducing deforestation, forest degradation , enhancement of forest
stocks and conservation , which have subsequently been reported to the United Nation s
Fr
amework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ), and which are u ndergoing  technical
assessment and have already been published i n the UNFCCC REDD- plus  information hub .1
T
hese results are presented to GCF for r esults -based payments (RBP s) as part of the REDD -plus
RBP pilot programme and are fully compliant with the elig ibility criteria set out in the t erms of
reference (TOR) for the pilot program me (decision B.18/07) . The presented results , which
compl y with UNFCCC standards and the GCF TO R, are undergoing analysis  based on the
scorecard  as shown in annex 1.
2. Chile will use the proceeds from the RBP to invest in additional activities that support
the implementation of their nationally determined contribution ( NDC ) and National Strategy o n
C
limate Change and V egetation Resources (ENCCRV) 2017 −2025. The RBP project wil l focus on
the following outputs :
(a) Output 1 : implementation and investment ; and
(b) Output 2 : enabling conditions for ENCCRV implementation .
1.2 Scorecard  results  
3. As per decision B.18/07 , the proposal is currently being assessed using  the scorecard for
REDD -plus  RBPs . This assessment i s being conducted by the S ecretariat with support of L and
Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry ( LULUCF ) experts and the preliminary results will be
discussed with the independent T echnical Advisor y Panel ( TAP). The final score still needs to be
discussed and agreed with the TAP .
Table 1:  Scorecard results  (see annex 1 for details)  
Scorecard section  Results  
1 Available at <https://redd.unfccc.int/>.


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 75 
 
 
Carbon elements  Score: 41 All criteria “pass”  
Non -carbon 
elements  Cancun Safeguards  All criteria “pass”  
Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  Score: 2 
GCF investment framework  All criteria “high”  
GCF policies  All criteria “pass”  
1.3 Proposed payments  
4. Following the procedure defined in the T OR, the following equation was applied to 
estimate the volume of results to be translated in to payments : 
Volume of ERs offered (x) Total score achieved  = GCF volume of ERs  
Maximum score  
Abbreviation:  ERs = emission reductions  
5. The resulting GCF volume of results and the proposed amount for payments are 
provided  in table 2  below:  
Table 2:  Resulting GCF volume of results and the proposed amount for payments  
Values  Results  
Volume of ERs offered:  14.530.220 tCO 2eq 
Total score achieved:  41 
Maximum score:  48 
Valuation of results: USD 5/tCO 2eq 
Non -carbon benefits  score :  2 GCF volume of ERs : 12.411.229 .6 tCO 2eq 
Additional 2.5%  of payments for non -
carbon benefits  
Proposed results -based payments:  
USD 63,607 ,552 
Abbreviations:  tCO 2eq = tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent; ER s = emission reductions  
1.4 Strengths and points of caution  
6. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
The use of proceeds will be reinvested to 
deepen implementation of the ambitious 
National Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV) 
2017−2025 . As per the terms of reference , GCF will make 
the payments in a single disbursement. 
Implementa tion of the use of proceeds will 
mostly be supervised directly by the accredited 
entity . Nonetheless, annual reporting will be 
provided to GCF .


---
*Page 76*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 76 
 
 
The project provides a good case for 
complementarity and coherence by 
blending GCF investments with other 
ongoing initiatives to support Chile  
implement its ENCCRV such as the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility’s  Carbon Fund .  
7. The Board may  wish to  consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum  XVII, titled “List o f proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Assessment of performance  against the investment criteria  
2.1 Impact potential                                Scale:  High  
8. Chile  implemented a number of policies and legal reforms between 2008 and 2013 that 
resulted in ERs  of 18.409 .425  tCO 2eq between 2014 and 2016. Of these emissions 78.9  per cent  
(14.530.220  tCO 2eq) are being offered to the GCF in the revised proposal. Chile has not received 
other REDD -plus  payments for the results of 2014 −2016. These results are in part the outcome  
of a new legal framework as well as positive incentives in line with REDD -plus  objectives, such 
as the Law 20283 on the Recovery of Native Forests and the Promotion of Forestry issued in 
2008. The total volume of ERs  achieved by Chile in this period , including those proposed in the 
REDD -plus  RBP pilot programme , are included in the technical annex to  the biennial update 
report submitted to the UNFCCC . These results are currently undergoing  technical assessment 
in accordance with the Conference of the Parties decisions on REDD -plus . The achievement of 
these past results contributed directly to GCF objectives and targets in the forest and land use 
result area and furthermore , through the use of proceeds , will  lead to a continued reduction of 
emissions from deforestation , forest degradation, enhancement of forest stocks and 
conservation . 
9. Although  the forest reference emission level  (FREL)  is subnational,  Chile demonstrates 
ambition to scale up to national level , mainly through the implementation of ENCCRV and the 
link to the commitments in the LULUCF sector under Chile’s NDC. The five regions contemplated 
for the subnational level are: Maule, Biobío, La Araucanía, Los Ríos and  Los Lagos, covering the 
central -southern zone of Chile. These five  regions contemplated at the subnational level contain 
41 per cent  of Chile’s native forests (5,853,387 ha ) and represent 11 of the 12 forest types 
present in the country.  
10. The country continues to build an ambitious and power ful approach to REDD -plus  based 
on the activities contemplated in ENCCRV and NDCs . In the context of its NDC, part of Chile’s 
commitment is to focus on restoration of forests and reduce emissions from forest degradation. 
This approach is highly ambitious,  necessary  and transformative in  nature. The use of proceeds  
offers the opportunity to support Chile  to continu e transforming the forest sector and achieve 
more REDD -plus results in the future . These results are expected to be presented to the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility’s (FCPF) Carbon Fund.  
2.2 Paradigm shift potential                  Scale: High  
11. The initiation of ENCCRV  helped Chile streamline and coordinate REDD- plus  efforts 
through  an ambitious and strategic approach. This helped the country reduce emissions from


---
*Page 77*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 77 
 
 
deforestation , forest degradation, enhancement of forest stocks and forest conservation and 
later report and record the results in full compliance with the UNFCCC and now GCF. Th e 
project will help to continue the transformation of the forest sector that Chile  has undertaken 
for several years  and allows for the financial complementarity and coherence with other 
initiatives, such as the FCPF Carbon Fund.  
12. The reinvestment of the pro ceeds into ENCCRV  will help Chile  to further reduce 
emissions from deforestation in the coming years and involve the  FCPF Carbon Fund and the 
private sector , which will further help the country in meeting  its national REDD -plus  targets  and 
commitments under its NDC.  The strategic investments from GCF for implementation of 
ENCCRV  seek to complement existing funding sources ( e.g. FCPF)  and have the potential to 
attract other donors and financial mechanisms to blend in for implementation o f the very 
ambitious REDD -ENCCRV.   
13. There is furthermore a strong potential for building a platform to engage the private 
sector , which is expected to trigger a paradigm shift that will catalyse  the long -term impacts of 
the project. Specifically, market dev elopment and transformation, innovation of practices, and 
the public -private approach are  expected to allow reinvestment. This will in turn provide 
additional experience and valuable lessons learned to the other donors  and national 
stakeholders.  
14. Chile  is one of the pioneering countries in the world including four REDD -plus  activities 
in their results submitted  for consideration  to the UNFCCC, including not only deforestation 
reduction but also by testing and validating  methodologies allowing for the inclusion of forest 
degradation, the enhancement of forest carbon stocks and conservation.  This supports Chile ’s 
transition from an almost carbon neutral country in terms of these activities, into a significant 
net-sink for carbon . 
15. Finally,  the benefit -sharing system that is expected to be put in place for reinvestment of 
the proceeds is built in accordance with ENCCRV and will allow further implementation of the 
strategy by defining and implementing mechanisms aligned to per formance -based incentives 
schemes  at subnational and local scales.  
2.3 Sustainable development potential              Scale:  High   
16. The GCF project will create an enabling environment to sustainable development by 
achieving systemic change at the local, subnatio nal and national levels. ENCCRV  focuses on 
sustainable development across all its outputs. The outputs in ENCCRV  that will be supported 
through this proposal explicitly concentrate on economic, environmental and social aspects and seek to improve the livel ihoods of rural poor  in Chile.  
17. In addition, the proposed project is expected to engage and improve the livelihoods of 
women who are mostly in disadvantaged positions. The project will strengthen governance in 
indigenous territories and provides support for  improving their livelihoods .  
18. Chile is a signatory of the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169 
on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, among other instruments for indigenous peoples. The pro ject 
is in  compliance with provisions regarding environmental and social safeguards  (ESS) , 
emphasizing indigenous and gender dimensions.  
19. Gender assessment and a gender action plan are key elements of the project. The project 
will build on this gender action plan ali gned to ENCCRV . The project will use the various


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 78 
 
 
regulations of the policy instruments in the activities in full compliance with national policies, 
international treaties and the gender policies and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of th e United Nations (FAO) .  
20. The project  addresses the  incorporation of women in actions through specific indicators 
that will be included in the safeguards information system to monitor gender aspects and 
generation of jobs from the activities that will be im plemented.  
21. The project targets poverty reduction  and, through the focus on enhancing the provision 
of ecosystem services (e.g. soils, water, biodiversity) will lead to increase d resilience of the 
ecosystems and fewer expected impacts on the environment , resulting in improved conditions 
for the rural poor. Also, by fostering ecosystems’  restoration and the integral value of the 
forests, improved economic impacts are expected with  project implementation.  
22. The project activities have a positive impact on the en vironment. Special consideration 
is given to the occurrence of forest fires in the subtropical forests of Chile, which constitute one of the main drivers of forest loss and forest degradation, with the consequent effects to local 
population s and their live lihoods. Improvement in the conditions of the fiscal territories 
through the increase of the forest mass and the reduction of fire risks  is an activity prioritized in 
ENCCRV. This special consideration has also been embedded in the benefit -sharing system for 
reinvestment of the proceeds, as a buffer assignation is considered in order to trigger and 
increase potential actions , in particular those associated with forest fires, that will in the future 
capture carbon or stop emissions.  
2.4 Needs of  the recipient                  Scale: High  
23. The focus of the use of proceeds will target strategic sections of ENCCRV,  
complementing other public and international financing sources and thus partially covering the 
financial needs for implementation of the s trategy.  
24. The outputs of ENCCRV  targeted by this project all have a strong focus on capacity -
building of the various stakeholders at national and subnational levels involved (indigenous 
peoples, local communities and government  at subnational and national levels) . There is a 
strong focus on strengthening the operational management of ENCCRV . This will not only 
support the implementation of this project but also provide a strong platform for the entire 
strategy  and indirectly support the implementation of al l other outputs and activities that are 
part of such a strategy.  
25. Chile is particularly vulnerable to the occurrence and exacerbation of forest fires, in part 
due to the dry conditions in some forest areas. Th e specific vulnerabilities and impacts have als o 
been documented in national communications to the UNFCCC secretariat and are being duly 
internalized in ENCCRV.   
26. The main beneficiaries of these payments include the rural population and indigenous 
people s living in five region s of Chile . Indeed,  among the most vulnerable groups in the country 
are indigenous and non -indigenous rural communities concentrat ed mainly between the Maule 
and Aysén regions.  This has been duly internalized in ENCCRV.  
2.5 Country ownership                     Scale: High


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 79 
 
 
27. The pr oject is fully aligned with national policies  and NDC  priorities,  and the proceeds 
will be used to reinvest in the full implementation of Chile ’s very ambitious ENCCRV.  
28. During project preparation, the national designated authority (NDA)  has experienced a 
high level of engagement and country appropriation. The NDA has led the definition and 
development of the project  by providing feedback  of the process in several moments . In 
particular, the NDA has been involved in the definition of the i nstitutional arrangements for the 
program me execution and has provided technical recommendations during  the convening of 
the independent TAP , which  review ed the funding  proposal as per their internal procedures . 
Only a fter reviewing the proposal, the TAP r ecommended that the NDA issue the non -objection 
letter.  
29. In the context of the preparation of this proposa l and the ENCCRV,  the Government 
undertook a highly consultative process with relevant stakeholders, including indigenous 
peoples and relevant stakeholders. Evidence on this process was provided in an annex as part of 
the funding proposal.   
30. Moreover, the National Forestry Corporation  (CONAF ), a governmental body with more 
than 50 years of experience,  plays a key role for implementation of the project. For the purposes 
of project´s outreach and field work, the project relies on the  presence of CONAF in the territory 
at the regional and provincial levels .  
2.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: High  
31. The REDD -plus  results for 2014 −2016  presented to GCF and the suggested budget both 
clearly highlight that a fixed price of US D 5 per tCO 2eq will be applied to the project , which is 
cost effective and in accordance with the T OR of the pilot prog ramme. Furthermore, t he 
payment for these past results is reinvested into a transformation of the forest sector , which 
will allow Chile  to continue to reduce emissions from deforestation , forest degradation, 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks and conserva tion.  
32. The reinvestment into ENCCRV  further helps Chile  reach economies of scale together 
with other donors currently supporting ENCCRV  and bring s different donors and partners 
together to improve complementarity and coherence. The GCF investment will compl ement 
ongoing support from FCPF . The project is a model by showcasing how GCF funds can help bring 
complementarity and coherence with other important funding sources for REDD -plus  RBPs. 
FCPF Carbon Fund’s payments  have a clearly defined role  and timing , which is  described in the 
project with specific details on what GCF investments will cover  and for which time period.   
33. Furthermore, t here will be numerous lessons learned and best practices from the 
implementation of activ ities and coordination with the other sources that will be crucial not 
only for Chile but for other REDD -plus  countries engaging in RBP. This will be important with 
regard s to the private sector and in seeking to increase their engagement in REDD -plus  finance.  
34. Finally, Chile is developing two systems to have an accounting of emissions and a 
distribution of benefits. The registry system allows  the accounting of emissions traded and will 
avoid a double accounting of ERs ; while the benefit distribution system follows the agreements 
and guidelines obtained in the phases of development and implementation of ENCCRV and ensures a reinvestment and distribution in the regions and localities in a transparent and 
equitable manner.


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 80 
 
 
III. Assessment of consistency with GCF sa feguards and policies  
3.1 Environmental  and social safeguards  
35. A proposal is submitted by the government of Chile to GCF under its REDD -plus RBP for 
the payment of the greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions generated by its REDD -plus 
activities for the perio d of 2014 to 2016. The REDD- plus RBP will be used to support the 
implementation of the country’s ENCCRV , which  integrates the national REDD -plus strategy in 
five priority regions of Maule, Biobio, La Araucania, Los Rios and Los Lagos. The prioritized 
regions comprise 15.3 million ha, of which 35  per cent  are covered in native forests. The 
ENCCRV aim s to contribute to the achieveme nt of the country’s nationally determined 
contributions (NDC) as well as to the country’s commitments to various international 
obligations. The goal of ENCCRV is to reduce vulnerability associated with land degradation in at 
least 264,000 ha  from 2017 to 2 025 while reducing 20  per cent  of the GHG emissions from the 
LULUCF sector by 2025 compared to the reference level during the period 2001 to 2013. To 
achieve its goals, ENCCRV will implement 26 action measures consisting of seven direct actions 
and 19 enab ling actions. The proceeds from the REDD- plus RBP will support the 
implementation of five direct action and five enabling action measure s that address the main 
drivers of deforestation and forest degradation , as well as mobilize additional resources to 
imp lement the other ENCCRV action measures.  
36.  An ex post  review of the extent to which implementation of the activities that generate 
emission reduction results was consistent with the safeguards framework for REDD- plus agreed 
under the UNFCCC (also referred t o as Cancun safeguards)  was included in the funding 
proposal. The review was based on the country’s policies and measures, and the GCF and 
accredited entity’s (AE) environmental and social safeguards and relevant policies . Also 
included in the proposal are  the processes for ex  ante identification, assessment and 
management of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts of activities supported 
by the proceeds from the RBP that are compliant with the requirements of the ESS  and related 
policies o f GCF and the AE.  
37. In terms of the ex  post review, the AE prepared an e nvironmental and s ocial assessment 
(ESA) that describes the extent to which the past activities that generated emission reductions were consistent with the Cancun safeguards and the safeguards ’ frameworks of GCF and AEs. 
The development and implementation of REDD -plus activities require that such  activities 
address and respect the UNFCCC safeguards following decision 1/CP.16. T his involved 
interpreting the Cancun safeguards according to the country context . The review of how each of 
the Cancun safeguards was addressed and respected throughout implementation of the 
activities was based on this specific context . The ESA incorporated th is information  and offers  a 
comparison of the REDD- plus safeguards with the country’s interpretation , including 
consistency of its relevant policies, laws and regulations with the environmental, social and economic sustainability framework  of the AE .  
38. In terms of ex  ante review, the AE developed an en vironmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) that describes how the environmental and social risks and impacts 
associated with the activities supported by the proceeds from RBP will be identified and 
managed. The risks and impacts were initially iden tified using the screening process of the AE . 
These risks and impacts were described  in the ESMF , which a lso include s the indigenous 
peoples planning framework (IPPF). As details of the specific activities, including locations, have 
yet to be finalized, th e ESMF provides the process for screening, scoping, further assessment 
and management of risks and impacts associated with the activities.


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 81 
 
 
39. Consistency of the design and implementation of REDD -plus activities with the Cancun 
safeguards and GCF and AE ESS:  
(a) The ESA prepared by the AE, in coordination with the Government of Chile,  is a well -
organized retrospective review of the extent to which , in the context of the REDD -plus 
RBP,  the measures undertaken to identify, assess, and manage environmental and social 
risks and impacts are consistent with GCF ESS ;  
(b) The ESA relied on numerous sources of information for the period covering 2014 to 
2016, including various publications, some available via links provided in the ESA, in the 
process of its assessment. The ES A acknowledges challenges associated with an ex  post 
review involving three different sets of applicable safeguards: the Cancun safeguards, 
the GCF interim ESS , and the environmental and social standards  of the AE . To address 
this complexity, the assessmen t focused primarily on the Cancun safeguards and the 
environmental and social standards  of the AE , based on  the rationale that the 
compatibility of the AE  with GCF interim ESS was determined during the GCF 
accreditation process. While there are some notable differences between the standards  
of the AE  and GCF interim ESS, the assessment identified similar or complementary 
ways in which the different safeguards were addressed or respected and undertook to substantiate the consistency of those actions with GCF  requirements ; 
(c) The ESA provides a detailed description that underscores general consistency of 
applicable safeguards, particularly in relation to stakeholder engagement. It elaborated 
on the range of stakeholders consulted or engaged during the review peri od; the various 
ways in which the stakeholders were identified, informed, and consulted; and the 
information on how the stakeholders participated in the activities. Much of this more 
detailed information is elaborated in several resources , which were inclu ded in the ESA , 
and provided additional information about participatory processes undertaken in 
conjunction with the ENCCRV. Such processes included regional participatory 
workshops, expert workshops and a national workshop with various actors and 
speciali sts who were exposed to the impacts ; 
(d) The ESA identified the need to strengthen extension and territorial work with impacted landowners, who “must understand the project to be interested in participating” , and 
better understand evolving  management practices associated with Chile’s overall shift in 
institutional management approaches. This need is identified in the ESA as relevant to training and technical assistance. However , in the context of stakeholder engagement in 
relation to the activities sup ported by proceeds from RBP, the AE will need to 
strengthen ways to incorporate a  training initiative into both the ESMF and the specific 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP), aimed at increasing awareness of 
and participation in technical and managerial aspects of ENCCRV implementation ; 
(e) Regarding information disclosure, the ESA includes a detailed description of the Chilean 
Government’s information, transparency, and grievance redress laws and decrees , 
including the most pertinent Information Of fices, Claims and Suggestions (OIRS ). The 
ESA  elaborates the process for how information is collected, processed and 
disseminated , consistent with Cancun and GCF information disclosure and transparency 
policies. The OIRS “ claims and suggestions ” function s erves as the project’s grievance 
redress system and is described in the ESA as analogous to a project -level approach . The 
system also satisfies the GCF requirement for an institutional grievance redress 
mechanism (GRM) as well as processes required by the establishment of REDD- plus 
activities; and  
(f) The ESA provided data from OIRS describing the types of claims, means used to present 
the claim, the gender balance and the time it took OIRS to respond to the requested


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 82 
 
 
information. However, i t would be important  for the ESA to include a description of how 
the OIRS mechanism was  accessed during the review period, how  specific complaints 
were received and what  redress was provided. This should include additional 
information on development of the OIRS, and improveme nts that were made as a result 
of consultative workshops. A dditional information should  be included in the ESMF and 
specific ESMP , integrating the results of the review of REDD -plus activities implement ed 
by ENCCRV during 2014 to 2016 . Lessons learned and  gaps identified should be 
mainstreamed into measures related  to activities supported by the proceeds of RBP.  
40. Environmental and social due diligence for the use of payment for results:  
(a) The AE and the Chilean G overnment recognize that the project, supported by the 
proceeds from the REDD- plus RBP, is expected to generate environmental and social 
benefits arising from improved forest cover and the management and governance of 
forest resources. There are, however, several en vironmental and social risks and 
impacts that may be associated with the implementation of ENCCRV activities. In 
relation to the action measures that will be supported by the REDD -plus RBP, the AE 
classified the project as c ategory B under the AE and GCF p olicies and standards. The 
risks and impacts are anticipated to be moderate within the action measures area of influence, reversible, and mitigated through management measures ; 
(b) CONAF developed the ESMF  pf ENCCRV , including the protocols and procedures rela ted 
to environmental and social evaluation and management, natural forests and habitats, 
pest management, cultural heritage, indigenous peoples planning framework, and 
gender action plan. A separate ESMF was developed and submitted for the proposed 
project  under the REDD- plus RB P supporting some of the action measures under the 
ENCCRV. The ESMF describes the environmental and social context related to the forestry sector the country, the legal and policy framework applicable to the activities, 
environmental  and social due diligence, stakeholder engagement and the grievance 
redress systems for the project. The ESMF will be updated after  the first year of 
implementation and on a periodic basis to improve its alignment with the ENCCRV 
framework.  Incorporated in  the ESMF for the REDD -plus RBP is an IPPF that provides 
further assessments and considerations related to identifying and assessing impacts on indigenous peoples, including informed consultation and participation and free, prior and informed consent consi stent with the policies and standards of the AE . The result of 
the environmental and social screening following the environmental and social management guidelines of the AE  is also included as an annex to the ESMF. The 
screening is a preliminary assessment  tool used to identify the likely risks and impacts 
of the project and based on the results , form s the basis for the risk categorization and 
the scope for further assessments. Further screening of the supported action measures will be conducted  to specify  both  the environmental and social assessment that will be 
carried out  and the measures to manage the risks. Informed by the environmental and 
social screening, an ESMP will be developed for the activities ; 
(c) The ESMF identified  the anticipated key environmental and social risks and potential 
adverse impacts of the project. Table 6 of the ESMF tabulated the risks and impacts and 
provided some of the measures contemplated to mitigate such risks and impacts. Key 
environmental and social risks and impacts from th e activities include the following:   
(i) Indigenous peoples : the ESMF indicated the presence of indigenous peoples 
populations within the project implementation areas, particularly in the regions of Biobio, Araucania, Los Rios and Los Lagos.  The project does not anticipate 
significant adverse impacts on indigenous pe oples and communities. However, 
some activities, for example those related to land -use planning , may exclude


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 83 
 
 
vulnerable groups, including indigenous peoples. Uncertain land tenure and 
ownership of lands considered as indigenous territories, under tradition al 
ownership or customary use may lead to the exclusion of indigenous peoples from the project benefits or restrict their access to the lands and resources. Loss 
of livelihood and further impoverishment may result from exclusion and failure 
of indigenous p eoples to partake in the project benefits. In addition, there may 
be risks of conflict as regards the  traditional knowledge system and customary 
forest management practices with the introduction of new monitoring 
techniques and processes. The project will undertake further social assessments, 
develop measures to mitigate the potential risks and adverse im pacts and 
conduct informed consultations and participation leading to free, prior and 
informed consent of indigenous peoples consistent with the IPPF for ENCCCRV. 
Among the measures viewed as requiring further detail in the specific ESMP are: 
establishing a process to guarantee the protection of rights to land tenure and 
possession ; recognizing traditional planning ; develop ing and implement ing a 
free, prior and informed consent process in line with the country’s policy 
requirements and the polic ies and stan dard s of the AE ; building the capacity of 
indigenous peoples ; and fully integrat ing traditional practices and local 
knowledge into the REDD -plus strategy action measures;  
(ii) The country formally recognizes indigenous peoples and they are legally 
protected und er Act 19.253 and have  obligations under the ILO Convention 169 , 
which the country ratified and which entered into force in September 2009. The 
AE will work closely with the relevant government agenc ies such as the National 
Indigenous Development Corporati on (CONADI)  which reports to the Ministry of 
Social Development ; this Ministry is the main institution responsible for conflict 
resolution, safeguarding legal and customary rights , advising and assisting 
projects that may affect indigenous population s and for  implementation of the 
consultation process  (mandated by Supreme Decree No. 66 of 2013 of the 
Ministry of Social Development and the Supreme Decree No. 40 of 2013 of the 
Ministry of Environment) . Pursuant to the ILO Convention 169 and the existing 
laws of the country, a process for obtaining free, prior and informed consent 
through dialogues and participation will be undertaken for each action measure that will be implemented. The methodology for dialogue and participation for 
the entire ENCCRV is provid ed in the IPPF ; 
(iii) Land tenure and involuntary resettlement : the project does not foresee adverse 
impacts related to involuntary resettlement and any form of physical 
displacement or dispossession of lands. While the project seeks to promote 
reforestation, la nd restoration, and sustainable management of forest resources, 
the uncertainties related to land ownership and tenure may restrict access of 
small landowners and indigenous peoples to project benefits. Further due 
diligence is necessary as part of the det ailed environmental and social 
assessment of the project to ascertain land tenure and ownership conditions in 
areas where the activities will be implemented. Activities that will lead to 
involuntary resettlement, dispossession of assets and physical displa cement will 
form part of the project’s list of excluded activities. To avoid and/or minimize 
conflicts related to land tenure, the project contemplates work ing closely with 
the relevant agencies to : address legal and policy gaps relevant to the activities 
that limit the participation of vulnerable communities ; implement the free, prior 
and informed consent process ; implement a fair and equitable benefit -sharing 
scheme ; incorporate local norms and practices in the planning and


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 84 
 
 
implementation of the activities ; and enhance inter -institutional coordination on 
issues pertaining to indigenous peoples;  
(iv) Loss of livelihoods : changes in territorial planning to enhance landscape 
restoration, reforestation, and enforcement of protected areas may lead to loss 
of economic opportunities for local communities and actors. W orking closely 
with the government , the project will support the livelihoods and income -
generating activities of lo cal communities that take into consideration the 
balance between productive practices and conservation measures. In addition, economic opportunities and measures will be identified and implemented by the 
government to facilitate access to the project benef its for people working in the 
informal sector. Supporting these initiatives, the project will integrate educational and capacity development measures and promote sustainable forest 
management among affected local populations ; 
(v) Biodiversity and natural habit ats: the screening identified potential risks of 
introducing alien invasive species and the conversion of natural forest lands into 
monoculture forest plantations. The promotion of plantations and the introduction of invasive alien species may reduce natur al forest areas and 
adversely affect ecosystem services and reduce biodiversity. As part of the mitigation measures, the project will prioritize the use of native tree species and 
those that pass through the vetting and assessment processes of CONAF in the  
reforestation and restoration activities. In addition, the project will work to strengthen policies that prioritize biodiversity and forest conservation as well as 
enforce the implementation of such policies to prevent land -use changes and 
conversion of natural forests ; 
(vi) Exacerbation of conflicts : the screening identified potential exacerbation of local 
conflicts between communities and groups due to issues related to  benefit - 
sharing and poor governance. The project will ensure that benefit -sharing 
mechanisms are developed and established following a transparent, auditable, and inclusive process. The design and implementation of activities will 
incorporate local and customary practices to avoid internal conflicts. The 
benefit -sharing mechanism will give  special attention to vulnerable groups such 
as indigenous peoples, women, youth and elderly to avoid further exclusion and 
marginalization. Further, where indigenous peoples and communities may be 
affected, the process of free, prior and informed consent will be undertaken ; 
(vii) Displacement or leakage of emissions : activities designed to reduce 
deforestation in the intervention areas may promote deforestation in other 
areas not addressed by the project. To complement the country’s FREL and 
monitoring , reporting, v erification  (MRV) system to monitor and avoid emission 
displacement and leakage, the project will work with the government to 
strengthen the capacity of stakeholders in areas with weak enforcement and 
governance to avoid illegal and unsustainable forest management practices ; and  
(viii) Excluded activities: t he ESMF provided a list of excluded activities that may 
generate significant environmental and social risks and impacts and raise the 
overall risk category of the project. Activities with non -eligible environme ntal 
aspects include : afforestation with dense monoculture of introduced, fast-
growing , colonizing species;  clone -based forest plantations ; use of 
agrochemicals , including pesticides,  that are not in the authorized products list 
of the government ; conversi on of natural forest cover ; and establishment of 
grazing areas in headwaters of micro -basins and natural slopes. Activities with 
non- eligible social aspects include those that generate significant impacts on


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 85 
 
 
indigenous peoples, in particular where the acti vities lead to disruption of 
cultural practices, physical displacement of indigenous peoples, loss of 
livelihoods, or irreversible effects on resources and cultural and spiritual 
practices. Additional non -eligible  activities are those that may lead to 
involuntary resettlement including direct economic displacement, restriction of 
access to lands and resources, especially lands declared as protected areas ; 
(d) The project builds on the extensive engagement with stakeholder s as part of the 
preparation and imp lementation of the ENCCRV. The ESMF provided the overall 
strategy for engaging identified project stakeholders of ENCCRV. The salient outcomes 
of consultations related to ENCCRV and the proposed REDD -plus RBP are provided in 
the ESMF. The consultations foc used on identifying the drivers of and barriers limiting 
deforestation and forest degradation, environmental and social risks and impacts, and 
actions to avoid and mitigate such risks and impacts. The stakeholder engagement 
strategy also takes into conside ration the dialogue and informed participation of 
indigenous peoples that will form the basis of free, prior and informed consent. The ESMF described the consultation process supporting project implementation, including an update of the stakeholder list an d holding start -up national, regional and field -level 
dialogues. The methodology for stakeholder consultation is provided in the ESMF. A more detailed stakeholder engagement plan will be developed as part of the ESMP that 
will describe the specific engagement and consultation of the various activities. 
Supporting the stakeholder engagement, dissemination and disclosure of relevant 
information will be undertaken following the AE and GCF disclosure procedure. 
Additional disclosure materials such as audio -visu al materials in local languages will be 
utilized to enhance a better understanding of the project ; 
(e) The ESMF described the various levels of GRMs  that can be accessed by aggrieved or 
potentially aggrieved persons. The GRM of the AE is described in the ESMF and the various complaint levels that the GRM is mandated to review. The grievance redress 
system of the government is also described, for example, and complaints are lodged 
through the OIRS of CONAF and other agencies involved in the project. Complaints c an 
also be lodged at the project -level through the project implementation unit (PMU) 
housed at the AE country office. The project coordinator at the PMU will be responsible 
for receiving, recording and facilitating how the grievances will be addressed ; and  
(f) The implementation of the ESMF and the specific ESMP will be under the responsibility of CONAF, particularly the ENCCRV implementation structure. The AE, acting also as an 
EE, exercises oversight to the implementation of ESMF and all the specific safeguar ds 
instruments. Within the CONAF structure, the Climate Change and Environmental 
Services Unit will have the responsibility of performing environmental and social 
assessments, evaluation of safeguards compliance, systemization of safeguard reporting 
follow ing the Safeguards Information System and developing tools and guidance on 
environmental and social management. The Indigenous and Social Affairs unit of CONAF 
will supervise the social safeguards of the project collaborating with the other units of 
CONAF and government agencies. Other support units include the Prosecutor’s Office 
and the Department of Environmental Control and Evaluation. R egional implementation 
teams will be formed to coordinate implementation at the regional and local levels 
together  with relevant government agencies. I mplementation of the detailed ESMP will 
be monitored and reported by field staff and a PMU safeguard specialist in accordance 
with the monitoring plan that will be developed in conjunction with the ESMP. It will be 
importan t to include the specific activities and costs of implementing the mitigation 
measures  as part of the ESMP .


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 86 
 
 
3.2 Gender policy  
41. The AE has submitted a gender assessment; therefore, it complies with the operational 
guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan. The gender assessment discusses gender 
issues at the country level and refers to the policy, legal and institutional framework for 
promoting gender equality in Chile. At the national level the government has established a 
Ministry of Women and Gender  Equality and the National Women Service which provides 
guidelines for gender units of state agencies. The assessment also provides information on gender inequalities as they relate to access to education and health, participation in the labour 
force and u npaid domestic and care work at the national level and in the zones targeted for the 
use of proceeds.  
42. Most of the communities in the prioritized areas of action of ENCCRV live in the rural 
zones and depend on forest resources with men and women having different dependencies on 
natural resources. Men are involved in harvesting timber, including its large -scale trading, while  
women are involved in small -scale trading, medicinal herb gathering and harvesting of non -
timber forest resources. In addition, most l and is owned by men in rural areas for which legal 
regularization is generally limited, especially for women, which in turn limits access to finance from financial institutions. The gender action plan addresses access to project benefits by 
ensuring that p roject activities are designed to allow women to derive value from forest 
resources.  
43. For the period of achieved results, information on gender mainstreaming is mainly 
related to stakeholder engagement during the preparation of ENCCRV. Both women and men, and women leaders from different organizations and small entrepreneurs involved in forestry, 
participated in workshops to discuss the project. Focus group discussion on the formulation and 
validation of ENCCRV, including through sex segregated discussions,  were held. For women, the 
proposed actions gathered during stakeholder engagement exercises include having environmental education as a basic need, sustainable use of water resources, particularly their maintenance and care, and greater institutional pres ence in the territories; actions requested 
from men were technical training for forestry, farming and livestock production and sustainable development of forests to ensure productivity. The use of proceeds responds to requests related 
to accessing informat ion through activities that will be implemented for enabling local 
investments such as training on conservation matters which will have a target of 40 per cent 
women beneficiaries.  
44. The AE has included a programme- level gender action plan. The AE is recommended to 
revise the gender action plan to respond to address the following issues: The action plan 
contains indicators with some sex -disaggregated targets and responsibilities;  however, these 
shall be linked to specific actions. The baselin e has been provided as zero. Gender -responsive 
actions listed in the action plan are activities under the two outputs of the programme for the 
use of proceeds for which the connection to the indicators needs to be  clarified . Where actions 
have been listed, they shall be  aligned to indicators , clarifying to which indicators and targets 
they are related to. For example, the indicator for further gender analyses should be linked to an 
action for conducting gender analyses at the project level rather than an ac tion to prepare 
methodologies for developing projects with gender analysis due to the fact that the indicator 
and target provided is the number of projects that have conducted gender analysis during 
project preparation. Similar revisions are recommended fo r each item included in the gender 
action plan. Responsibilities for implementation have been assigned to CONAF which has 
gender expertise and the AE will maintain oversight in ensuring that the action plan is 
implemented – the AE should ensure that there is dedicated gender expertise in the project 
management unit of the project. There is an indicator in the action plan to train CONAF staff on


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 87 
 
 
gender and climate change; it is recommended that the AE indicates who will be responsible for 
conducting this tra ining given that CONAF itself will be responsible for implementing the gender 
action plan, and what issues the training will address that have been raised in the gender 
assessment.   
45. The project commits to undertake further gender analysis when projects are identified. 
This is a good commitment as undertaking further analysis when specific project activities have 
been identified can result in articulation of gender activities that can address the needs of 
women and men in those specific communities. The AE should aim to have more than one 
project conducting further gender analysis. The AE should also take the opportunity of 
undertaking further gender analyses to indicate how the use of proceeds is going to ensure 
equitable participation and benefits to both w omen and men within the communities. This will 
be complemented by having gender -related objectives, outputs, outcomes, indicators, budget, 
monitoring and evaluation at the project -level – the AE should aim to have all projects 
integrating gender fully by h aving these elements. Regarding activities on training, the AE 
should also assess the utilization of skills acquired in forestry activities by participants besides 
collecting information on the level of confidence of trainees to use the skills and adoption  of 
practices.  
3.3 Risks  
3.3.1.  Overall  program me assessment (medium risk)  
46. Under the pilot programme for REDD -plus RBPs , GCF is requested to provide a payment 
of USD 63,607,55 2 for the ERs achieved by Chile in the period 2014 −2016 . The volume of ERs 
for which GCF funding is sought is within 30  per cent  of the total payable volume as required 
under the T OR of the pilot programme . 
3.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
47. FAO is an AE and has an extensive track recor d in implementation of projects in 
developing countries. The AE is considered a reliable partner to support the REDD -plus project 
in Chile. The AE will also act as an executing entity ( EE) for this project in close coordination 
with CONAF as the technical entity responsible for forest public policies and ENCCRV . 
3.3.3.  Program me-specific execution risks (medium risk)  
48. Risk of double payments . The funding proposal indicates that the ER s submitted to 
GCF are currently not in a national registry, but in an interim tra cking system  
(https://www.enccrv.cl/medicion -y-monitoreo ). Also , the ERs achieved by Chile and submitted 
to the GCF are registered in the Lima REDD+ Information Hub ( https://redd.unfccc.int/info -
hub.html ), allowing the public registry of Chile’s results. The national and public registry is 
being developed and currently being tested. In addition, CONAF has agreed with FCPF that the potential Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement with FCPF will be for mitigation results 
achieved in a period different from that of the ERs being offered under  the GCF project (e.g. from 
2018 to 2025 as against 2014 −2016 for GCF project) to mitigate the risk of double payments.  
49. Use of proceeds . Chile  will use the proceeds from RBP s to support implementation of 
ENCCRV . ENCCRV was proposed as a public policy inst rument developed to comply with the 
national commitments assumed in the Paris Agreement and the consignment of Chile's NDC . 
Thus, the end use is as permitted under  the REDD -plus  TOR. The proposed activities will be


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 88 
 
 
implemented over six years and thus need to be adequately monitored to achieve the desired 
impact . The current plan for use of proceeds is based on the participatory workshops held in the 
five regions  and budget allocation s were evaluated and accepted by the regions together with 
the criteria est ablished for their allocation .  
50. Competing for the carbon ownership: the funding project  states that Chile’s current legal 
framework does not have a definition of ER s and ER ownership. The AE has provided that the 
involvement of CONAF will help mitigate the risk of competing claims to the ERs; CONAF might have bilateral agreements at the regional and local level. However, there may still be some 
residual risk of claim s by third parties to the ERs. Therefore, closer monitoring of the 
arrangement ( bilateral agreements) by CONAF with respect to the ERs is required by the AE 
during implementation. Although the legal framework is yet to be finalized, the AE has informed 
that REDD -plus , forests and climate change have remained as part of a common politi cal agenda 
during last 10 years despite  alternating political parties.  
51. Disbursement plan . The project implementation will be over six  years . Accordingly, it 
is recommended that the disbursement of GCF financing is carried out over the six -year period 
corr esponding to the implementation of the activities.  
3.3.4.  Compliance risk ( medium risk)  
52. As per article 9.03, paragraph (a) of the AMA between FAO and GCF, FAO will apply its 
own fiduciary principles and standards relating to any “know your customer” checks, anti -
corruption, AML/CFT, fraud, financial sanctions and embargoes to comply with the GCF Policy 
on Prohibited Practices. FAO has provided details as to how it will apply those fiduciary 
principles and standards in the implementation of this project. Based on t his additional 
information and the commitment of the AE to ensure that the activities to be undertaken are free from improper activities, Compliance is of the opinion that the proposed strategy and 
policies of the AE to be implemented to prevent ML, TF and  prohibited practices can effectively 
mitigate the risks for ML, TF and prohibited practices to a “medium” level.  
3.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
53. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non -
material an d within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal . 
3.3.6.  Conclusion (medium risk)  
54. It is recommended that any approval by the Board is be  made by considering the  above 
points . 
Summary Risk Assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium  The proposed payment is for emissions 
reduction s already achieved by Chile. The 
accredited entity is also the executing 
entity  under the project and will work in 
close coordination with CONAF . 
The proceeds will be used for investment to support the implementation of the Accredited entity /executing 
entity  capability  Low  
Project specific execution  Medium  
Compliance  Medium


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 89 
 
 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  National Strategy on Climate Change and 
Vegetation Resources at the regional and 
national level s. Close monitor ing is 
required to mitigate the risk of double 
payments and/or competing emission 
reduction ownership . 
3.4 Results monitoring and reporting  
55. Following the requirements of the T OR, the proposal will follow a simplified reporting 
procedure for which a specific template was developed by the secretariat. The frequency of 
reporting will be annual following the accreditation master agreement ( AMA) .  
56. Monitoring the use of proceeds will be conducted at the main activity level according to 
the desc ription provided in the funding proposal.  
3.5 Legal  assessment  
57. The AMA was signed with the AE  on 8 June 2018, and it became effective on 4 October 
2018.  
58. The proposed project will be implemented in Chile, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed. The Secretariat met, during the Global NDA Conference, on 10 October 2018, wi th a 
government official from Chile and provided additional information on the rationale for the 
draft privileges and immunities agreement. However, no response has been received yet.  
59. The heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity  Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that GCF disbursements are made only after GCF 
has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country or has 
been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
IV. List of proposed conditions  
60. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board be  made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 90 
 
 
 
Annex I:  Scorecard (aligned to the funding proposal template structure)  
 
Section A: Proposed and projected REDD- plus results  
Criteria  Status 
(Yes/No)  Remarks  
Does the total volume of achieved results indicated in the proposal 
match the results indicated in the biennial update report (BUR) 
during the results period (31 December 2013 to 31 December 2018)?  Yes The total volume of results achieved during the period 2014 −2016 is 
18.409.425 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq).  
Is the volume of achieved results offered to the pilot programme 
equal to or less than the total volume of achieved results indicated in 
the BUR during the results period?  Yes The total volume of REDD -plus  results offered to the GCF pilot 
programme is 14.530.220 tCO 2eq. Only the volume for 2014 −2016 is 
offered to GCF and meets the eligible period.  
Is the expected volume of REDD -plus results to be achieved significant 
compared to the overall level of REDD -plus results achieved in the 
current funding proposal being submitted?  Yes According to the  Funding Proposal, t he expected volume of REDD -
plus  results to be achieved for the period 2017 −2018 is 6.136.475 
tCO2eq . The results to be achieved in the years of 2017 and 2018 
have not been measured yet and Chile has scheduled the second 
milestone of monitoring for 2021 in  order to measure the results for 
2018 and 2019 against the current FREL/FRL assessed by the 
UNFCCC.  Following the submission with the E mission Reduction 
Programme Document, Chile started the negotiation of an E mission 
Reduction Programme Agreement  with the Carbon Fund, therefore 
the indicative results to be achieved for the period 2017 −2018 will 
not be considered in the following years of the eligibility period of 
GCF pilot program me for receiving payments . 
Is the total volume expected to be submitted to the pilot programme 
within the available allocation of funding for the pilot programme and 
below the c ap per country?  Yes The proposed volume falls within the available allocation of funding 
and remains below the cap per country.  
Section B:   Carbon elements  
B.1. Forest reference emission level/forest reference level (FREL/FRL)  
Criteria  Score  Remarks


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 91 
 
 
(i) Is the FREL/FRL consistent with the greenhouse gas (GHG) 
inventory, including the definition of forest used?  1 Chile noted in its modified submission that there is close consistency 
between its proposed FRELs and FRLs and its national GHG 
inventory, but where there were differences, Chile provided the 
rationale for these differences between both estimations.  
The assessment team (AT) noted that the average emissions from 
deforestation and degradation in the modified submission are 
significantly different to those included in the national GHG 
inventory for the same period (2001 −2010).  The AT acknowledges 
the explanations provided, indicating that some differences between 
the FRELs and FRLs and the national GHG inventory are justified. 
Chile als o explained that it will modify the methodology to be used in 
its future national GHG inventory in order to maintain consistency 
with its future submissions of proposed FRELs/FRLs.  
The Technical Assessment Report (TAR) concludes the FRELs and 
FRLs in the modified submission maintain consistency, in terms of 
sources for the Activity Data (AD) and Emission Factors (ES), with 
the GHG inventory included in Chile’s first BUR. In the cases in which 
there was no consistency between the FRELs and FRLs and the BUR, 
the reasons provided by Chile were explained well and the AT 
considers that the differences are well justified. Overall, the AT 
commends Chile for the improvements in the modified submission 
and notes that Chile could consider including the indicated 
improvements in the next GHG inventory submission.  
Regarding the forest definition, the FREL/FRL uses a different 
definition from the GHG inventory, as the FREL/FRL excluded 
planted forests and considered only native forests. Chile indicated 
that new plant ed forests will be included in the FREL if they are 
destined for permanent cover and are consistent with the goals set 
by the nationally determined contributions under the Paris 
Agreement.  
(ii) Is the FREL/FRL based on historical data and is it equal to or 
below the average annual historical emissions during the reference 
period, unless a country is a  high forest, low deforestation  (HFLD ) 
country?  2 Chile is not a HFLD country. The subnational FREL/FRL is based on 
an annual average emissions/removals of  CO 2. The submission of the 
modified FREL/FRL considered two reference periods using 
interpolation methods: 2001 −2013 for activities and subactivities 
related to land use change, and 2001 −2010 for activities or 
subactivities that occurred in permanent fore st. The AT considers


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 92 
 
 
that future submissions could be based upon a single common 
reference period for all selected activities.  
(iii) Is the FREL/FRL in accordance with the guidelines in decision 
12/CP.17?  2 The assessment team notes that the data and in formation used by 
Chile in constructing its FREL/FRL are transparent and complete and 
are in overall accordance with the guidelines contained in the annex 
to decision 12/CP.17. The AT commends Chile for the information 
provided on the ongoing work relating  to the development of 
FRELs/FRLs for other activities, as well as for other biomes as steps 
towards a national level FREL/FRL.  
(iv) Are the data and information provided for the FREL/FRL 
transparent? (Has information been provided to allow an 
understandi ng of how UNFCCC guidance on submission of 
information on reference levels has been addressed?)  2 The AT notes that the transparency and completeness of information 
improved significantly in the modified FREL/FRL submission and 
commends Chile for providing additional data and information that 
increased the transparency of its submission and facilitated the work 
of the AT in technically assessing the submission (thus improving the 
reproducibility of the calculations).  
The funding proposal indicates that for further improving the 
transparency of the construction of the FREL/FRL, Chile is 
developing an integrated platform that allows the storage and 
dissemination of the spatial and database information, together with 
the semi- automated generation of re ports and the visualization of 
results. This was also included in the technical assessment  report as 
one of the main areas that Chile plans to address in future 
FREL/FRLs.  
It is therefore considered that the issues raised by the AT were 
resolved with the modified FREL/FRL and the country has indicated 
how to continue increasing transparency through the 
platform/portal.  
(v) Is the FREL/FRL complete? (Has information been provided that 
allows for the reconstruction of the FREL/FRL?)  2 The AT concluded tha t the information is complete in the modified 
FREL/FRL submission. The TAR  did not present relevant issues that 
were not addressed and solved to fulfil the completeness of the 
FREL/FRL.  
(vi) Is the FREL/FRL consistent? (Were data and methodologies 
applied consistently over the time series used for the construction of 
the FREL/FRL?)  1  For the FREL/FRL construction, Chile applied a methodology based 
on the activity data extracted from the historical series included in 
the land use Cad astre made by the National Forestry Corporation  
(1997−2012). Since the Cadastre has a database with different base 
years for Chilean regions, the information was complemented with a


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 93 
 
 
Landsat data set. Chile acknowledged that the differences in dates of 
the maps produce differences in estimates of annual emissions as the 
oldest maps in the Land Registry used mosaics of aerial images from 
various years. The AT notes that Chile could ensure more consistent 
time series by using the same satellite data sources (e.g. from 
Landsat or RapidEye) to ensure the consistenc y of AD (in spatial and 
temporal resolution) applied in estimates.  
The funding proposal indicates that Chile has considered this 
recommendation and new maps of land use and land use change are 
being developed using Landsat data only.  
It is also noted that Chile presented a modified submission with two 
reference periods using interpolation methods: (1) 2001 –2013 for 
activities and subactivities that cause a land -use change; and (2) 
2001 –2010 for activities that occur in forests remaining forests. The 
AT ackn owledged the difficulties involved in standardizing the 
historical reference period based on the available information but 
considers that future submissions could be based upon a single 
common reference period for all selected activities . 
(vii) Is the FRE L/FRL accurate? (The data and methodologies used 
neither over - nor under- estimate emissions and/or removals during 
the reference period, so far as can be judged.)   
2 During the technical assessment process, t he proposed FREL/FRL 
was modified significantl y because of changes introduced in the 
reference periods and other methodological changes. The TA did not 
identify incidents of over - or underestimations in the modified 
proposed FREL/FRL. The AT also notes that the FRELs/FRLs 
represent an improvement in t erms of the use of higher -tier methods 
compared to Chile’s first BUR, leading to increased accuracy of 
emission and removal estimates.  
(viii) Have all REDD -plus activities that are significant sources of 
emissions been included?   
2 The activities included in Chile’s FREL/FRL are reduced emissions 
from deforestation, reduced emissions from degradation, forest 
conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks. All but 
sustainable forest management activities referred to in decision 
1/CP .16, paragraph 70 have been included. S ustainable forest 
management was not explicitly included due to the lack of spatially 
explicit information necessary for its quantification. However, Chile 
decided to include the carbon stock changes owing to sustaina ble 
management of forests under the activities reducing emissions from  
forest degradation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 94 
 
 
Chile plans to address in future FREL/FRL the inclusion of new 
activities: the development of management plans based on spatially 
explicit information that would allow the inclusion of other activities 
such as sustainable management of forests and activities that 
normally occur at farm level of 10 ha or less.  
(ix) Have all of the most significant pools been included?  
 
  
2 In the modified submission, above -ground and below -ground 
biomass pools were included in all four activities, while dead organic 
matter was included in three of the four activities (except 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks). Soil organic carbon ( SOC ) was 
excluded because of the lack of national information on the rate of 
change in this pool and to ensure that consistency is maintained with 
the national GHG inventory . 
The AT notes that changes in SOC could be significant when forest 
land is converted t o other land uses (e.g. deforestation) but the 
exclusion of SOC in the case of the activity enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks could be conservative, because this pool is not 
expected to decrease in this activity. The AT commends Chile for its 
efforts to obtain better information on dead organic matter  and SOC 
with the aim of including these carbon pools as part of a stepwise 
approach in future submissions or to exclude them if there is 
evidence that changes are not significant.  
In the f unding proposal it is indicated that continuous efforts are 
underway in order to include emissions factors and activity data 
related to SOC fluxes.  
In relation to significance, the funding proposal provides an 
estimation of the significance of the SOC pool emissions due to 
deforestation using Tier 1 methodology which determined that 
emissions from SOC were 128,005 tCO2e/year, compared with the 
1,653,819 tCO2e/year emitted from the living biomass and dead 
organic matter pools representing 7.7 % of the total emissions.  
(x) Have all gases that are a significant source of emissions been 
included?   
2 Regarding the inclusion of GHGs, the FRELs and FRLs include CO 2 
emissions and removals in the four selected activities, as 
appropriate, and include the estimation of non -CO 2 emissions 
(methane  and nitrous oxide ) from forest fires, which is considered a 
subactivity under the activity reducing emissions from forest 
degr adation. The AT commends Chile for its efforts to include non -


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 95 
 
 
CO2 gases using the appropriate equations from the 2006 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) Guidelines and 
no significant exclusion is identified, because methane and nitrous 
oxide  from forest fires are taken into account.  
(xi) Is the information provided in the construction of the FREL/FRL 
(data, methodologies and estimates) guided by the most recent 
applicable IPCC guidance and guidelines as adopted by the Conference 
of the Parties?   
2 Chile used the most recent guidance and guidelines provided in the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as a 
basis for estimating annual changes in carbon stocks and non -CO 2 
emissions of the four activities.  
(xii) Hav e any significant issues related to the application of IPCC 
GLs/GPGs been raised in the TA report?   
2 No significant issues were raised.  
(xiii) What is the reference period for the FREL/FRL?   
2 The subnational REFL/RFL presented by Chile considers two 
reference periods that use different interpolation methods: (i) 
2001−2013 (13 years) and (ii) 2001 −2010 (10 years).  
(xiv) How does the reference level for the results included in the 
proposal compare to the previous reference level that applies to the 
same area?   
1 No previous FREL has been submitted.  
(xv) Has the country provided information on aggregate uncertainties, 
taking into account national capabilities and circumstances?   
1 The FREL/FRL submitted by Chile presents an aggregated 
uncertainty of 33.29 %. Uncertainty was estimated for each source of 
emissions or carbon sink and for each individual activity and then 
propagated using the method described in equations 3.1 and 3.2 of 
the IPCC (2006).  
The AT notes that detailed information on uncertainty assessment 
has been provided and commends Chile for its efforts on including 
this uncertainty analysis in its submission.  
B.2. REDD -plus results reporting  
Criteria  Score  Remarks  
(i) Are the reported results in the technical annex to the BUR 
consistent with the FREL/FRL (including the same pools, activities 
and gases)?   
2 The Technical Analysis of the Technical Report (TATR) concludes 
that the results presented are consistent, to the extent possible and 
according to its current national capacities and capabilities, with the 
assessed FREL/FRLs. This is considering that Chile used a different 
method for monitoring AD in the submission of the REDD -plus  
results under the technical annex. The TATR also conclud es that


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 96 
 
 
Chile ensured overall consistency between its assessed FREL/FRLs 
and its estimation of the results of the implementation of its REDD -
plus  activities through including the same carbon pools, the same 
gases, and the same area.  
(ii) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
transparent? (Has information been provided to allow an 
understanding of how UNFCCC guidance on results reporting has 
been addressed?)   
1 The Land Use, Land  Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) experts note 
that the data and information used by Chile in constructing its FREL 
are transparent and complete. However, the LULUCF experts noted 
that Chile’s technical annex does not include sufficient information to 
allow  an assessment of consistency with the data used in the latest 
GHG inventory (2016).  
(iii) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
complete? (Has information been provided that allows for the 
reconstruction of the results?)   
2 The LULUCF experts note that the data and information used for 
constructing the FREL are complete. No significant issues were 
raised, and the technical team of e xperts was able to reproduce the 
same results presented by Chile in all of the REDD -plus  activities.  
(iv) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
consistent? (Were data and methodologies applied consistently over 
the results time series?)  
 2 The LULUCF experts conclude that the data and information 
provided are considered to be consistent to the extent possible, given 
current national capacities and capabilities; also acknowledging that 
this is an area for future technical improvement when dev eloping the 
next FREL/FRLs.  
(v) Are the data and information provided in the technical annex 
accurate? (Does the annex neither over - nor under- estimate 
emissions and/or removals?)   
1 The TATR indicates that the data and information provided in the 
techn ical annex is accurate to the extent possible. The LULUCF 
experts are of the view that Chile may be underestimating Activity 
Data (AD) by using coarser -resolution satellite data (i.e. 30 m 
Landsat images) and pixel- based land -use change classifications for 
the results period while using higher resolution data (i.e. 5 m 
RapidEye and Spot images) with visual interpretation to estimate 
emissions for the FRELs/FRLs. The co arser pixels used for the results 
period may register a land -use change (e.g. forest to non -forest) 
depending on the thresholds chosen for the spectral indices and may 
indicate fewer areas compared with the high -resolution images.  
(vi) How many years are there between the last year of the FREL 
period, and the year corresponding to the results being proposed for 
payments?   
2 The last year of the FREL period is 2013, and the first year of the 
results being proposed for results -based payments is 2014.  
(vii) Has the country provided information on aggregate 
uncertainties, considering national capabilities and circumstances?   
1 The funding proposal does contain information on the aggregate 
uncertainties and an aggregate uncertainty estimate of 38.68% was 
obtained for the results period. The uncertainty calculation was


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 97 
 
 
presented separately by activity, subactivity, carbon pool and region, 
including th e parameters used to estimate emissions and removals of 
carbon pools. The LULUCF experts noted that, as part of the TA 
process, Chile provided additional information, in particular, the 
calculation worksheets for the uncertainty analysis; commending 
Chile for its efforts to increase the transparency and ensure the 
completeness of the data and information provided, allowing for the 
reconstruction of the results.  
(viii) Has information been provided on payments that have been (or 
are expected to be) received  from other sources for results recognized 
by the countrya from the same national or subnational area during the 
period for which a country is proposing to receive payments from 
GCF? And has the country provided sufficient assurance that results 
already paid for by other sources have been excluded from the total 
volume offered to GCF?   
2 An agreement with Forest Carbon Partnership Facility’s  Carbon Fund 
is in place for considering the results post 2017. The Emission 
Reductions Payment Agreement (ERPA)  considers the same area 
(regions) as the GCF results- based payments but differentiated time 
periods. There are two recorded private initiatives that matched the 
period and area considered for GCF results -based payments and 
these have been excluded from the total volume offered to GCF.   
(ix) Are the results proposed to GCF for payment included in a 
registry or similar system, that tracks emission reductions and 
corresponding paymentsb to ensure there is no past or future double 
payment (or use) of such emissions reduction?   
2 GCF are currently not in a national registry, but in an interim 
tracking system ( https://www.enccrv.cl/medicion -y-monitoreo ). 
Also, the ERs achieved by Chile and submitted to the GCF are 
registered in the Lima REDD+ Information Hub 
(https://redd.unfccc.int/info- hub.html ), allowing the public registry 
of Chile’s results. The national and public registry is being developed 
and currently being tested.  
Total score section B  41  
Any fails  ☐ Yes  ☒ No  
a Through the REDD -plus national entity or focal point, where appointed.  
b For each of these results, tracking information should identify (at a minimum) the corresponding national or subnational area , the entity eligible to receive 
payment, the year generated, and the source of results -based payments received and, where possible, the identifying number.  
 
Section C:  Non -carbon elements  
C.1. Cancun Safeguards


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 98 
 
 
Does the summary of information on safeguards provide information on how each of the safeguards below were addressed and respected in a way that ensures 
transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness?  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
(i) That actions complement or are consistent with the objectives of 
national forest programmes and relevant international conventions 
and agreements.  Pass  The actions complement and are consistent with the objectives of the  
National Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources  
(ENCCRV ), the national climate change and forest strategy, the 
nationally determined contribution ( NDC ) and other international 
agreements and conventions. The actions are also consistent with 
national regulatory and policy frameworks  such as the Forest Pol icy. 
It is desirable to determine the challenges and needs associated with 
implementation of ENCCRV and to identify capacities and additional 
resources required to institutionalize consistent processes. For 
reporting on this safeguard, it will be important to keep updated any 
specific analysis of alignment and compatibility of ENCCRV with 
policies, regulations and laws on future forestry issues and 
sustainable development, including reporting on NDC progress and 
achievements.  
(ii) Transparent and effective national forest governance structures, 
taking into account national legislation and sovereignty.  Pass  • Increasing clarification and strengthening internal 
governance structures for rights holders involved in 
REDD- plus  implementation will be crit ically important, as 
this will involve more local actors (communities, ethnic 
groups, etc.) in REDD- plus  action planning. Although the 
forest governance structure has been defined and the 
Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit  (UCCSA , 
Spanish acronym ) and Inter- ministerial Technical 
Committee on Climate Change  (CTICC , f Spanish  
acronym ) play an important  role for REDD- plus  
implementation, they should ensure representativeness  
and legitimacy. It is recommended to ensure vertical 
coordination among governmental bodies, from national 
to local (communities) levels.  
• Information mechanisms that promote transparency of 
the operat ional and financial management of REDD- plus  
need to be strengthened, including those related to the


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 99 
 
 
distribution of REDD -plus  resources through the benefit -
sharing mechanism. This includes ways to validate and 
disburse progress reports on REDD- plus  impleme ntation 
activities. This will require strengthening and updating 
processes that allow for efficient compilation of 
information on safeguards, as well as information 
generated from implementation of ENCCRV. Many lessons 
learn ed from the pilot projects under  ENCCRV could 
serve for retrieving lessons learned on how to strengthen 
forest governance. The website created and updated 
regularly in both languages (Spanish and English) serves 
to increase transparency and validation of progress 
made.  
• Inter- agency (inte r-institutional) links should be 
strengthened to enable better coordination and 
institutionalization of REDD -plus  activities across  the 
Government. This may involve training institutional staff 
and local stakeholders to improve capacity of technical 
teams supporting REDD- plus  initiatives beyond the 
National Forestry Corporation (CONAF)  and even beyond 
the CONAF Climate Change and Environmen tal Services 
Unit (UCCSA).  
• The developed Mechanism of Claims and Suggestions of 
ENCCRV is an important measure and mechanism to 
ensure compliance with this safeguard. It would be 
important to register not only effectiveness in responding 
to queries and req uests, but also to actual action in 
attending to those queries, as well as informing 
adequately.  
(iii) Respect for the knowledge and rights of indigenous peoples and 
members of local communities, by taking into account relevant 
international obligations,  national circumstances and laws, and noting 
that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted the United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  Pass  • Chile relies on existing policies to respect this safeguard. 
An important piece of the legal architecture is the policy 
to promote e quity and s ocial inclusion, that seeks to 
respect the tradition and culture of the peasant and 
indigenous communities that depend on forests. Specific


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 100 
 
 
land use planning and management tools embedding 
ethnical and cultural specificities have been considered 
and developed. ENCCRV was developed under a 
participatory process including i ndigenous peoples and 
vulnerable populations. These processes have been 
registered, systematized and included for public access in 
the ENCCRV platform.  
• It is recommended that systematic approaches for 
fostering dialogue and engagement with indigenous 
peoples and other vulnerable communities are 
streng thened. Culturally appropriate processes should be 
considered to ensure involvement of these stakeholders 
in decision -making processes around REDD- plus  
activities – including strengthening existing processes for 
protection of their lands and resources , including use and 
access.  
• The proposed benefit -sharing mechanism should ensure 
that these stakeholders are fully informed and with the 
capacities to access new resources derived from the 
results achieved and performance. It will also be 
important to consider t ailor -made training programmes 
and improved information dissemination regarding 
financial agreements.  
• All communication and engagement processes, as well as 
training and capacity -building programmes, should be 
culturally and linguistically relevant t o the local 
populations.  
• Design and implementation of any REDD- plus  activities 
should ensure the collective rights of stakeholders, taking 
into account differences in social organization, decision -
making norms, governance structures and ethnic 
identities.


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 101 
 
 
• REDD -plus  activities should ensure that intellectual 
property rights are recognized, and they should fully 
respect traditional knowledge.  
• Tools and processes for gathering data on the 
participation of indigenous peoples and other local 
stakeholders should be developed. They should include 
their comments and concerns, and how those concerns 
are or will be addressed.  
(iv) The full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in 
particular indigenous peoples and local communities, in the actions 
referred to in paragraphs 70 and 72 of decision B.18/07  Pass  • This safeguard is respected by ensuring the full and 
effective participation of indigenous peoples and women 
in the development and implementation of ENCCRV.  
• In the context of the preparation of the funding proposal 
and ENCCRV, the Government undertook a highly 
consultative process with relevant stakeholders, 
including indigenous peoples and relevant stakeholders. 
Evidence on this process was provided in an annex as 
part of the funding proposal .  
• The environmental and social management framework 
(ESMF) describes the process of screening of the projects 
and considerations for planning and managing risks and 
impacts, including impacts on indigenous peoples.  
• It is recommended to strengthen mechanisms and forms 
of participation that promote generational approac hes, 
emphasizing culturally appropriate engagement with 
local stakeholders.  
• The implementation of REDD -plus  activities could be 
linked to existing participation spaces at national and 
local levels, to strengthen opportunities for dialogue, 
deliberation an d monitoring activities using already 
institutionalized and legitimized platforms and spaces.  
(v) That actions are consistent with the conservation of natural 
forests and biological diversity, ensuring that the actions referred to 
in paragraph 70 of deci sion B.18/07 are not used for the conversion of 
natural forests, but are instead used to incentivize the protection and Pass  • Chile unders tands this safeguard when referring to the 
prevention of ENCCRV action measures from promoting 
the conversion of native vegetation resources. It also


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 102 
 
 
conservation of natural forests and their ecosystem services, and to 
enhance other social and environmental benefits.  includes the measures to promote the protection and 
conservation of native vegetation to favou r ecosystem 
services provision and maintenance as well as the co -
benefits that these generate. These actions are considered 
as part of ENCCRV.  
• Research efforts could be strengthened to better understand the 
existence and permanence of forest resources and biological 
diversity, ecosystem services and the risks associated with loss or 
change in that diversity. Additional understanding about climate 
change impacts on vegetational resources is needed, especially in 
relation to subtropical and mountain ecosystems in Chile.  
• Continued allocation of resources is necessary for periodic 
monitoring of changes in relation to the conditions of ecosystem 
services, so appropriate decisions and actions can be 
implemented. These resources should in turn strengthen 
institutionalization (at all levels of management and decision -
making) of the National Forest Monitoring System.  
• It is important to develop strategies for managing stakeholder 
expectations involving potential economic and non -economic 
benefits on REDD- plus  related interventions. Lessons learned 
from projects being implemented at jurisdictional level as part of 
ENCCRV  could serve to inform these strategies. Not only CONAF 
but other governmental entities would need to continue to 
identify interests, expectations and opportunities for co- benefits, 
as well as define participatory measures and REDD- plus  
interventions.  
• CONA F, in coordination with the Forestry Institute and other 
agencies would need to explore avenues for strengthening 
relationships and partnerships with research institutes, 
universities, nongovernmental organizations or other actors that 
can collect and comp ile data and information on relevant 
environmental matters. Such institutions can be sources of 
trusted, third- party information. They can serve as contributors of 
information for the summary of information  (SOI) on safeguards


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 103 
 
 
for subsequent REDD -plus proj ects and provide analyses on non -
conversion of natural forests.  It is of particular interest the role 
private companies related to the forestry sector could have in 
promoting research and development in this matter.  
(vi) Actions to address the risks of reversals.  Pass  • To address this safeguard, the procedure established in the 
document “Guidelines for buffering the ER Programme ” of the 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  was applied. In particular 
forest fires are one of the main causes of degradation of vegetation 
resources in Chile.  
• To address the challenge of aligning and managing the various 
tools that guide implementation of REDD- plus  (including tools 
used by implem enting partners to identify and address risks of 
reversals) it will be important to strengthen the technical capacity 
of CONAF staff, so they can better promote and follow through on 
execution of critical REDD- plus  measures.  
• It will also be important to u pdate risk -identification processes, as 
well as the justification for risk categorization, including threats 
and changes in the behavio ur of drivers of deforestation and 
forest degradation (i.e. agricultural activities, forest industry, etc.), 
that could threaten the long -term viability of REDD- plus  projects.  
• CONAF and the accredited entity could continue to support efforts 
to promote ownership and participation by relevant stakeholders, 
including capacity and incentives programmes, and generally 
enforcing policies aimed at good governance on forest 
conservation.  
(vii) Actions to reduce displacement of emissions.  Pass  • Adequate forest control and monitoring of natural resources 
requires tools and verifiable criteria, and strong coordination 
between forest control and forest monitoring systems. ENCCRV 
identifies displacement risks, which relate to the most relevant 
drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. It would be 
important to link these efforts to the national cadaster system and 
to any risk related to land tenure.  
• Once the implementation of REDD- plus  actions begin, it will be 
important to determine the necess ary resources and processes for


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 104 
 
 
updating at the national level information on the causes, risks and 
threats of deforestation and forest degradation. This should 
include resources for capacity -building for gathering and updating 
the information. This should  also be reflected in any update 
process of ENCCRV following an adaptive management approach.  
• It will be important to strengthen enforcement of the legal and 
political framework with respect to land rights and territories.  
• It is essential to consider the contributions of community or local 
monitoring systems as sources of information that feed national 
environmental information systems. This will require identifying 
needs and implementing efforts to strengthen community 
monitoring systems.  
C.2. Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
Has information been provided on how proceeds will be used in a 
manner consistent with GCF policies? Has information been provided 
on how the proceeds will be used in a manner consistent with the 
country’s NDC, national REDD -plus strategy and/or low carbon 
development plans and policies? Has information been provided on 
how the proceeds will be used in a manner that contributes to the 
long -term sustainability of REDD -plus activities, including non -carbon 
benefits?   
2 • There is a clear description of how the proceeds will be used to 
reinvest the resources through the two outputs proposed in the 
funding proposal and for contributing to implement the ENCCRV. 
The benefit -sharing mechanism will be key to ensure the financial 
sustainability of the proposal. The linkages with the expected 
resources from the Carbon Fund are well described and 
complementarity is explained and expected to occur.  
• The outputs and outcomes are very well described and are fully in 
line with ENCCRV an d Chile’s NDC, especially with respect to the 
targets on restoration and afforestation.  
• The proposal provides an overall description of the 
implementation arrangements. The role of the AE and EE, as well 
as the role of CONAF are well explained. However, t here needs to 
be clarity on the governance structure, especially in regard to the 
role of the Inter -ministerial Technical Committee on Climate 
Change.  
• Section C.2.6 of the funding proposal provides sufficiently detailed 
information and descriptions of the non-carbon benefits.


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 105 
 
 
Total score section C  2  
Any fails  ☐ Yes  ☒ No  
 
Section D:  Investment framework  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(High/Medium/Low)  Remarks  
Impact potential  High  
 ☒ The relevant mitigation and/or adaptation impact is specified.  
☒ The GCF core indicators (and other indicators) are provided with specific values.  
☒ Methodologies provided for calculating non -GHG indicators are clear and robust.  
☒ The proposal compa res the indicator values against appropriate benchmarks to 
demonstrate the impact potential.  
Paradigm shift potential  
 High  
 The proposal clearly:  
☒ describes the potential for scaling up to the country’s nationally determined 
contribution , national REDD -plus strategy and/or low -carbon development plans and 
policies.  
☒ explains how the programme contributes to strengthening knowledge and learning.  
☒ describes how proposed measures will create an enabling environment and contribute 
to innovation, market development and transformation.  
☒ explains how the programme strengthens the regulatory framework and policies.  
☒ demonstrates paradigm shift potential for catalysing impact beyond a one -off payment.  
Sustainable development potential 
 High  
 ☒ The proposal demonstrates environmental, social and economic impact, including the 
gender -sensitive development impact.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 106 
 
 
Needs of the recipient  
 High  
 The proposal clearly:  
☒ describes the degree of vulnerability of country/population and demonstrate s that the 
programme addresses the issues.   
☒ explains in detail how the programme addresses financial, economic, social and 
institutional needs.  
Country ownership  
 High  
 The proposal:  
☒ sufficiently explains how the programme contributes to a national climate strategy 
and/or policies.  
☒ specifies in detail how the multi- stakeholder consultation was conducted.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness  High  The proposal:  
☒ clearly describes adequateness of the financial structure for cost -effectiveness and 
efficiency.  
☒ provides information on financial viability in the long run.  
☒ explains in detail the application of best practices and the degree of innovation.  
 
Section E:   GCF policies  
For the period of the results considered in the request for proposal  
Criteria  Evaluation (Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS)  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in an environmental and social 
assessment report describing the extent to which the measures undertaken to identify, 
assess and manage environmental and social risks and impacts, in the context of the 
REDD- plus  proposal, were consistent with the requirements of the applicable GCF ESS 
standards.


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 107 
 
 
Risk assessment  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided that allows for an assessment of the 
historical performance of the activities undertaken (track record) against the risk 
tolerance levels specified in the risk appetite statement and the criteria (where 
applica ble) outlined in the risk guidelines for funding proposals.  
Gender  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in the assessment describing the extent 
to which the measures undertaken complied with GCF Gender P olicy.  
Interim policy on prohibited 
practices  Pass  ☒ Appropriate and sufficient information provided in a due diligence report to 
demonstrate that no prohibited practices occurred during the implementation of the 
activities that lead to the REDD -plus results, such as undisclosed prohibited practices, 
includ ing money laundering and the financing of terrorism, occurred during the 
implementation of results -based actions; and double payment or financing for the same 
results achieved.  
For the use of proceeds  
Criteria  Evaluation (Pass/Fail)  Remarks  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS)  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided in an environmental and social 
management framework that will describe how environmental and social risks and 
impacts will be identified, assessed and managed  in a manner consistent with ESS 
standards of GCF, including the determination of the relevant environmental and social 
risk category of the proposed activities.  
Risk assessment  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided  that details how the plan for use of 
proceeds does not violate the risk tolerance levels specified in the risk appetite statement 
and allows for performance monitoring and evaluation against the criteria (where 
applicable) outlined in the risk guidelines for funding propos als. 
Gender  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided  on how the accredited entity will 
undertake an activity -level gender assessment and action plan once the details of the 
activities become known.  
Monitoring and evaluation  Pass  ☒ Adeq uate and sufficient information provided  on how the activities to be undertaken 
with GCF proceeds comply with the GCF monitoring and accountability framework.


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 108 
 
 
Interim policy on prohibited 
practices  Pass  ☒ Appropriate and sufficient information provided that assures the activities with use of 
proceeds will follow the interim policy on prohibited practices, such as: undisclosed 
prohibited practices, including money laundering and the financing of terrorism; 
improper subsequent use of GCF proceeds in the prohibited practices; and double 
payment or financing for the same results achieved, etc.  
Indigenous people’ s policy  Pass  ☒ Adequate and sufficient information provided on how the activities will meet th e 
requirements of the policy and guided by the prevailing relevant national laws and/or 
obligations of the countries directly applicable to the activities under relevant 
international treaties and agreements.  
Section F:  GCF legal arrangements  
E.6.1. Legal title to REDD -plus results  
Requirement  Remarks  Status 
(Complete/Pending)  
☒ Analysis with respect to legal title to REDD -plus results in the 
country is provided. It includes an analysis of entitlement to claim 
for the results to be paid for by GCF.  
 Based on current legislation of Chile, national assets whose 
use does not generally belong to the people, are called State 
assets or fiscal assets (article 589 of the civil code). Such 
goods, especially if derived from nature, cannot be owned by private entities. Moreover, it has been identified that it is 
difficult to determine the or igin and holders of emission 
reductions ( ERs). To covenant that no other party has a 
competing claim to the results proposed to GCF, Chile proposes to implement an equitable benefit- sharing 
mechanism, fully described in the funding proposal , and 
detailed arrangements are presented under the benefit -
sharing plan in order to clarify how the REDD- plus  benefits 
will be equally distributed among the beneficiaries  that 
have contributed to generating such payments.  
 
 
Regarding use of the ERs, these will be used towards 
achievement of Chile’s nationally deter mined contribution . 
As such, the results achieved during the reference period 
(2014 –2016) will be accounted against the nationally 
determined contribution to implement the ENCCRV and its  
Complete


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.06  
Page 109 
 
 
benefit -sharing distribution plan, and the crediting will be 
register ed at national level.  
☒ A covenant provided that no other party has a competing claim 
to the results proposed to GCF in accordance with national policy, 
legal or regulatory frameworks.  A covenant is included in the term sheet.   
Complete  
Section G: Accredited entity fee  
Requirement  Remarks  Status 
(Complete/Pending)  
Is the proposed list of activities clearly specified and justifiable as 
part of the accredited entity ( AE) fee?  Yes, the accredited entity fee includes properly justified 
information on the use of the expected fees by the AE . Complete  
Is the fee amount considered reasonable and justifiable?  The agreed amount was 3.5%  which is reasonable 
considering the nature of this results -based payments 
proposal which requires fewer responsibilities from the AE 
to GCF and a simplified reporting. However, it is also 
acknowledged that the AE will need to implement 
additional activiti es specific to REDD -plus . Complete  
Is the proposed list of activities justifiable as part of the project 
management cost (PMC)?  The proposed activities included in the PMC seem 
reasonable.  Complete  
Is the PMC amount considered adequate and justifiable?  Although the PMC costs seem significantly high compared 
to other projects with similar activities, the amount was 
defined in agreement between the host country and the AE, 
considering that the PMC costs are included within the 
payments provide d to the host country . Complete


---
*Page 110*
---

G
CF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 110 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP120 
Proposal name:  Chile REDD- plus results -based payments for results period 
2014 -2016  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Project/programme size: Medium  
I. Scorecard application
1. The independent  Technical  Advisory Panel ( iTAP), with the support of a L and Use, Land-
Use Change and F orestry ( LULUCF) expert selected from the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) roster of experts and with experience in REDD -plus
assessment and analysis, assessed the proposal “Chile REDD -plus Results -Based Payments for
Results Period 2014–2016 ” using the scorecard inclu ded in the terms of reference for the
REDD -plus results -based payments  (RBP)  pilot programme.
1.1 Summary of scorecard results  
Scorecard s ection  Results  
Carbon elements Score: 41 All criteria “pass” 
Non -carbon 
elements  Cancun safeguards  All criteria “pass” 
Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits Score: 2 
2. Based on the  above results  and fo llowing the terms of reference procedures , the iTAP
recommends that the Board consider the following:
(a) GCF volume of emission reduct ions: 12.411.229.6 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent
(tCO 2eq);
(b) Additional 2.5 per cent for use of proceeds and non -carbon elements ; and
(c) Proposed REDD -plus RBP  (USD  5/tCO 2eq): USD 63,6 07,552 .
II. Main findings
3. The following paragr aphs describe the main findings on those sections of the scorecard
where the assessment was found to be lower than the maximum score for each criterion  (see
d
etails in annex) :
(a) B.1.(i) Consistency between the forest reference emissions level/forest referenc e
level  (FR
EL/FRL) and the greenhouse gas ( GHG ) inventory : the Assessment Tea m
(AT) n
oted that the average emissions from deforestation and degradation in th e
mo
dified submission are significantly different to those included in the national GHG
inventory for the same period (2001 –2010). In the case of deforestation, Chile explained


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 111 
 
 
that differences  are due to better activity data ( AD) and more intensive use of country -
specific emission factor s (EF) . In the case of forest degradation, Chile explained that the 
main reasons for the inconsistencies are related to the A D, the calculation methods used 
and the exclusion of carbon gains in tree plantations replacing native forests. Regarding 
the increase of forest carbon stocks, there were also significant differences between the 
FRLs and the GHG inventory because of the exclusion of carbon removals in tree 
plantations in the FRLs. The AT considered that the FRELs/FRLs represent an 
improvement in terms of the use of higher -tier methods leading to increased accuracy of 
emission and removal estimates  (see para . 40 of the third assessment report ( TAR )). In 
this regard, the AT commended Chile for the improvements and noted that Chile could 
consider including these improvements in its next GHG inventory submission. Chile  did 
use the more accurate methodologies in updating its national GHG inventory as par t of 
its third biennial update report (BUR) submitted in 2018. With regard to the forest definition, the FREL/FRL excluded planted forests, and thus consider ed only native 
forests in the definition, while the greenhouse gas inventory ( GHG- I) included all t ypes 
of forests. This exclusion was explained with the fact that more than the 97  per cent  of 
forest plantations have industrial objectives and are composed of  single exotic species.  
During the FREL/FRL , the  technical assessment  of Chile stated that plantations will be 
included in the FREL/FRL once these plantations are used as permanent cover and are consistent with the objectives outlined in the n ationally determined contributions 
(NDCs) under the Paris Agreement ( see para . 35 of the TAR). The iTAP  fully recognize s 
that the FREL uses  an improved methodology and AD  compar ed with the GHG -I but also 
takes into consideration that  the FREL and  GHG- I apply two different forest definitions. 
Though both of them are official ly accepted by  the country  (i.e. approved  by the law) , 
the iTAP  estimates  a score of 1 because there is no consistency  in the forest definition  
required by the scorecard ; 
(b) B.1.(vi) Con sistency: the FREL/FRL submitted by Chile is based on the AD  extracted 
from the historical series data included in the land -use cadastre made by the National 
Forest Corporation ( CONAF ) (for the period  1997 to 2012). Due to budget and 
operational limitation s, the c adastre has a database with different base years for Chilean 
regions.  This information is provided for  all activities included in the FREL/FRL. The AT 
noted that Chile could ensure a more consistent time series by using the same satellite 
data sources (e.g. from Landsat or RapidEye) to ensure the consistency of AD (in spatial 
and temporal resolution) appli ed in estimates. This was identified by the AT as an area 
for future technical improvement ( see para . 41 of the TAR). In its funding proposal  
(section B.1.1 (vi)), Chile points out that the new maps of land use and land -use change 
are being developed using  Landsat data only and  were  used in the REDD -plus  technical 
annex of results . The funding proposal  further notes that these  maps will allow Chile to 
increase the consistency of the results by using a single source of information and a common date for all t he regions . The score is 1 , “significant issues were raised and were 
resolved, or issues that were not resolved due to the limitation of time and data but were not material to the consistency of the FREL/FRL, and the country has provided a 
plan on how it w ill seek to overcome them” ; 
(c) B.1.(x iv) Comparison with previous FREL/FRL : Chile ’s FREL/FRL  is the first 
reference level submitted to the UNFCCC in the context of RBP. The corresponding score 
is 1, “no adjustment made or no previous FREL/FRL submission” ; 
(d) B.1.(xv) Aggregated uncertainties of the FREL/FRL : table 63 of Chile’ s modified 
submission shows an aggregate uncertainty of 33.29  per cent  (although the text of the 
submission, as well as the funding proposal , mentions an uncertainty of 33.4  per cent ). 
Consequently, t he score is 1, as aggregate uncertainty is below 50  per cent  and 
assumptions and sources of uncertainties are identified and assessed for their relative 
contribution ;


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 112 
 
 
(e) B.2.(ii) Transparency of the data and information provided in the technical annex : 
the LULUCF experts noted that Chile’s technical annex does not include sufficient 
information to allow an assessment of consistency with the data used in the latest GHG -I 
(2016) submitted with the third BUR. The LULUCF experts commended Chile for its 
efforts to (i) ensure consistency among the emissions and removals that will be reported 
in its future submissions of its GHG inventory, its FRELs/FRLs and results;  and (ii) use 
updated methodologies and data for all three processes as part  of the stepwise approach 
and as noted in the report on the technical assessment of the proposed FREL of Chile 
submitted in 2016 (see para.  22 of the technical report of the technical analysis ( TATR )). 
The score is 1 , “significant issues were raised and we re resolved, or issues that were not 
resolved due to the limitation of time and data but were not material to the 
transparency of the results, and the country has provided a plan on how it will seek to 
overcome them”;  
(f) B.2.(v) Accuracy of data and information provided in the technical annex : Some 
issues pertaining the accuracy of the data and information in the technical annex were 
raised by the LULUCF experts.  The AD applied for the FRELs/FRLs were developed 
using cadastre maps with different initial years for different regions of the country, 
whereas the results were estimated using land -use change maps with similar start and 
end dates for different regions. Both set s of AD use the same land  use and land -use-
change categories, with a minor adjustment in the application of the forest definition 
pertaining to arborescent matorral. The LULUCF experts were of the view that Chile may 
be underestimating its AD by using coar ser-resolution satellite data (i.e. 30 m etre  
Landsat images) and pixel -based land -use change classifications for the results period , 
while using higher resolution data (i.e. 5 m etre  RapidEye and S POT  images) with visual 
interpretation to estimate emissions for the FRELs/FRLs. Furthermore, the LULUCF 
experts noted that Chile may wish to consider recalculating the entire set of AD using 
satellite imagery with the same classification approach, spatial resolution and time 
frame for all subnational areas or for national coverage, with the aim of enhancing the 
consistency and accuracy of the estimates in future submissions ( see para . 37 of the 
TATR). Chile identified the following technical support and capacity -building needs for 
the further improvement of its est imation of AD and EFs: e nhancing the accuracy of  the 
identification of  land -use change from non -forest to native forest; developing 
methodologies for monitoring activities in high cloud cover regions; strengthening the 
technical capacity to monitor other r egions and forest types under the national forest 
monitoring system ( NFMS ); and applying the Monte Carlo approach for the uncertainty 
analysis of estimates ( see para . 39 of the TATR). The score is 1 , “significant issues were 
raised and were resolved; or iss ues that were not resolved due to the limitation of time 
and data but were not material to the accuracy of the results, and the country has 
provided a plan on how it will seek to overcome them”; and  
(g) B.2.(vii) Aggregate uncertainties for results : table 57 o f the REDD -plus  technical 
annex shows that the aggregate uncertainty of the results reported by Chile is 38.4  per 
cent . The score is 1,  “<50  per cent , and assumptions and sources of uncertainties are 
identified and assessed for their relative contribution ”. 
2.1 Impact potential                           Scale: High  
4. In 2010 , under the leadership of the Ministry of Agriculture and CONAF , Chile started a 
broad consultation process at  the national and international levels for the development of the 
Nati onal Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV) , which was approved 
by the country in November 2016. ENCCRV  is considered by the G overnment as an instrument 
to implement public policy for the native vegetation resources of Chile. It is al igned with 
country’s international and national commitments. The overal goal of ENCCRV is to increase the


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 113 
 
 
resili ence of ecosystems and mitigate climate change through the enhancement of forest carbon 
stocks.  
5. Chile has 14.3 million hectar es (ha) of unique forests with  a high level (50.3 per cent) of 
endemism. Historically, approximately 5 million ha  of these forests were convertetd for 
agricultural and other uses. Recently, degradation has become a more prominent threat to 
Chilean forests. Key driver s of degradation are firewood, livestock and forest fires.  
6. The REDD -plus  programme of Chile is an integral part of ENCCRV. The REDD- plus 
actions included in ENCCRV are focused on a significant part of the national territory where  
there is a high concentrat ion and diversity of forests, including temperate rain forests, in 5 of 
the 16 administrative regions of Chile: Maule, Biobío, Araucanía, Los Ríos and Los Lagos. These 
regions represent 22  per cent  of the total area of the country , host 41  per cent  of the n ative 
forest, and hold 11 of the 12 f orest types defined at the national level.  
7. ENCCRV considers 26 action measures for addressing the drivers of deforestation  and 
forest degradation and the barriers to the restoration, conservation and sustainable 
management of all types of forests. The REDD -plus process in Chile is an integral part of 
ENCCRV . CONAF is the n ational focal point for coordinating the REDD- plus process  and 
establishing and reporting on  REDD -plus process elements,  such as  the NFMS,  national re gistry, 
assessment and reporting of FREL/FRL,  and the preparation of the technical annex o n REDD -
plus results.  
8. In total , 264,000 ha of territory is proposed in ENCCRV for the implementation of 
measures proposed in the strategy, which is aligned with the goals established in Chile’s  NDC for 
the LULUCF sector. The NDC t arget  is afforestation of 100,000 ha  and management of  another 
100,000 ha.  
9. CONAF plays a  fundamental role in ge nerating basic information for the NFMS. Article 4 
of Law No. 20,283 ( 2008 ) on recovering native forests and f orest development establishes that 
CONAF is responsible for  maintain ing a permanent forest cadastre.  
10. The NFMS was established in 2018 and is desig ned to operate and report every two 
years at  the subnational leve l, and it is expected to expand to report at the national level from 
2020 on reducing the risk of d isplacement. The NFMS is integrated into the ENCCRV measuring 
and monitoring system.1 
11. The first FREL submitted by the country to the UNFCCC secretariat for conducting 
technical assessment s is su bnational, but Chile has ambition to scale up REDD- plus activities to 
the national level, mainly through the implementation of ENCCRV. The five regions included in 
the FRL at the subnational level are Maule, Biobío, La Araucanía, Los Ríos y Los Lagos, covering 
the south- central zone of Chile. These five regions contain 5,853,387 ha  of Chile’s native forests.  
12. Chile is the first country applying for RBP from GCF , which has included in REDD -plus 
four activities (reducing emission s from deforestation, reducing emission s from forest 
degradation, enhancement of forest  carbon stock s, and conservation of  forest carbon stocks)  of 
the five considered  eligible for RE DD-plus in paragraph 70 of the Cancun Decision (decision 
1/CP.16). The sustainable forest management activity was not included by the country due to 
the lack of spatially explicit information for appropriately attribut ing emission reductions 
and/or removal s resulting f rom  sustainable forest management activities.  
 
1 Available at <https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/documentos/item/455 -sistema -de-medicion -y-monitoreo -
de-la-estrategia -nacional -de-cambio -climatico -y-recursos -vegetacionales > (in Spanish).


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 114 
 
 
13. Between 2014 and 2016, Chile has generated significant REDD -plus  results for the 
following RED D-plus  activities: deforestation, degradation, increase in carbon stocks and 
conservation. In total, this amounts to 18,409,425 tCO 2eq. 
14. Annual reductions in emissions per REDD -plus a ctivity (tCO 2eq/year) are provided in 
the table 1 below.  
Table 1:  Annual reductions in emissions per REDD -plus activity (tCO 2eq/year)  
 
 Deforestation  Forest 
degradation  Increase in 
carbon stocks  Forest 
conservation  Total  
Reference period         3,452,885         9,149,392         (10,012,012)         (2,430,348)        159,917  
Monitoring period         3,304,373       13,680,124         (19,010,937)         (3,950,207)    
(5,976,648)  
Emissions  reduced          148,513        (4,530,732)           8,998,925         1,519,769    6,136,475  
15. Chile submitted its first subnational FREL/FRL on a voluntary basis on 4 January 2016 
and a revised version  on 31 August 2016 , which took  into consideration the clarifications and 
additional information resulting from the t echnical assessment to improve th e transparency 
and consistency of the FREL. The subnational FRELs and FRLs proposed by Chile are based on 
historical data and are equal to annual average carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions and/or 
removals.  
16. All key findings from the UNFCCC A T were  analysed and  AT concluded in the scorecard 
attached as an annex to this report in accordance with the decision B.18/07 on the REDD -plus 
pilot programme.  
17. An emission reduction of  18,409,425 tCO 2eq for the period 2014 –2016 is confirmed in 
technical annex to the third BUR  of Chile submitted on 3 December 2018. The TATR  of the 
technical annex also confirmed the results and concluded that  the data and information 
provided by Chile in the technical annex are transparent.  
18. From the generated and confirmed 18,409,425 tCO 2eq emission reduction , Chile claims 
only 14,530,220 tCO 2eq after deducting 3,879,205 tCO 2eq from the total.  The d educted amount 
of 16,741 tCO 2eq is the sum of emission reductions already claimed for payment s by other 
stakeholders to other donors  as indicated in the Funding Proposal , and 21 per cent of the rest 
(3,862,464 tCO 2eq) was set aside as the buffer for risk of reversals . Based on scorecard results 
(Chile gets a score  of 41  from a maximum of 48) and the additional 2.5 per cent for the score 
under the section related to non- carbon elements , GCF will pay USD 63.6 million  to Chile  for 
results achieved in 2014 –2016.  
19. The GCF proceeds will be reinvested in the ENCCRV 2017 –2025 activities,  which are  
prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture of Chile, through CONAF.  
20. The f unding proposal consists of two components.  Eighty  per cent of proceeds will be 
reinvested in component  1 of the funding proposal , which is  focused on the implementation  of 
local activities through financial and technical support for key investments indicated by the 
ENCCRV. Key programmes considered for reinvestment under component 1 and the share of 
proceeds allocated for each of them are:  
(a) A 35 per cent share  of proceeds for  the afforestation and revegetation program 
(Transversal Measure (MT) 4 of ENCCRV );  
(b) A 21 per cent share of proceeds will be allocated for joint goals of  the programme for 
strengthening ecological restoration in communes/priority areas (MT5) and  the


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 115 
 
 
program me for  restoration after forest fires ( Measure on Forest Fires under the 
ENCCRV ( IF) 2);  
(c) A 6 per cent  share of proceeds  for the preventive forestry program me with  an emphasis 
on rural urban interface (IF3); and  
(d) A 33.5 per cent  share  of proceeds will be a llocated for  the implementation of joint goals 
of two programmes: the forest management program me in public and private lands that 
incorporate multiple forestry activities (US21) and  the strengthening of the wood energy 
program me (US3).  
21. The potential mitigation benefits associated with these measures are 500,000 tCO 2eq 
accumulated by 2025 and 2,400,000 tCO 2eq accumulated by 2030.  
22. Ten per cent of resources will be allocated for the implementation of component 2 , 
aimed  at the promotion of susta inability of the local investments in the regions, which should 
ensur e the effective and efficient use of the funds and  the implementation  of actions in ENCCRV 
related to the strengthening of institutional capacities, law enforcement and provi sion of  
techn ical services. The remaining  10 per cent will be allocated for management. Actions planned 
in component 2 and  the share of proceeds allocated for each of them are:  
(a) A 66 per cent share of proceeds for technical assistance to support the consolidation of 
the elements of the Warsaw Framework and part of MT6 (environmental education and 
dissemination program me), IF6, GA31 and MT7;  
(b) A 14 per cent share of proceeds allocated for capacity -building in the technological 
transfer of management alternatives and silvoagricultural waste (IF6),  adaptation 
programme for the management of vegetation resources in the context of climate 
change, desertification, land degradation and drought (GA.1) , and MT6;  and 
(c) A 20 per cent share of proceeds for strengthening the enforcement of forest and 
environmental legislation (MT7)  
23. According to the 2016 GHG -I of Chile, the LULUCF sector represented –37.0 per cent  of 
the GHG emissions balance in 2016. The a verage annual reduction of emiss ions from the land -
use change and forestry sector in 2014 –2016 reached about 10  per cent . It is the opinion of the 
iTAP  that the contributions  of this REDD -plus programme to the fulfilment of Chile’s  NDC  is 
high.  
2.2 Paradigm shift potential              Scale:  High  
24. The REDD -plus mechanism, negotiated and established within the UNFCCC process and 
based on the RBP for increasing  the resilience of ecosystems and strengthening the role of this 
system in climate change mitigation , should itself be considered as a mechanism for initiating 
transformational changes in the sustainable management of the  forest and land -use sector at 
the glob al level.  
25. Though the country has not yet included all REDD -plus activities (only four of five have 
been  implemented) in its REDD -plus programme , which is allowed in this mechanism, the 
national REDD -plus process established in Chile is comprehensive and an  integral part of the 
broader ENCCRV . Such an approach is also transformational and should be exemplary for other 
countries implementing the REDD -plus programme.  
 
2 US stands for sustainable management model of vegetation reso urces, according to the ENCCRV.  
3 GA stands for adaptive management of the vegetation resources to climate change, desertification, land degradation 
and drought.


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 116 
 
 
26. Based on Chile’s approach for the use of proceeds, payments  will be reinvested in to the 
implem entation of activities planned from  the ENCCRV strategic plan and the  generation of new 
emission reduction units contributing to the fulfilment of Chile’s  NDC commitments.  
27. The iTAP  would like to highlight the innovative approach of  the benefit -sharing sche me, 
which is offered  to promote the  sustainability of the ENCCRV  and REDD -plus process. The 
benefit -sharing approach is based on three key principl es: equity, efficiency and solidarity . 
Eighty per cent of the funds , which should be reinvested into each region, are divided  into three 
assignments based on these three principles. These assignments are basal allocation (50 per 
cent), performance allocation (20 per cent) and buffer allocation (10 per cent) , described  as 
follows:  
(a) Basal allocation  is based on the principle of equity , where the percentage assigned 
under the criterion will be divided in to equal parts among the regions;  
(b) Performance allocation  is based on the principle of efficiency  in resource use and will 
be p rovided for the emission reductions and/or increase in forest carbon absorption 
generated in each of the regions, compared with the respective FREL. The allocation will 
be proportional between the amount of the tonnes of emissions reduced and/or 
increased absorption per region , and the financing available after receiving the 
corresponding RBP ; and 
(c) Buffer allocation  is based on the principle of solidarity  and will be allocated to the 
regions that , by any circumstances of force majeure (fires, plagues or other situations), 
require more intense intervention s and, therefore , interventions  of greater duration and 
cost.  
28. Table  2 below demonstrates the distribution of the 80 per cent of GCF proceeds among  
the five regions involved in the first phase of Chile’s REDD- plus  programme ( see funding 
proposal , page 28).  
Table 2:  Distribution of the 80 per cent of GCF proceeds 
 
 
29. The iTAP  is of the  opinion that such a conceptual approach to the benefit -sharing 
process should be replicated by other countries as well , ensuring fairness and transparency in  
the sharing of benefits gained from ecosystems. In  future , the concept could be enriched 
through more transparent way to demonstration how  gender and ind igenous communities 
could be included  in this benefit -sharing process.  
30. As indicated in paragraph 26  above , ENCCRV  and the REDD -plus process,  its integral  
component , significantly contribute to NDC implementation through the management of the 
LULUCF sector . It target s CO 2 mitigation , which is also  a transformational approach for the 
Chilean forestry sector  and has been boosted due to the positioning of the wood and cellulose 
industry.  
2.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale: High  
31. The REDD -plus programme of Chile is integral part of country’s  ENCCRV , which was 
constructed based on more than three years  of broad consultations with all potential


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 117 
 
 
stakeholders. The objective of the strategy is to reduce the country’s social, environmental and 
economi c vulnerability caused by climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought , 
and with this contribu te to all three pilars of sustainable development.  
32. As a result of long -term consultations, ENCCRV has the support and commitment of civil 
society . During the design and formulation phase of the ENCCRV, the inclusion of social and 
environmental safeguards, which follow national and international guidelines, was carefully 
established, including the potential risk associated with its implementation.  
33. According to the activities planned in the strategy, it is expected that the successful 
implementation of measures could generate a significant amount of environmental, social and 
economic co -benefits, such as increased ecosystem services in the  areas of interven tion , the 
improved quality of life of local actors, improved management practices of native vegetation resources and increased natural capital, and increased adaptive capacity of vegetation and 
vulnerable local communities.  
34. The funding proposal is in  compliance with all environmental and social safeguard 
standards required by the Cancun Agreements , GCF and the Food and Agriculture Organization  
of the United Nations (FAO).  The Cancun safeguards are confirmed in the relevant section of the 
scorecard. The FAO safeguards are in compliance with GCF safeguards , as FAO  is an accredited 
entity (AE), and, as such, its  safeguards are analysed in the funding proposal.  
35. The benefit -sharing system (see para . 22 above) expected to be put in place for the 
reinvestment of proceeds was set up  in accordance with  the ENCCRV and will also significantly 
contribute to the sustainable development process being constructed  based  on the three main 
principles of sustainable development: equity, efficiency  and solidarity. The main beneficiaries 
of these payments include the most vulnerable population s, such as the rural population and 
indigenous peoples living in the five regions of Chile  that are REDD- plus programme host 
regi ons. Chile plans to bring this benefit -sharing approach from the regional level to the national 
level in the late stage s of implement ing the strategies.  
36. At the start of the design stage of the demonstration projects, Chile considered 
developing  these proj ects in areas where not only carbon capture is enhanced, but also where 
the multiple benefits  are generated for  the forest. N on-carbon benefits considered to be 
achieved  according to the REDD -plus pilot programme  are: improve the regulation of water 
resour ces as well as the water quality; promote soil conservation and reduce erosion;  and 
improve the landscape, forest conservation and biodiversity.  
37. Scenarios with and without ENCCRV w ere developed and the economic valuation was 
determined  for the range of car bon as well as non- carbon benefits. The estimate not only finds a 
positive net benefit from the implementation of ENCC RV, but it also finds that the estimated 
non- carbon benefits for ENCCRV are 1.2 times larger than the carbon benefits ( funding 
proposal , pp. 39–40). 
38. A consultancy is c urrently  being initiated to expand this methodology at the national 
level. The obj ective is  to develop  an environmental and social co-benefits system at the national 
level and systematize  official data for the implementation of territorial baselines for  at least six 
co-benefit indicators, consisting o f three environmental and three social indicators. These 
products will be linked to the ENCCRV Platform, making the information available to interested 
persons and institutions in a transparent and expeditious manner.  
39. The iTAP  concludes that the sustainable development potential of ENCCRV and  the 
funding proposal is high.  
2.4 Needs of the recipient               Scale: High


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 118 
 
 
40. Chile’s needs  to implemen t mitigation actions in the LULUCF sector as well as 
successfully fulfil its  national contribution is described in Chile’s N DC. The NDC  identified needs 
for a  strategy on strengthen ing national adaptation capacity at regional and national levels; a 
strateg y on a technology development and transfer mechanism (including adaptation and 
mitigation technologies); and financial support.  
41. As presented in the funding proposal impact assessment section , a 10 per cent  share  of 
GCF proceeds will be re -invested to strengthen the capacity -building and technology transfer 
elements of ENCCRV ( see para . 22(a), (b) and (c). 
42. The ENCCRV proposes 26 action measures impacting 264,000 ha , with  a total budget of 
USD 433 million,  divided  between  already existing resources and those that need to be 
leveraged from different financing sources ( i.e. conditional), such as international funds or 
agencies. The latter corresponds to 84  per cent  of the total budget.  
43. Chile’s  NDC also highlights  the need to reduc e the level of inequity in the Chil ean 
economy as well as provid e more security to vulnerable groups with low social protection ( still 
a pending task ). 
44. ENCCRV and its REDD -plus programme as well as the re-investment of proceeds will 
contribute to reduc ing the  vulnerability of  the most sensitive rural and indigeneous population s 
by increasing their adaptive capacities and contributing to risk reduction.  
2.5 Country ownership               Scale: High  
45. Country ownership of ENCCRV and its RED D-plus section could be assessed as very high 
based on the information provided in the funding proposal and on the ENCCRV web site.4 In 
particular, the strategy was formulated and finally approved in 2016 after more than three 
years of intesive consultation s with national and international key players and takes into 
consideration all Chile’s national and international commitments.  
46. The participatory process during  the formulation phase of ENCCRV, carried out through 
regional workshops and a national workshop,  had more than 1,200 active participants from all 
regions of the country , includ ing indigenous peoples; the institutional sector; the private sector; 
non- governmental organizations ; academ ia; small and medium -size d landowners; groups of 
women; consultants ; and extension agents.  
47. In support of country ownership , the reform established by Law 20.283/20085 should 
be considered. This reform  was  foreseen to reach a larger number of beneficiaries through its 
incentive schemes, includ ing payment for e cosystem services schemes,  to implement a 
sustainable management model linked to vegetation resources. In addition, landholders  who  do 
not yet  have  regular land titles might be included as potential beneficiaries of national 
programmes aiming to implement ENCCRV.  
48. Country ownership is fully supported by  the implementation of funding proposals 
through  Comité s Regional de Cambio Climático  (regional climate  change committees) , which are 
decentralized working groups created at the regional level in each of the 16 regions of the 
country. These regional climate change committees  are chaired by the highest regional 
authority ( intendente ) and will lead a multi -stakeholder engagement process at the subnational 
level. They are constituted by the public sector, academia, non -governmental organizations and 
the private sector,  depending on the region. Figure 6  of the funding proposal shows the 
relationships between the institutions.  
 
4 Available at < https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/participacion/proceso -de-formulacion>; 
<https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/participacion/proceso -de-validacion> (in Spanish).  
5 On the Recovery of Native Forests and the Promotion of Forestry, issued in 2008.


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 119 
 
 
49. The funding proposal indicates that the n ational designated authority has led the 
development of the  proposal by providing feedback on the definition of the institutional 
arrangements for program me execution and tech nical recommendations through the iTAP , 
which reviews  the draft proposal  before submission to GCF , as per their internal procedures. 
After reviewing the proposal, the iTAP  recommended that the national designated authority  
issue a no-objection letter.  
50. This section demonstrate s a high level of country ownership with regard to the forest 
and land -use sector.  
2.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: High  
51. There is evidence below  below demonstrating the high efficiency and effectiveness of 
the funding pro posal . 
52. Anticipated results to be achieved from  the reinvestment of GCF proceeds in to ENCCRV 
2017 –2025 are estimated by the project proponents as 500,000 tCO 2eq accumulated by 2025 
and 2,400,000 tCO 2eq accumulated by 2030. This volume represents  3.6 per cent of CO 2 
accumulated in 2016 in Chile’s forests and other land -use sector s.  
53. Offered by the country reinvestment scheme increases the efficiency of this funding 
proposal from the perspective  of GCF . Total emission reductions resulting in result s-based 
payments  by 2030 is about 17 million tCO 2eq.6 The cost  for 1 tCO 2eq reduction/accumulation 
for GCF is  USD 3.7 0. From Chile ’s perspective , income  from emission reductions  generated 
through  reinvested proceeds depends on the exist ence of future buyers . 
54. The e ffectiveness of the funding proposal should be very high,  taking into consideration 
the benefit -sharing mechanism described under the paradigm shift criteria.  
55. As a result of the analysis of the reversal risk potential of the str ategy, a reserve fund of 
21 per cent  of the emission reductions,  accounting for a total of 3,862,464 tCO 2eq, has been  
established as a buffer for reversals, which will remain in place during the validity of the 
strategy. This fund will be generated only fr om ERs due to deforestation and degradation, since 
increases in removals due to increased stocks or conservation are exposed to natural and 
anthropogenic risks that may affect their permanence over time.  
56. ENCCRV facilitate s public- private partnership s and works  intensively  with private 
sector representatives at the decision -making level as well as at the implementation level , which 
also increase s the effectiveness of the funding proposal.  
57. Monitoring of safeguards, the displacement of activities and emissions,  as well as other 
elements of the REDD -plus programme is being carried out through the measurement and 
monitoring system of ENCCRV . This includes elements of m easurement , reporting and 
verification , which should ensure the accuracy and transparen cy of generated emission 
reductions . 
58. CONAF is responsible for tracking the movement of all emission reductions  generated in 
the country. The r egistry for the accounting and tracking of emission reductions is being 
finalized, and the interim national regist ry is available in the  mean time .  
59. The iTAP  is of the  opinion that the entire REDD- plus approach, benefit -sharing concept 
and use of GCF proceeds, risk management and monitoring are efficient and effective,  and could 
be considered a best practice case.  
 
 
6 16,930,220 tCO 2eq = 14,530,220 tCO 2eq (generated in 2014 –2016) + 2,400,000 tCO 2eq (accumulated by 2030).


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 120 
 
 
III. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
60. The iTAP  considers that the funding proposal “ Chile REDD -plus Results -Based Payments  
for the R esults Period 2014 –2016 ” is fully in line with GCF and REDD -plus policies and 
reco mmends it to the Board  of the GCF  for approval.


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 121 
 
 
Annex: Scorecard  
Section A:  Proposed and projected REDD-plus results  
Criteria  Status 
(Yes/No)  Remarks  
Does the total volume of achieved results indicated in the proposal 
match the results indicated in the biennial update report ( BUR ) during 
the results period (31 December 2013 to 31 December 2018)?  Yes Chile ’s FRELs and FRLs are based on its annual average historical 
CO 2 emissions and removals, amounting to 159,826 tCO 2eq/year, 
and represent  two reference periods : one for activities involving 
land -use change (2001 –2013) and one for no change in land use 
(i.e. forest remaining forest)  (2001 –2010)  (see para. 9 of the TATR) . 
According to paragraph 10 of the TATR, Chile reported the results 
of the implementation of its four REDD -plus  activities calculated 
against its FRELs and FRLs, which amount to ERs  of 6,136,475 
tCO 2eq/year, derived from the following:   
(a) A reduction in emissions of 148,513 tCO 2eq/y ear for 
deforestation for the period 2014 –2016;  
(b) An increase in emissions due to forest degradation amounting 
to 4,530,732 tCO 2eq/year, resulting from:  
(i) A reduction in emissions of 3,854,177 tCO 2eq/y ear from the 
substitution of native forest with exotic species plantations for 
the period 2014 –2016;  and 
(ii) An increase in emissions of 8,384,909 tCO 2eq/year from the 
degradation of permanent forests, including forest fires, for the 
period 2011 –2015;  
(c) An increase in removals of 1,519,769 tCO 2eq/year from the 
conservation of forest carbon stocks for the period 2011 –2015; and 
(d) An increase in removals of 8,998,925 tCO 2eq/year from the 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks, including:  
(i) R emovals of 128,868 tCO 2eq /year from the increase in forest 
carbon stocks due to an increase in native forest area resulting 
from the conversion of other land uses to forest lands, including 
restitution, for the period 2014 –2016; and 
(ii) Emission reductio ns of 8,870,057 tCO 2eq/year from the 
recovery of degraded forests resulting in increased forest carbon 
stocks for the period 2011 –2015.


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 122 
 
 
In its technical annex, Chile provided a summary table (table 35) 
with the aggregated results of the implementation of its REDD -plus  
activities covering the two periods: 2014 –2016 for activities 
resulting in land -use change and 2011 –2015 for activities occurring 
in forest remaining forest. The aggregated results (net 
emissions/removals) for the periods 2014 –2016 and 2011 –2015 
are 4,131,558 tCO 2eq/year and 2,004,917 tCO 2eq/year, 
respectively. The funding proposal  submitted by Chile reports a 
total volume of REDD -plus results of 18,409,425 tCO 2eq for the 
period 2014 -2016.  
Is the volume of achieved results offered to the pilot  programme equal 
or less than the total volume of achieved results indicated in the BUR 
during the results period?  Yes The total volume of REDD -plus  results offered to the pilot 
programme is 14 ,530 ,220 tCO 2eq (which includes ER  deductions 
from project activities  certified by other owners of 17 tCO 2eq 
between 2014 and 2016 and 16,724 tCO 2eq between November 
2013 and November 2014 ) and from the establishment of a 
reversal buffer a containing 21  per cent of the remaining ERs  
(3,862,464 tCO 2eq), and therefore is lower than the 18,409,425 
tCO 2eq reported in the technical annex  of the biennial update 
report .  
Is the expected volume of REDD -plus results to be  achieved significant 
compared with  the overall level of REDD- plus results achieved in the 
current funding proposal being submitted?  No The expected volume of REDD -plus  results to be achieved for the 
period 2017 –2018 is 1,199,502 b tCO 2eq, estimated for the second 
milestone of monitoring , which is scheduled for 2019 or 2020. 
However, following the submission of the E missions Reductions  
Program Document to the Carbon Fund of the Forest Carbon 
Partnership Facility , Chile started the negotiation of an e mission 
reduction purchase agreement with the World Bank;c therefore , the 
indicative results to be achieved for the period 2017 –2018 will not 
be considered in the following years of the eligibility period of the 
pilot program me for receiving payments.  
Is the total volume expected to be submitted to the pilot programme 
within the available allocation of funding for the pilot programme and 
below the c ap per country?  Yes As pointed out in the funding proposal, the indicative results to be 
achieved for the period 2017 –2018 will not be considered in the 
following years of the eligibility period of the pilot programme  for 
receiving payments.  ERs claimed by the country for the results -
based payment  pilot programme is 14,530,220 tCO 2eq, which is 48  
per cent of the cap per country  established by the programme  (30 
million tCO 2eq).


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 123 
 
 
Section B: Carbon elements   
B.1. Forest reference emission level/forest reference level  
Criteria  Score  Remarks  
(i) Is the FREL/FRL consistent with the greenhouse gas ( GHG)  
inventory, including the definition of forest used?  1 According to paragraph 19 of the TAR, the AT noted that the 
average emissions from deforestation and degradation in the 
modified submission are significantly different to those included in 
the national  GHG inventory for the same period (2001 –2010) (i.e. 3 
times higher for deforestation and 10  times higher for forest 
degradation in the FRELs, compared with the national GHG 
inventory). Chile provided a detailed explanation f or these 
significant difference s in its modified submission. In the case of 
deforestation, Chile explained that differences are due to better AD 
and more intensive use of country specific  EFs. In the case of forest 
degradation, Chile explained that the main reasons for the 
inconsistencies are related to AD, the calculation methods used 
(gain –loss method in the national GHG inventory versus stock 
change in the FRELs) and the exclusion of carbon gains in tree 
plantations replacing native forests. Regarding the increase of 
forest carbon stocks, there are also significant differences between 
the FRLs and the GHG inventory in that the former are 
approximately eight times smaller than the latter because of the 
exclusion of carbon removals in tree plantations in the FRLs. Chile 
also explained th at it will modify the methodology to be used in its 
future national GHG inventory in order to maintain consistency 
with its future submissions of proposed FRELs/FRLs. In addition, 
Chile noted in its modified submission that it will use the more 
accurate methodologies in updating its national GHG inventory as 
part of its BUR that will be submitted in 2018  (and they were in fact 
used in the ir third  BUR, according to the funding proposal ). The AT 
considered that the FRELs/FRLs represent an improvement in 
terms  of the use of higher -tier methods leading to increased 
accuracy in emission and removal estimates  (see para. 40 of the 
TAR) . In this regard, the AT commends Chile for the improvements 
and notes that Chile could consider including these improvements 
in its  next GHG inventory submission.


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 124 
 
 
Regarding forest definition,  paragraph 34 of the TAR states that 
Chile provided its definition of forest used in the construction of the 
FRELs and FRLs. According to this definition, a forest will be 
considered as all lands that are defined as “Native Forest” according 
to the current Chilean legislation. The AT found that this definition 
is different from the one that the Party uses in its latest national 
GHG inventory. The latest national GHG inventory uses the forest 
definition established by Law 20.283; namely, “a place populated 
with plant formations, in which trees predominate and cover a 
surface area of at least 5,000 square meters, with a minimum width 
of 40 meters, with arboreal canopy cover that surpasses 10 per cent 
of the surface area in arid and semi -arid conditions and 25 per cent 
in more favorable conditions”. The FREL uses another definition, 
established by the same Law 20.283, applied to Native Forest; 
namely, “forest composed of indigenous species deriving from  
natural production, natural reproduction, or planted under the 
canopy, with the same species in the area as original distribution, 
which can contain the presence of randomly distributed introduced 
species” . The forest definition applied in the FREL is als o different 
from the definition applied to the national GHG for forestry 
territories, because in the latter , native forests and planted forests 
are included. During the TA, the Party provided more information 
at the request of the AT for this different use of definitions, namely 
that over 97 per cent of the planted forests in Chile are industrial, 
single species  and composed of introduced species, resulting in the 
exclusion of carbon fluxes from forest plantations from the 
construction of the FREL. However, Chile indicated that new 
planted forests will be included in the FREL if they are destined for 
permanent co ver and are consistent with the goals set by the 
nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement  
(see paragraph 35 of the TAR) . 
The iTAP  fully recognize s that FREL uses an improved methodology 
and AD compared with the GHGs national inventory but also takes 
into consideration that FREL and  the GHG inventory apply two 
different forest definitions. Although b oth of them are official in the 
country and approved by  the law, the iTAP  estimates the score as 1  
because there is no consistency required by  the scorecard.


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 125 
 
 
(ii) Is the FREL/FRL based on historical data and is it equal to or below 
the average annual historical emissions during the reference period, 
unless a country is an HFLD country?  2 Chile is not a high forest cover, low deforestation  country. Chile 
developed its subnational FRELs and FRLs for the temperate native 
forests in five administrative regions (Maule, Biobío, La Araucanía, 
Los Ríos and Los Lagos), with the aim of transitioning to a national 
FREL/FRL in the future, incorporating all biomes/forests in the 
country ( see para . 8 of the TAR). The subnational FRELs and FRLs 
proposed by Chile are based on the historical data and equals in 
total  159,826 annual average CO 2 equivalent emissions and/or 
removals. Chile’s FRELs are calculated for two reference periods, 
one for activities involving land- use change (2001 –2013) and one 
for no change in land use (i.e. forest remaining forest) (2001 –2010). 
The activity reducing emissions from f orest degradation includes 
methane (CH 4) and nitrous oxide (N 2O) emissions from forest fires  
(para . 9 of the TAR) .  
(iii) Is the FREL/FRL in acc ordance with the guidelines in d ecision 
12/CP.17?  2 The AT note d (see para . 37 of Chile ’s TAR) that the data and 
information used by Chile  in constructing its FREL  and FRLs  are 
transparent and complete and are in overall accordance with the 
guidelines for submission of information contained in the annex to 
decision 12/CP.17 .  
(iv) Is the data and information provided for the FREL/FRL 
transparent  (Has information been provided to allow an understanding 
of how UNFCCC guidance on the submission of information on 
reference levels has been addressed?)  2 The AT noted (in para . 37 of Chile’s TAR) that the data and 
information used by Chile in constructing its FREL s and FRLs are 
transparent . The AT also noted that Chile presented transparent 
FREL s/FRL s in its modified submission, which were further 
supported with additional data and information during and after 
the assessment week ( see para. 11 of the TAR), and commended 
Chile for providing such data, which increased the transparency of 
its submission a nd facilitated the work of the AT in technically 
assessing the submission ( see para. 45 of the TAR).  
(v) Is the FREL/FRL complete  (Has information been provided that 
allows for the reconstruction of the FREL/FRL?)  2 The AT noted (in para . 37 of Chile’s TA R) that the data and 
information used by Chile in constructing its FREL s and FRLs are 
complete . The AT further noted that the completeness of 
information improved significantly in the modified FREL/FRL 
submission, and that the new information provided in t he modified 
submission, including the description of methods and data sources, 
increased the reproducibility of FREL/FRL calculations ( see para . 
39 of the TAR).


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 126 
 
 
(vi) Is the FREL/FRL consistent  (Were data and methodologies ap plied 
consistently over the time series used for the construction of the 
FREL/FRL?)  1 The FREL/FRL submitted by Chile is based on the AD extracted 
from the historical series data included in the land -use cadastre 
made by the National Forest Corporation , CONAF ) (period 1997 to 
2012). Due to budget and operational limitations, the c adastre has a 
database with different base years for Chilean regions. This 
information is provided for all the activities included in the 
FREL/FRL. The AT noted that Chile could ensure a more consistent 
time series by using the same satellite data sources (e.g. from 
Landsat or RapidEye) to ensure the consistency of AD (in spatial 
and temporal resolution) applied in estimates . This was identified 
by the AT as an area for future technical improvement ( see para . 41 
of the TAR).  
In its funding proposal  (section B.1.1 (vi)), Chile points out that the 
new maps of land use and land -use change are being developed 
using Landsat data only ; these maps of land use were used in the 
REDD- plus  technical annex of results and are based o n a remote -
sensing analysis . These maps will allow Chile to increase the 
consistency of the results by using a single source of information 
and a common date for a ll the regions,  which  differ s from the 
current time series of data  (which  has different years for  maps for 
each region  and uses several sources of data ). 
(vii) Is the FREL/FRL accurate  (The data and methodologies used 
neither over - nor underestimate emiss ions and/or removals during the 
reference period, so far as can be judged .) 
 2 As noted in paragraph 14 of the TAR, in order t o estimate the 
carbon stocks of the different activities  and considering the 
different forest types in regions included in the FRELs and FRLs, 
Chile uses methods and equations from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories , as well as tier 2 and tier 3 
methods (see table 12 of the modified su bmission). The FRELs and 
FRLs combine different tiers depending on national availability of 
information; for example, tier 3 methods were used to estimate 
above -ground biomass and  DOM , while tier 2 methods were used to 
estimate below -ground biomass, except in the case of enhanc ing 
forest carbon stocks , where tier 3 methods were used to estimate 
the below -ground biomass. For above -ground biomass, below -
ground biomass, dead wood and litter (DOM), immediate oxidation 
is assumed following deforestation. For for est degradation, Chile 
uses a tier 3 method developed by Bahamóndez et al. to estimate 
carbon stock changes at different points in time. As this 
methodology estimates only CO 2 emissions, Chile used the relevant


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 127 
 
 
equations from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines to es timate the non -CO 2 
emissions from forest fires. The AT noted that while Chile has 
developed stock charts for the forest type “Siempreverde”, which 
includes the species “Roble” ( Nothofagus obliqua ) and “Raulí” 
(Nothofagus alpina), Chile still needs to develop stock charts for 
other extended forest types (e.g. “Lenga”  and Nothofagus pumilia ). 
The AT commended Chile for the extensive use of tier 2 and tier 3 
methods, which increased the accuracy of the estimates. The AT 
also commended Chile for its efforts to further develop stock charts 
for other forest types.  
The AT also noted that the uncertainty analyses are detailed and 
provide guidance for future work to improve accuracy ( see para. 37 
of the TAR).  
(viii) Have all REDD- plus  activities that are a significant source of 
emissions been included?  2 According to para graph  7 of the TAR, Chile , in its modified 
submission . proposed FRELs and FRLs for four activities: reducing 
emissions from deforestation; reducing emissions from fore st 
degradation; conservation of forest carbon stocks; and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks. Chile explained that, in the 
case of sustainable management of forests, owing to a lack of 
geographic data to identify the areas subject to this activity, it 
decided to include the carbon stock changes resulting from 
sustainable management of forests under the activity reducing 
emissions from forest degradation (if the result is emission s) or 
under enhancement of forest carbon stocks (if the result is 
removal s). Moreover, Chile plans to include new activities: the 
development of management plans based on spatially explicit 
information that would allow the inclusion of other activities such 
as the sustainable management of forests and activities that 
normally occur at the farm level of 10 ha  or less (see para. 22(e) of 
the TAR). The AT acknowledged that Chile included four of the five 
activities identified in paragraph 70 of decision 1/CP.16, in 
accordance with national capabilities and circumstances. The 
activity “sustainable management of forests ” is implicitly included 
by Chile under the activities “reducing emissions from forest 
degradation ” and “enhancement of forest carbon stocks ” (see para. 
33 of the TAR).   
The iTAP  agrees that all significant sources of emissions are included 
in the FREL/FRL.


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 128 
 
 
(ix) Have all of the most significant pools been included?  
 
 2 According to paragraph 31 of the TAR, during the technical 
assessment , the AT requested clarification of the reasons for the 
omission of SOC  in the activity “ reducing emissions from forest 
degradation ” and the omission of DOM in the activity “ enhancement 
of forest carbon stocks ”. The AT noted that the exclusion of the 
DOM carbon pool seems conservative because this pool is not 
expected to decrease in the activity “ enhancement of forest carbon 
stocks ”. Chile justified the exclusion of SOC in all four activities 
because of the lack of national information on the rate of change in 
this pool and to ensure that consistency is maintained  with the 
national GHG inventory, which excludes SOC. The AT notes that 
changes in SOC could be significant when forest land is converted to 
other land uses (e.g. deforestation) but the exclusion of SOC in the 
activity ‘enhancement of forest carbon stocks ’ could be 
conservative, because this pool is not expected to decrease in this 
activity. The AT commended Chile for its efforts to obtain better 
information on DOM and SOC with the aim of including these 
carbon pools as part of a stepwise approach in future submissions 
or to exclude them if there is evidence that changes are not 
significant. The AT considered the treatment of the omitted 
emissions from SOC  as an area for future technical improvement of 
the FRELs/FRLs. The AT noted that during the technical 
assessment, Chile stated that it is making ongoing efforts to include 
new and additional pools such as developing emission factors  and 
AD linked to SOC f luxes.  
In its funding proposal , Chile provided an estimation of the 
significance of the SOC pool emissions due to deforestation using a 
tier 1 methodology , which determined that emissions from SOC 
were 128 ,005 tCO 2eq/year, compared with the 1 ,653 ,819 
tCO 2eq/year emitted from the living biomass and DOM  pools , 
representing 7 .7 per cent  of the total emissions.  
Based on this additional information provided in funding proposal,  
the iTAP  concluded that all  of the  most significant pools are included 
in the FREL/FRL.  
(x) Have all gases that are a significant source of emissions been 
included?  2 Regarding the inclusion of GHGs, the FRELs and FRLs include CO 2 in 
the four selected activities  as well as t he estimation of non -CO 2 
emissions (CH 4 and N 2O) from forest fires  in the sub-activity under 
the activity “reducing emissions from forest degradation ”. The AT


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 129 
 
 
commended Chile for its efforts to include non -CO 2 gases using the 
appropriate equations from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines (see para. 32 
of the TAR) . 
(xi) Is the information provided in the construction of the FREL/FRL 
(data, methodologies and estimates) guided by the most recent 
applicable I ntergovernmental P anel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
guidance and guidelines as adopted by the C onference of the P arties  
(COP) ?  
2 Chile used the most recent guidance and guidelines provided in the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines as a basis for estimating annual changes in 
carbon stocks and non- CO 2 emissions of the four activities (see 
paragraph 11 of the TAR) . 
(xii) Have any significant issues related to the ap plication of IPCC 
guideline s/good practice guidance  been raised in the TA report?  2 No issues were raised.  
(xiii) What i s the reference period for the FREL/FRL?  2 Chile presented a modified submission with two reference periods 
using interpolation methods: (1) 2001 –2013 for activities and sub -
activities that cause land- use change (deforestation, substitution, 
increases in forest areas and restitution); and (2) 2001 –2010 for 
activities that occur in forests remaining forests (conservation of 
forest carbon stocks, degradation of permanent forests and 
recovery of degraded forests) ( see para. 9 of the TAR). The 
reference periods were therefore of 13 and 10 years, respectively . 
(xiv) How does the reference level for the results in cluded in the 
proposal compare with  the previous ref erence level that ap plies to the 
same area?  1 Chile ’s FREL s and FRLs are  the first ref erence level s submitted to 
the UNFCCC in the context of results -based payments .  
(xv) Has the country provided information on aggregate uncertainties, 
taking into account national c apabilities and circumstances?  1 The AT noted in paragraph 25 of the TAR that the modified 
submission provided detailed information on the uncertainty 
assessment , and the AT commended Chile for its efforts on 
including this uncertainty analysis in its submission. Uncertainties 
are estimated using non -weighted error propagation (2006 IPCC 
Guidelines, equation 12.1). The AT also commended Chile for 
presenting the uncertainties disaggregated by activity, sub -activity, 
region, carbon pool and parameters used to estimate the emissions 
and removals from the car bon pools.  
Table 63 of Chile’ s modified submission shows an aggregate 
uncertainty of 33.29  per cent  (although the text of the submission,


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 130 
 
 
as well as the funding proposal , mentions an uncertainty of 33.4  per 
cent) . 
In accordance with the terms of reference for the scorecard , if 
uncertainty is estimated in between 30  per cent  and 50  per cent  the 
score should be 1.  
B.2. REDD -plus r esults reporting  
Criteria  Score  Remarks  
(i) Are the reported results in the technical annex to the B UR 
consistent with the FREL/FRL (including the inclusion of the same 
pools, activities and gases) ? 2 The LULUCF experts concluded that the results presented on the 
implementation of the selected REDD -plus  activities in the five 
administrative regions of Chile are consistent, to the extent possible 
and according to its current national capacities and capabilities, 
with the assessed FRELs/FRLs ( see para. 18 of the TATR). The 
LULUCF experts noted that Chile ensured overall consistency 
between its assessed FRELs/FRLs and its estimation of the results 
of the implementation of its REDD -plus  activities ( see para . 16 of 
the TATR) . 
The AT also commended Chile for showing a strong commitment to 
the continuous improve ment of the data and information used for 
calculating the results, in line with the stepwise approach, which 
are consistent with those used to establish its assessed FRELs/FRLs 
(see para. 43 of the TATR).  
According to paragraph 17 of the TATR, the LULUCF experts noted 
from the information provided in the technical annex that there are 
some observed differences between Chile’s assessed FRELs/FRLs 
and the results reported in the technical annex, namely from:  
(a) The methodology used to generate some of the A D for activities 
that involve land -use change (deforestation, degradation by 
substitution, enhancement of forest carbon stocks). The 
methodology used for generating the land- use change maps for 
constructing the FRELs/FRLs was based on data contained in the 
cadastre and evaluation of vegetation resources in Chile, while for 
estimating the results, the land- use change maps were based on 
spectral classification, the application of the Random Forest


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 131 
 
 
algorithm for classification (Breiman, 2001) and analysis of c hanges 
in Landsat 8 imagery; and  
(b) The minimum mapping unit used (resulting from the different 
methodology for estimating AD noted above): 0.5 ha was used for 
the FRELs and FRLs and 0.27 ha was used for the monitoring of 
results, which is equivalent to three pixels in the Landsat 8 imagery.  
The LULUCF experts commended Chile for its efforts to ensure 
consistency between the data and methodologies described in the 
FREL/FRL submission and the technical annex , the methodological 
improvements made in the mon itoring of activities since the 
FREL/FRL submission, and the efforts made to improve the 
National Forest Inventory  data and emission factor s (see para. 18 of 
the TATR) .  
Moreover, the LULUCF experts concluded that exploring the use of 
a more consistent time series by using the same satellite data 
sources (e.g. Landsat or RapidEye) for the entire period of the AD is 
an area for future technical improvement ( see para . 36 (d) of the 
TATR) and noted that Chile may wish to consider recalculating th e 
entire set of AD using satellite imagery with the same classification 
approach, spatial resolution and time frame for all subnational 
areas or for national coverage (see paras. 20 and 35 above), with 
the aim of enhancing the consistency and accuracy of the estimates 
in future submissions ( see para . 37 of the TATR).  
The iTAP  recognizes  that the inconsistences identified are caused 
because of improvements implemented for the results monitoring and 
estimated this criterion  by score 2.  
(ii) Is the data and information provided in the technical annex 
transparent? ( Has information been provided to allow an 
understanding of how UNFCCC guidance on results reporting has been 
addressed?)  1 The LULUCF experts consider ed the data and information provided 
in the technical annex is mostly transparent . (see para. 41 of the 
TATR) .  
However, the LULUCF experts noted that Chile’s technical annex 
does not include sufficient information to allow an assessment of 
the consistency  of data used in the FREL  and results with the data 
used in the latest GHG inventory (2016) submitted with the third 
BUR (see para. 22 of the TATR).  
The iTAP  takes into consideration the information provided by 
LULUCF experts in TATR and estimates  the score as 1.


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 132 
 
 
(iii) Is the data and information provided in the technical annex 
complete  (Has information been provided that allows for the 
reconstruction of the results?)  2 The LULUCF experts concluded that Chile provided the necessary 
information to allow for the reconstruction of the results of the 
implementation of the selected REDD -plus  activities (see paragraph 
25 of the TATR). The LULUCF experts considered the data and 
information provided in the technical annex to be complete (see 
para . 41 of the TATR) . 
The L ULUCF experts noted that, as part of the TA process, Chile 
provided additional information, in particular the calculation 
worksheets for the uncertainty analysis, the regional- scale forest 
fire statistics worksheets, the National Forest Inventory  data 
work sheets, and cadastre maps and land -use change maps. In 
addition, the technical annex includes links to Excel spreadsheets 
with details of the calculation of the  activity  results, thus increasing 
the transparency of the methods and AD used. The LULUCF exper ts 
commended Chile for its efforts to increase the transparency and 
ensure the completeness of the data and information provided, 
allowing for the reconstruction of the results  (see para. 19 of the 
TATR).  
(iv) Is the data and information provided in the t echnical annex 
consistent  (Were data and methodologies ap plied consistently over the 
results time series?)  
 2 The LULUCF experts consider the data and information provided in 
the technical annex to be consistent (based on the assumptions and 
information used)  and in accordance with the guidelines referred to 
in decision 14/CP.19, paragraph 11 ( see para . 41 of the TATR). T he 
LULUCF experts noted that Chile ’s estimation of the results of the 
implementation of its REDD -plus activities for its fiv e subnational 
territories was undertaken using a transparent approach and 
ensuring, to the extent possible, consistency  (see para . 32 of the 
TATR).  
(v) Is the data and information provided in the technical annex 
accurate (Does it neither over - nor under estimate emissions and/or 
removals?)  1 Some issues pertaining the accuracy of the data and information in 
the technical annex  were raised by the LULUCF  experts . As noted in 
paragraph 35 of the TATR, in response to a question from the 
LULUCF experts, Chile provided clarification on  the development of 
the AD used for the calculation of the FRELs/FRLs and the results. 
The AD applied for the FRELs/FRLs were developed using cadastre 
maps with different initial years for different regions of the country, 
whereas the results were estimated using land -use change maps 
with similar start and end dates for different regions  and activities . 
Both sets of AD use the sa me land -use and land -use-change


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 133 
 
 
categories, with a minor adjustment in the application of the forest 
definition pertaining to arborescent matorral. The land- use change 
maps are based on the cadastre maps. The LULUCF experts are of 
the view that Chile may b e underestimating AD by using coarser -
resolution satellite data (i.e. 30 m etre  Landsat images) and pixel-
based land -use-change classifications for the results period, while 
using higher  resolution data (i.e. 5 metre  RapidEye and S POT  
images) with visual interpretation to estimate emissions for the 
FRELs/FRLs. The courser pixels used for the results period may 
register a land -use change (e.g. forest to non -forest) depending on 
the thresholds chosen for the spectral indices and may indi cate 
fewer areas compared with the high -resolution images.  
Chile identified the following technical support and capacity -
building needs for the further improvement of its estimation of AD  
and emission factors : enhancing the accuracy of identifying land-
use change from non- forest to native forest; developing 
methodologies for monitoring activities in high cloud cover regions ; 
strengthening the technical capacity to monitor other regions and 
forest types under the national forest monitoring syste m; and 
applyi ng the Monte Carlo approach for the uncertainty analysis of 
estimates ( see para. 39 of the TATR).  
The iTAP  takes into consideration the comments provided by the 
LULUCF experts and estimated the score as 1.  
(vi) What is the number of years between the last year of the FREL 
period, and the year corresponding to the results being proposed for 
payments?  2 As noted by Chile  in its funding proposal , the number of years that 
took place between the last year of Chile’s FREL/FRL is the 2013, 
and the first year of the results being proposed for results -based 
payments, 2014, is zer o. (section B.2.1 (vi)).  
(vii) Has the country provided information on aggregate uncertainties, 
taking into account national c apabilities and circumstances?  1 Table 57 of the REDD -plus  technical annex shows that the 
aggregate uncertainty of the results reported by Chile is 38.4  per 
cent . 
According to the scorecard , if uncertainty is between 30  per cent  and 
50 per cent,  the score should be 1.  
(viii) Has information been provided on paym ents that have been (or 
are expected to be) received from other sources for results recognized 
by the countryd from the same national or subnational area during the 
period for which a country is proposing to receive payments from the 
GCF? And has the country provided sufficient assurance that results 2 As noted in the funding prop osal (section B.2.2 (viii)), the 
Government of Chile is not offering or planning to offer in the future 
the results achieved during the period 2014 –2016 to any instances 
other than the GCF . The way of ensuring this is the designation of 
CONAF as the national agency in charge of manag ing REDD -plus


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 134 
 
 
that have been paid for by other sources have been excluded from  the 
total volume offered to the GCF?  RBP s. According to the funding proposal , this, together with the 
legal and institutional arrangements established at regional and 
local level with  relevant counterparts through bilateral agreements, 
might be considered as relevant measures to mitigate the risk of 
competing emission reduction  title s among different agencies. As 
an additional measure to avoid any risk of competing emission 
reduction  titles among different agencies or any other arrangement, 
CONAF has agreed with the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  of 
the W orld Bank that the negotiation of an emission reduction 
purchase agreement  will take into account mitigation results of the 
same areas but f or the period 2018 to 2025.  
Moreover, regarding the private voluntary market, CONAF, as focal 
point for REDD -plus  in Chile, has to be informed when a private 
organization or NGO has the intention of participating in the private 
carbon market. This is in the process of being formalized as a 
requirement for projects through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Additionally , CONAF is continuously monitoring platforms such as 
the IHS Markit Environmental Registry. There are two recorded 
private initiatives that matched the period and area considered for 
GCF  RBPs . The carbon credits from these two projects in the period 
2014 –2016 were subtracted from the total volume of the archived 
REDD- plus results and  considered in the calculation of the achieved 
volume of REDD -plus results offered to the pilot programme 
(section A of the funding proposal ). 
(ix) Are the results proposed to the GCF for payment included in a 
registry or similar system that tracks emission s reductions and 
corresponding paymentse to ensure there is no past or future double 
payment [or use] of such emission s reduction s? 2 According to the funding proposal , the emission reductions 
submitted to the GCF are currently not in a public registry, but a 
tracking system called “Emission Reduction Registry System” is 
being developed and tested by a consortium formed by IHS Markit 
and Santiago Climate Exchange in a consultancy for CONAF 
(financed by the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  readiness 
program me). This Registry System is currently being tested, and 
the expected result is to have a public platform were the emission 
reductions generated by Chile and by private org anizations can be 
available for potential buyers, avoiding double payment situations 
and increasing transparency. After the end of the consultancy, this 
national alternative will be evaluated by Chile, along with other 
alternative registry/tracking systems  provided by the interested


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 135 
 
 
international organizations. This decision is still pending review of 
the international platforms available.  
Total score section B  41  
Any fails  ☐ Yes 
X No   
Abbreviations:  AD = activity data, AT = Assessment Team (under the aegis of the UNFCCC) , BUR = biennial updated report, CO 2 = carbon dioxide, 
DOM= dry organic matter ,  
EF = emission factors, emission reduction s = ER s, FREL = forest reference emission level, FRL = forest reference level, GHG = greenhouse gas, HFLD =  
High Forest Low Deforestation  , IPCC = Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, LULUCF = Land Use and Land -Use Change and Forestry, RBP = 
results -based payments, SOC = soil organic carbon, TA  = technical assessment , TAP = Technica l Advisory Panel, TAR = third  assessment report, TATR  
= technical report of the technical analysis , tCO 2eq = tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent, UNFCCC  = United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.  
a This refers to a buffer where a percentage of the ERs is kept to address  the risk of reversals. The amount of ERs to be fed into the buffer depends on a 
risk analysis carried out following the gui dance provided by the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility’s Carbon Fund.  
b Addendum to ER Programme 
<https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/system/files/documents/Chile%20Doc.%20ERPA%20ENCCRV_Version%208%20_16_10_2018  
%20limpio -v3%20%28english%29.pdf>.  
c Letter of intent signed with the World Bank , available at  
<https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/s ystem/files/documents/Letter%20of%20Intent%20signed 
%20Chile.pdf>.  
d Through the REDD -plus national entity or focal point, where appointed.  
e Tracking information should, at a minimum, identify for each of these results the corresponding national or subnat ional area, the entity eligible to 
receive payment, the year generated, the source of RBP received and, where possible, the identifying number.  
 
Section C:   Non -carbon elements  
C.1. Cancun Safeguards  
Does the “summary of information on safeguards” provide information on how each of the safeguards below were addressed and respected in a way  
that ensures transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness:  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(pass/fail)  Remarks


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 136 
 
 
(i) That actions complement or are consistent with the objectives of 
national forest programmes and relevant international conventions 
and agreements.  Pass  The REDD -plus policy  of Chile  is an integral part of the ENCCRV  
approved by the G overnment of Chile in 2016. A ctivities 
implemented as part of the REDD -plus programme and the 
achievement s of the emission reductions  are kept in full 
compliance with this strategy developed based on broad 
stakeholder consultations. ENCCRV takes into consideration all 
national forest programmes and international commitments of the 
country.  
(ii) Transparent and effective national forest governance structures, 
taking into account national legislation and sovereignty.  Pass  All the phases of REDD -plus, throughout the preparation and 
implementation of ENCCRV and including the achievement of the  
emission reduction  results, ensured (and will keep on ensuring) 
the promotion of transparency and effectiveness of national forest 
and environmental governance structures, and th at national 
legislation and sovereignty are  taken into account.  
The highest decision -making body is the Council of Ministers for 
Sustainability, which validates multisectoral documents, such as 
national communications to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ), NDCs and a ction plans.  
The National Forest Corporation (CONAF) is  the national focal 
point  for REDD plus and is in charge of the generation and 
reporting of ERs, preparation  and reporting of FREL/FRL and the 
technical annex of REDD -plus results, and the coordinati on of the  
national forest monitoring system, ensuring at the same time the 
provision of activity data to the system.  
The Climate Change and Environmental Services U nit (UCCSA), 
which sits under the CONAF, has the role of executing entity and 
coordinator of activities carried out within the framework of the 
ENCCRV. In this role, the UCCSA maintains a permanent technical 
link with  the CONAF Interagency Committee on Cli mate Change,  
which is  made up of CONAF technical managers.  
Similarly, CONAF maintains its link with the Interministerial 
Technical Committee on Climate Change , led by the Office of 
Agricultural Studies and Policies of  the Ministry of Agriculture 
(MINAGRI) with the aim of strengthening the technical decisions 
that are adopted within the framework of ENCCRV . 
The transparency of the whole management system is ensured by 
the relevant national laws and international conventions. ENCCRV 
has a web  page  that  is rich with information and fact s on the


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 137 
 
 
implementation of REDD -plus  programme 
(<https://www.enccrv.cl >). 
(iii) Respect for the knowledge and rights of indigenous peoples and 
members of local communities by taking into account relevant 
international obligations, national circumstances and laws, and noting 
that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted the United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  Pass  ENCCRV ensures  respect for the knowledge and the rights of 
indigenous peoples and members of local communities, complying 
with international obligations ratified by Chile , its circumstances 
and national legislation . Chile ratified the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,  which was 
approv ed by the United Nations General Assembly . 
In order to respect the safeguards, and taking into account the 
existing legal framework, Chile generated, through CONAF, specific 
policies that promote e quity and social inclusion  of local 
population  and seeks, among other aspects, to respect the 
tradition and culture of the peasant and indigenous communities 
that depend on forests (Forest Policy 2015 –2035).  
ENCCRV also manages instruments to ensure respect for the 
dignity, human rights, economies and cultures of i ndigenous 
peoples and provide social and economic benefits that are 
culturally appropriate, such as the Indigenous People's 
Participation Framework , in annex 5 of the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework of the ENCCRV 
(<https://www.enccrv.cl >). 
(iv) The full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in 
particular indigenous peoples and local communities, in the actions 
referred to in paragr aphs 70 and 72 of this decision.   This safeguard was addressed by stressing the participation of  
indigenous peoples and women in  the development and 
implementation of the ENCCRV, as there has been strong interest 
in mainstreaming minorities in the implementation process. Each 
of these forms of participation have associated national and 
international legislation and regulations, from which management 
instruments are derived that allow for "respecting" this safeguard 
and achieving compliance. The approach to address, respect and 
comply with this safeguard is  as follows:  
The Plan for the Implementation of Social and Environmental 
Safeguards for Public and Indigenous Consultation a  Self-
assessmenta has been prepared, taking into consideration the 
guidelines established at international and national level on this


---
*Page 138*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 138 
 
 
matter (available on CONAF  web site). This document  guided the 
development of the entire participatory formulation process of the 
ENCCRV between 2015 and 2016. The Plan included the 
organization of regional workshops and a national workshop, 
ensuring local,  regional and national representation, considering a 
multi- sectoral and multi -stakeholder approach and mainstreaming 
of the gender approach and pluricultural participation.  
(v) That actions are consistent with the conservation of natural forests 
and biolo gical diversity, ensuring that the actions referred to in 
paragr aph 70 of this decision are not used for the conversion of 
natural forests, but are instead used to incentivize the 12 protection 
and conservation of natural forests and their ecosystem servic es, and 
to enhance other social and environmental benefits.   In accordance to the funding proposal , Chile fully addresse s and 
respect s this safeguard in the achievement of its emission 
reductions.   
To address this safeguard, the ENCCRV considers the integr ation 
of the ratified international agreements  and conventions signed by 
the country , as well as  the current national legislation, in regard to  
conservation of natural forests and biodiversity . CONAF – being 
the focal point for  these agreements and conventions - also 
considers the  close cooperation with other national coordinating 
entities .  The REDD -plus policy guidelines of the UNFCCC are also 
part of this integration process.  
This integration process is supported by broad stak eholder 
consultations particularly focusing on definitions of forest, forest 
degradation, deforestation  and other significant issues to be in 
compliance with safeguards . 
(vi) Actions to address the risks of reversals.  Pass  To address this safeguard, the procedure established in the 
document "ER Program Buffer Guidelines " of the Forest Carbon 
Partnership Facility  is being applied. This process includes (i) the 
identification of risks of reversals, where four risk factors , their 
description and valuation are analy sed corresponding to: the lack 
of broad and sustained support to key actors, the lack of 
institutional capacities and/or ineffective intersectoral/vertical 
coordination, the lack of long -term effectiveness in addre ssing the 
underlying factors, and exposure and vulnerability to natural 
disturbances (risks of disturbances and natural disasters) ; and (ii)


---
*Page 139*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 139 
 
 
defining the elements to prevent and minimize potential reversals. 
The details of this analysis are presented in th e Safeguards 
Summary of Information.  
This safeguard will be addressed through the Measurement and 
Monitoring System of the ENCCRV , which includes elements of 
early warning and of  measurement, reporting and v erification as 
part of the ENCCRV . 
As a result of  the analysis of  the reversal risk potential of the 
ENCCRV , a reserve fund of 21  per cent  of the emission reductions  
is established as a buffer for reversals, which will remain in place 
during the validity  period  of the ENCCRV . This fund will be 
generated only from emission reductions due to deforestation and 
degradation, since increases in removals due to increased stocks 
or conservation are exposed to natural and anthropogenic risks 
that may affect their permanence over time.  
(vii) Actions to reduce disp lacement of emissions.  Pass  Risks of emission displacement associated with the mitigation of 
deforestation and degradation activities will be monitored within 
the ENCCRV through the following indicators: e xpansion of 
agricultural- livestock activity and urban and industrial expansion ; 
unsustainable use of vegetation resources for production ; forest 
fires ; unsustainable management of forest crops ; and 
unsustainable use of vegetation resources for livestock . 
There are several laws for reduc ing emission displacement 
process es.  Among them, Law No. 20.283 / 2008, on Recovery of 
the Native Forest and Forestry Development should be highlighted 
in the context of emission displacement reduction. This law is a 
legal instrument  whose objectives include: the protection, 
recovery and improvement of native forests, in order to ensure 
forest sustainability and environmental policy, in line with 
ENCCRV. This Law, among other regulations, defines and regulates 
forest types, management  plans, environmental protection norms, 
the Conservation, Recovery and Sustainable Management Fund of


---
*Page 140*
---

 
GCF/B.24/0 2/Add. 06 
Page 140 
 
 
the native forest and the procedures and sanctions in cases of 
violation of its norms.  
C.2. Use of proceeds and non -carbon benefits  
Criteria  Evaluation 
(pass/fail)  Remarks  
Has information been provided on how proceeds will be used 
consistent with GCF policies? Has information been provided on how 
the proceeds will be used in a manner consistent with the country’s 
nationally determined contribu tion, national REDD -plus  strategy 
and/or low -carbon development plans and policies? Has information 
been provided on how the proceeds will be used in a manner that 
contributes to the long -term sustainability of REDD -plus activities, 
including non -carbon be nefits?  2 Yes, proceeds will be fully reinvested into the activities 
identified in ENCCRV and new emission reduction  units 
will be generated,  which  contributes to the country’s  
nationally determined contribution .  
Total score section C    
Any fails  ☐ Yes   ☒  
No  
Abbreviations:  ENCCRV = National Strategy of Climate Change and Vegetation Resources , ERs = emission reductions, FREL = forest reference emission 
level, FRL = forest reference level, NDC = nationally determined contribution , FREL = Forest Ref erence Emission Level.  
a Available  at <https://www.enccrv -chile.cl/index.php/documentos/item/352 -plan -sis>.


---
*Page 141*
---

G
CF/B.24/02 /Add.06 
Page 141 
Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment (FP 120) 
Proposal name:  Chile REDD- p lus results -based payments for results period 2014 -2016
Accredited entity:  F ood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Impact potential  
FAO welcome s the “High” assessment score . Chile successfully reported in a transparent, 
consistent  and accurate manner the results of the ENCCRV implementation . Chile ENCCRV 
aimed to implement adequate policies and measures for addressing the drivers of 
deforestation, forest degradation and the barriers to restoration, conservation and 
sustainable management of all types of forests. As mentioned by the iTAP , the REDD -plus 
process in Chile is an integral part of ENCCRV. Chile is committed  to use the results -based 
payments  funds for achieving results in  terms of climate change mitigation and adaptation in 
line with its national political commitment s.  
Paradigm shift potential  
FAO welcome s the “High” assessment score. 
Sustainable development potential 
FAO welcome s the “High” assessment score and share s the recognition and appreciation for 
the action s implemented between 2014- 2016  to reduce deforestation  and degradation, 
increased carbon stock and forest conservation  in Chile, contributing to sustainable 
development .   
Also, the i TAP acknowledge d that t he benefit -sharing  system to be implemented  for the 
reinvestment of the proceeds is built in accordance with  the ENCCRV . This will make a 
significant contribution to the sustainable development process of the most vulnerable 
population such as rural population and indigenous peoples living in the five REDD- plus 
programme host regions  in Chile.  
Needs of the recipient  
FAO welcome s the “High” assessment score . 
Country ownership  
FAO welcome s the “High” assessment score  
ENCCRV was formulated and approved in 2016 after three years of intensive  consultations 
with national and international key players, taking into consideration all national and 
international commitments of Chile.  In addition, th e Nationally Designated Authority  (NDA)  
actively supported the development of the F unding Proposal by providing technical 
recommendations through the Technical Advisory Panel (TAP).


---
*Page 142*
---

  
       GCF/B.24/02 /Add.06  
Page 142 
 
 
 
 Efficiency and effectiveness  
FAO welcome s the “High” assessment score . 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
Chile and FAO acknowledge  the iTAP 's positive evaluation of the F unding Proposal “ Chile 
REDD -plus RBP for results period 2014- 2016 ”.


---
*Page 143*
---

1 Annex 4 
Gender Assessment 
Part I  
I. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  2 
II.  Gender inequalities in Chil e ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  3 
a) Education  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  3 
b) Labour force participation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 4 
c) Poverty Rate  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  6 
d) Political engagement  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  8 
e) Health  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  8 
f) Unpaid domestic and care work  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  10 
e) Social protection  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  11 
III. Legal and administrative framework protecting women and promoting gender equality in Chile  ........  12 
a) International protocols and frameworks ratified by Chile in support of
gender Equality, women’s empowerment and Human Rights  ................................ ................................ ...........  12 
b) National gender equality and women’s empowerment frameworks in Chile  ................................ .................  13 
c) Institutional framework : National machinery for the advancement of women  ................................ ...............  14 
d) National Policies, Plans and Programs on gender equality  ................................ ................................ ...........  15 
IV. Gender Issues Around Forests and REDD+ National Strategy  ................................ ................................ . 17 
a) Gender gaps within the target groups of the  ENCCRV REDD+ actions  ................................ .......................  17 
b) ENCCRV frameworks and policies supporting gender equality and women’s empowerment  ......................  22 
c) National REDD+ strategy design from a gender approach  ................................ ................................ ............  23 
The Participatory Process as a method ological base for mainstreaming the gender approach  ...................  23 
Inputs obtained from the women FGs and ENCCRV response  ................................ ................................ ..... 26 
d) Gender in the ENCCRV REDD+ Governance  ................................ ................................ ...............................  28 
e) Gender considerations in the national REDD+ safegu ards ................................ ................................ ...........  32 
V. Conclusions and recommendation s ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  36 
Proposals and steps to be followed ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  36 
VI. Biblography  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  41 
Gender documentation for FP120


---
*Page 144*
---

 2  
 
I. Introduction  
 
 
According to the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy  (UN Women, GCF, 2017)1 Chile REDD -plus RBP 
proposal must include a gender asse ssment and a gender action plan, in order to provide  a detailed analysis of 
the scope of the ENCCRV,  which REDD+ integrates, with regard to its ability to fulfil l international and national 
commitments in the field of gender equality and women’s rights.2 
 
Over the last years, Chile has made good strides in promoting gender equality. According to the ranking of the 
Global Gender Gap of the World Economic Forum for t he year 2018, Chile has a n index core of 0,717, ranking it 
54 out of 149 countries  (World Economic Forum, 2018) .3 The country has taken concrete actions to promote and 
integrate gender equality into the broader policy -making agenda of the “Objectives for Sustainable Development” 
and the commitments of the Regional Conference on Wo men in Latin America and the Caribbean . Some of those 
actions have meant progress in the situation or status of women, while others have revealed the persistence of 
discrimination and of obstacles to full equality of opportunity between men and women in the country.  Additionally,  
the progress that has been made often hide s geographic differences in different dimension s of gender equality.  
 
The actions REDD+ of the ENCCRV will focus on a significant part of the national territory where there is a high 
concentration and diversity of forests in th e country, comprising five of the fifteen administrative regions of Chile: 
Maule, Biobío, Araucanía, Los Ríos and Los Lagos. These regions represent 22% of the total area of the country 
and host 41% of the Native Forest, with representation of 11 of the 12  Forest Types defined at the national level. 
In addition, these regions are those that have shown greater pressure on their forests due to the occurrence of 
forest fires, high demand for firewood, poverty and vulnerable population among others. From the be ginning the 
ENCCRV will consider this subnational area and will include actions for different types of property (fiscal and 
private), not ruling out that later it will be extended to other regions of the country.  The main objective of the 
ENCCRV is to esta blish itself as a framework for national action to support the recovery and protection of the 
native forest, xerophytic formations and promote the establishment of plant formations in soils that can be 
afforested belonging or used by small and medium -sized  owners, including women and indigenous communities  
(CONAF, 2017) . 
 
The gender assessment/ action plan  presented in t his document assess es the gender sensitiveness of the 
ENCCRV REDD+ targets, activities  indicators  and results . The object ive is to provide an analysis tailored to the 
gender -related aspects and the gender mainstreaming strategy  of the ENCCRV, and make recommendations in 
line with  the Gender Policies of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and of FAO.  
 
 
 
  
 
1 The GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan was adopted by The GCF Board  in March 2015 (GCF/B.09/10)  (UN Women, GCF, 2017 ). 
2 More information concerning the Gender Equality Policy of FAO  in: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  (2017), Guidelines for 
the assessment of gender mainstreaming, Food and Agriculture Orga nization of the United Nations Office of Evaluation (OED), Rome.  
3 In 2006 Chile had an index core of 0,645, ranking it 78. World Economic Forum  (2018) , Global Gender Gap Report 2018, Geneva, World Economic Forum.


---
*Page 145*
---

 3 II.  Gender inequalities in Chile  
 
a) Education  
 
 Educational level of boys and girls  
 
Chile has made progress in recent years in expanding the coverage and accessibility of education . The access to 
formal school education and higher education for males and females in the last few years has remained in equal 
conditions, highlighting the upward trend of females’ access to education, increasing by 0.53% between 2009 and 
2014 , and 1%  between 2014 -2016 . With regard to access as per educational level, figures also show equal 
characteristics, although for four of the five levels considered, access to education is briefly higher in males; higher 
education is the only category that females have more access to in 2014 (Table 1).  
 
Table 1. Students enrolled in traditional education , by gender and education level, 2014  
 
Education Level  Students Enrolled  
National Total  Male  Female  
Number  Percentage  Number  Percentage  Number  Percentage  
Pre-school  378,052  7.9 184,479  3.88 193,573  4.07 
Special  176,818  3.7 106,726  2.24 70,092  1.47 
Traditional 
Primary  1,957,416  41.2 1,006,378  21.16  951,038  19.99  
Secondary  1,029,032  21.6 517,611  10.88  511,421  10.75  
Higher  1,215,413  25.6 583,381  12.26  632,032  13.29  
TOTAL  4.756.731  100 2,398,575  50.42  2,358,156  49.58  
Source:  Statistical Compendium, 2015, INE.  
 
Despite progress, w omen ’s access to  formal school education still depends on significant differences by area of 
residence (rural -urban)  and ethnic origi ns. Accor ding to data from the Ministry of Education (Mineduc 2015) t he 
Educational levels of women older  than 15 years in rural areas of Chile are lower than in urban areas . 22.5% of 
rural women have a schooling of less than 5 years, in relation to the urban area (10% of schooling in this same 
age group ) (Ministry of Women and Gender Equity (2017). I n other hand, wo men who identify themselves as 
indigenous, are completed with a lower educational level than women who do not identify with an indigenous 
people. In higher education, the percentage of self -identi fied women as indigenous with a higher technical level is 
9.18%, while in the rest of the population it is a little higher (10.04 %) (INE, 2018).  
 
The access to education becomes more difficult for women living in rural areas and belonging to indigenous 
communities, since they must face language and cultural gaps, in addition to the geographical barriers. In terms 
of figures, 14.9% of indigenous women manage to complete secondary education, compared to 18.6% of non -
indigenous women. With respec t to higher education, only 3.6% of indigenous women manage to finish it, 
compared to 7.9% of non -indigenous women (CASEN, 2015).  
 
illiteracy rates  
 
The illiteracy rates of the country’s population have considerably decreased in the last 15 years . Between 1990 
and 2015, for men and women, the reduction accounted for 39%. In 2015, the trend remains where women are 
the ones who -in a larger percentage - do not know how to read or write.


---
*Page 146*
---

 4  
Table 2. Percentage of Inhabitants 15 years or older who do not know how to read or write, country total  
 
Years  Men Women  
1990  4.9 5.4 
1996  4.3 5.3 
2000  3.7 4 
2003  3.7 4.2 
2006  3.7 4.1 
2009  3.3 3.7 
2011  3.1 3.5 
2013  3.6 3.8 
2015  3 3.3 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN), 2015.  
 
 
It is worth mentioning that, comparing the level of literacy, educational level and condition of income -related 
poverty (described in the following paragraph); there is a direc t relation between a low level of education and the 
condition of income -related poverty (Table 3).  
 
Table 3. Educational Profile of individuals 15 years or older in conditions of poverty due to income, both genders  
 
Individuals 15 years or older 
by respective group  Condition  Years  
2006  2009  2011  2013  2015  
Illiteracy Rate  Poor  7.4 5.6 5.3 6.2 5.9 
Not Poor  2.7 2.9 2.8 3.4 2.8 
Schooling Average  Poor  8.4 8.8 9 9.1 9.3 
Not Poor  10.8 10.9 10.9 11 11.2 
Percentage of individuals 
with unfinished secondary 
education  Poor  69.4 62.9 61.8 60.3 57.3 
Not Poor  41.2 39.6 39.9 38.6 36.7 
 Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015.  
 
b) Labour force participation  
 
In Chile, Female labour force participation (LFP) and employment have risen only slightly over the last 25 years. 
Women have increased their labour market participation rate faster than men: l abour participation has been 
maintained with no major variations  for men; for women, from 1990 to 2015 it has increased by 14. 9 percentage 
points (Figure 8).  
Figure 1 . Labor engagement rate, by gender, 1990 to 2015.  
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015  
 
 
Nevertheless, the growing incorporation of women to the labor market has been accompanied by a process of  
feminization and a female concentration in some occupations an d sectors of production. The study “ Greater 
Incorporation of Women in the Chilean Economy” from the Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism, in its


---
*Page 147*
---

 5 conclusions it states: “ an increase in female occupation positively impacts national production, measure d through 
Real GDP per capita, nevertheless and due to the types of occupations, this impact is not yet as significant as the 
one produced when increasing male occupation.”  
 
At the national level, the main branches of economic activities that women perform  (occupied inhabitants, 15 years 
and older) are, first of all, wholesale trade and retail (22.5%); Teaching (13.7%); and private households with 
domestic service (12.2%).  It is worth mentioning that the area of agriculture, livestock development, hunting and 
forestry, branches associated with ENCCRV -activities, accounts for 5.4% of Chile’s working women  Ministry of 
Social Development, 2017b) .  
 
 
Figure 2. Distribution of occupied population by branch of economic activity and gender, 2015  
 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015.  
 
Considering the gender division of inhabitants who dedicate time to each economic activity, we can observe that 
in the Construction area, only 5.7% of the total occupied population in this activity are women, accounting for low 
figures; on the contrary, for the category Private Households with domestic service, 82.8% of the occupied 
population in this area are women. It is worth mentioning that in the area of agriculture, livestock development, 
hunting a nd forestry, associated with ENCCRV -activities, 26.7% of occupied inhabitants are women (Figure 6)  
(Ministry of Social Development, 2017b) .  
.  
Figure 3. Percentage distribution of each economic activity branch and gender, 2015  
. 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey,


---
*Page 148*
---

 6 c) Poverty Rate  
 
The situation of poverty in Chile, based on the 2015 National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN) conducted by the 
Ministry of Social Development (MDS), includes measuring poverty through two methodologies: income -related 
poverty and multi -dimensional poverty (Ta ble 5).    
 
Considering the number of people in situation of poverty according to gender, we can highlight that the amount of 
women in situation of income -related poverty is 0.9% more than men; nevertheless, under the multidimensional 
poverty approach, men  lead by 1 percentage point in terms of poverty conditions.  
 
 
Table 4. Percentage of individuals in condition of poverty, by gender, country total, 2015.  
 
Methodology  Total individuals (%)  
Men Women  Average  
In condition of income -related poverty4 11.2 12.1 11.75 
In condition of multidimensional poverty6 21.4 20.4 20.9 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015.  
 
In terms of the quantity of households in condition of poverty in relation to the gender of the head of household7 
(Figure 4) and within the perspective of poverty due to income, the gap is broadened, with more quantity of 
households headed by women (12.9%) than men (8.8%). This gap has persisted for many years, even though the 
total quantity of households in these co nditions has significantly decreased in the last 10 years (Figure 5). With 
regard to the multidimensional poverty of households, this gap is reduced, and there are a higher percentage of 
households headed by men in condition of poverty.  According to this,  the 2015 feminity index of poverty8 records 
a ratio -within the population in condition of income -related poverty - of 107107.9 women for every 100 men; and for 
 
4 Condition  of individuals who are part of households whose total monthly income is lower than the “line of poverty by equivalent individual ”, or minimum 
income set to satisfy basic food and non -food needs in that same period, in accordance with the quantity of househol d members.  
5 Out of this total, 8.1% accounts for non -extreme poverty and 3.5% accounts for extreme income -related poverty (2015 CASEN Survey) . 
6 Individuals that are part of households that do not reach proper life conditions within a set of five relevan t aspects of well -being, among which we may 
find: (1) Education; (2) Health; (3) Work and Social Security; (4) Household and Environment; and (5) Networks and Social Coh esion. The previous conditions 
are observed through weighted set of 15 indicators (thre e for each area) with which household deficiencies are identified. Households that accumulate 
22.5% or more deficiencies are considered in a condit ion of multidimensional poverty (2015 CASEN Survey).  
7 According to the 2015 Casen Survey, 39.5% of households are headed by women, out of which 77.4% are single -parent homes (2015 CASEN Survey).  
8 Ratio between the quantity of women in poverty and men in poverty , multiplied by 100.


---
*Page 149*
---

 7 the same year, for every 100 men in condition of multidimensional poverty, there are 94.1 women  in the same 
condition (2015 CASEN Survey , Ministry of Social Development, 2017b ). 
 
Figure 4. Percentage of households in condition of income -related poverty or multidimensional poverty, by gender 
of head of household  
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Percentage of households in condition of poverty by income, by gender of head of household  
 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015.  
 
This background information is consistent with one of the main domestic issues around gender equality, which 
accounts for the current wage gap between men and women in every region of the country (Figur e 6). 
 
Figure 6.  Monthly Average Income from main occupation, by gender and region  
 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015.


---
*Page 150*
---

 8  
d) Political engagement  
 
In 2015 in Chile, 27.1% of women and 25.4% of men declared having participated in organizations or organized 
groups9. Considering the population’s gender division (Figure 11), we can observe that there is a majority of 
women participation in 10 out of the 13 types of organizations considered  (Ministry of Social Developme nt, 2017b) .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Distribution of the population that participates in each type of organization, by gender, 2015  
 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015.  
 
Despite the previously described levels of political engagement of women, engagement in popular election 
positions (Table 9 and Table 10) is significantly low, with considerable gaps that have been decreasing.  
 
Table 5. Distribution between representatives elected in local governments, according to election year 
 
Election Year  Municipalities  City Departments  
Men  Women  Gap Men  Women  Gap 
1992  93.6 6.4 -87.2 88.0 12.0 -76.0 
1996  90.6 9.4 -81.2 85.6 14.4 -71.2 
2000  87.7 12.3 -75.4 82.8 17.2 -65.6 
2004  87.8 12.2 -75.6 78.8 21.2 -57.6 
2008  87.5 12.5 -75.0 76.7 23.3 -53.4 
2012  87.5 12.5 -75.0 74.8 25.2 -49.6 
2016  88.1 11.9 -76.2 88.0 12.0 -76.0 
Source:  Gender Indicators, INE.  
e) Health  
 
Maternal Mortality Rate  
 
In terms of maternal mortality, Chile has had increasing indexes in the last few years, and according to official 
statistics it has registered an increase between 2009 and 201 6 (Table 6).   
 
Table 6. Maternal Mortality Ratio for one hundred thousand live births


---
*Page 151*
---

 9 Year  Maternal Mortality Ratio for one hundred 
thousand live births.  
2009  17 
2010  18.3 
2011  18.5 
2012  22.1 
2013  21.4 
2014  22,2 
2015  22,8 
2016  21,9 
Source:  Department of Health Statistics and Information (DEIS). Ministry of Health (MINSAL).  
 
 
 
 
Infant Mortality Rate  
 
In 2014, the national infant mortality average reached a rate of 7.2 for each one thousand live births; average 
which accounts for 1010 regions, mainly from the country’s northern and southern zones.  
  
 
Figure 8. Infant Mortality Rate (for children under one year of age) by region, 2012 and 2014  
 
 
Source:  Vital Statistics. INE’s 2014 Yearbook.  
 
 
The infant mortality rate for the 1 to 4 years old category (Table 7) for males is 21.8% higher than for females. In 
a regional scale analysis, there are 411 regions whose infant mortality rates for males and females show rates 
which  exceed the national average.  Female mortality exceeds the national average in 612 out of 15 regions of 
 
9 Percentage of individual s of 12 years or older who participate  or have participated in the last 12 months in organizations or have organized groups 
(Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey, 2015).  
10 Regions of Tarapaca , Antofagasta, Atacama, Coquimb o, O´Higgins, Maule, La Ar aucania, Los Lagos, Aisen and  Magallanes.  
11 Regions of Arica and  Parinacota, Antofagasta, Coquimbo and  Los Ríos.  
12 Regions of Arica and  Parinacota , Antofagasta, Atacama, Coquimbo, Los Ríos  and Los Lagos.


---
*Page 152*
---

 10 Chile. The region of Arica and Parinacota presents the highest mortality rat e within the 1 to 4 year old category 
both in male and female (9.3% and 6.9% respectively).  
 
Table 7. Infant Mortality, 1 to 4 year old category, by gender and region  
 
Region  Infant Mortality Rate, 2014 (Rate per 10,000 inhabitants of the age 
group)  
Male  Female  
Arica and Parinacota  9.3 6.9 
Tarapaca  2.5 1.8 
Antofagasta  3 3.1 
Atacama  2 5 
Coquimbo  3.5 2.7 
Valparaíso  2.3 2.1 
Metropolitana  2.4 2.3 
Libertador B. O'Higgins  3.2 2.1 
Maule  4.3 3 
Biobio  4.5 2.4 
La Araucania  5.2 1.5 
Los Ríos  6.6 4.8 
Los Lagos  3.3 3.8 
Aysen  0 0 
Magallanes  0 0 
TOTAL  3.2 2.5 
Source:  DEIS. Ministry of Health  
 
Food security  and nutrition  
 
With regard to the food and nutrition of individuals, in Chile there are food and nutrition gaps between men and 
women, and also with respect to the area in which they reside. According to the Ministry of Health, the healthy 
eating index shows that in urba n areas, 7.3% of women have an unhealthy diet and 9% of men have an unhealthy 
diet. In rural areas, 4.3% of women have an unhealthy diet and 7.3% of men have an unhealthy diet. From this, it 
can be observed that in rural areas individuals have a healthier diet than in urban areas, and in general, women 
have a healthier diet than men.  
 
On the other hand, with respect to the overweight and obesity of the individuals, there are also gaps by area and 
gender. The Ministry of Health states that in urban areas, 33.9% of women and 44.8% of men are overweight, and 
32.6% of women and 18.6% of men are obese. With regard to rural areas, 31.7% of women and 39.2% of men 
are overweight, and 36.3% of women and 22.7% of men are obese. Thus, it is observed that altho ugh there are 
no large gaps per zone, there are important gaps between gender, since in the case of overweight, women suffer 
less in this trend compared to men, but in the case of obesity women suffer this condition to a greater extent than 
men (National F ood Consumption Survey, Ministry of Health, 2014), . 
 
f) Unpaid domestic and care work  
 
In Chile domestic and reproductive work in the household, as well as the care responsibility for dependents, 
continue to be culturally recognized as the female functions. A ccording to data from the 2015 Time -Use Survey, 
the distribution of paid and unpaid work is very highly unequal by gender and socioeconomic stratum. In terms of 
hours, men spend a total of 2.7 hours on unpaid work in a typical day, while women spend 5.9 hours (INE, 2016). 
When analyzing the total workload (which measures unpaid and paid work, together with transportation time) it is 
possible to verify that Chilean women perform a greater proportion of paid and unpaid activities than men . In the 
employed population of 15 years old, the total workload presents pronounced gender differences:  9.78 hours for


---
*Page 153*
---

 11 men and 11.46 hours for women on a weekday, and on a weekend day the load of hours is lower but still an 
important difference is maintain ed by sex; moreover, the participation of women in domestic work and care 
intensifies during the weekends (Arriagada y Miranda, 2019) . These gender gaps translates into gender 
inequalities that undermine opportunities and conditions for women's labor inser tion, generating a double pressure 
on them -as a family care and as a worker - that increases among those who are living in poverty (Arriagada y 
Miranda, 2019).  
 
e) Social protection  
 
ln Chile, the pension system underwent profound changes after the implem entation of the 2008 reform. Previously, 
the sector's operational reform in 1981 replaced the pay -as-you-go system with an individual capitalization model. 
This system is based on contributions individually for an amount equivalent to 10% of wages. Tales o f deposit 
contributions in the calls Pension Fund Administrators (AFP).  
 
By 2015 the rate of affiliation to the pension system (total number of people who declared that they have 
contributed to a pension system in their lives) reached 80.3% of the total nu mber of respondents  of the Social 
Protection Survey (EPS).  The gap between males and females  exceeds 10 percentage points, the former reaching 
an enrollment rate of 85.3% while women only 75%.  This gap, although still significant, It has shown a clear 
tendency to decrease with respect to the previous rounds of the survey, mainly due to the sustained increase in 
the enrollment rate of active women in the system, which had risen from 63.5% in 2006 to 69% in 2009. For both 
sexes, a maximum was observed in the percentage of affiliates in the age group of 35 to 49 years, reaching a rate 
of 87.6% (93.3% men and 82.0% women). In contrast, the youngest section, from 18 to 34 years, reaches only 
74.1%, while the oldest, between 50 and 64 years, reaches a membersh ip rate of 79.1%. With regard to marital 
status, the highest rate of affiliation is observed among "separated, divorced or annulled" individuals, with 88.4%, 
while the lowest rate is among those who at the time of the survey indicate being "single", with 7 4%. Finally, the 
enrollment rate tends to be increasing with respect to the educational level (from 59.2% among those who indicate 
not having education to 93.6% among those who attained a postgraduate degree) and the number of children 
(71.2% for individua ls without children, 85.1% with 1 child, 86.5% with 2 children and 81.7% with 3 or more 
children)  (Ministry of Labor and Social Security, 2015) .


---
*Page 154*
---

 12 II. Legal and administrative framework protecting women and 
promoting gender equality in Chile  
 
a) International protocols and frameworks ratified by Chile in support of gender 
Equality, women’s empowerment and Human Rights  
 
Chile has made great legislative advances towards equality and social inclusion. The international -level 
instruments with the hig hest relevance and which have applicability in the country are  the Programme of Action  of 
the International Conference  on Population and Development (1994), the Beijing Declaration  and Platform for 
Action (1995) and the “UN General Assembly Resolution” of 2011, on women’s political participation, which 
reinforces that “the active participation of women, on equal conditions than men, in all levels of decision -making is 
essential for achieving equality, sustainable development, peace and democracy. The countr y has also ratified


---
*Page 155*
---

 13 and/or signed many key international conventions and treaties on gender equality, women‘s empowerment and 
human rights  (table 1).  
 
Table 8. Human r ights and gender equality instruments ratified in Chile  
 
Human Rights/  Gender equality 
Instrument   Ratification Status  
Ratification status of optional protocols  Signatur
e Ratification  
ILO convention Domestic Workers  (No. 189)  2015  2015   
International Convention for the Protection of 
all Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 
2010  2007  2009   
Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities, 2008  2007  2008  • The optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with  Disabilities of 2008 was 
signed by Chile in 2007 and ratified in 2008.  
ILO convention on indigenous and tribal 
peoples, 1989  2008  
 2008  
  
International Convention on the Protection of 
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and 
Members of their Families, 2003  1993  2005   
Inter-American Convention on the 
Prevention,  Punishment, and Eradication of 
Violence against Women (Convention of 
Belém do Pará), 1994  1994  1996   
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1990  1990  1990  • The optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in 
armed conflict of 2002 was signed by Chile in 2001 
and ratified in 2003.  
 
• The optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights o f the Child on the sale of children, child 
prostitution and child pornography of 2002 was 
signed by Chile in 2000 and ratified in 2003.  
 
• The optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on a communications procedure 
of 2014 was signed by Chile in 2012 and ratified in 
2015.  
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment, 1987  1987  1988  • The optional Protocol of 2006 was signed by Chile in 
2005 and ratified in 2008  
Convention on the Elimin ation of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), 
1981  1980  1989  • The optional Protocol of 2000 was signed by Chile in 
1999 but not ratified.  
International Covenant on Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights, 1976  1969  
 1972  
 • The optional Protocol of 2013 was signed by Chile in 
2009 but not ratified  
International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights, 1976  1969  1972  • The optional Protocol of 1976 ratified by Chile in 
1992.  The second Optional Protocol of 1991  signed 
by Chile in 2001, and ratified in 2008)  
International Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1969  1966  1971   
Source: Status of ratification of International Human Rights Treaties , interactive  dashboard.  http://indicators.ohchr.org  
 
 
b) National gender equality and women’s empowerment frameworks  in Chile  
 
At the national level, the State Constitution of Chile include the gender equality principles, in its article 19, number 
2, that states “Equality before the Law (…) men and women are equal before the law”, (National Congress, 1980). 
Additionally, the Law N o. 20,609/2012, establishes measures against discrimination and provides for in Article 
no.1, that every State administration -body, within their field of competition, will be responsible for creating and 
implementing policies destined to guaranteeing every  individual, without arbitrary discrimination, the enjoyment


---
*Page 156*
---

 14 and exercise of their legitimate rights and freedoms recognized by the Political Constitution of the Republic, and 
international laws and treaties ratified by Chile which are currently in for ce” (National Congress, 2014). The national 
legal framework on gender equality integrates different reforms in the educational domain, the electoral system, 
the labo ur policies. It is also important to mention that t he gender agenda for the period 2014 – 2017 promoted 
the gender approach in the design of a new Political Constitution , the National Investment System and the reform 
of the nursery regime for child -care services for workers, which will ensure the non -discrimination of female 
workers and will include  co-responsibility in child -caring.  
 
Table 9. National legal framework on gender equality in Chile  
 
Law/Act  Publicatio
n  Contents  
20.840   
 2015  
 Replaces the binominal electoral system with one of an inclusive proportional nature, introduces 
quota rules in favor of women, with the aim of promoting their participation in the National Congress  
20.820  2015  Creates the Ministry of Women and Gender Equality  
20.786  2014  Modifies the working day, home -leave conditions and composition of the remuneration of domestic 
workers; prohibits of the requirement of uniform in public places  
20.595  2012  Creates the Family Ethical Income for families of extreme p overty and the employment subsidy for 
women  
20.609  2012  Measures against discrimination  
20.507  2011  Typifies  the crime of trafficking of children and adults and establishes norms for its prevention and 
for more effective criminal prosecution  
20. 533  2011  Enables midwives to prescribe contraceptives  
20.545  2011  Modifies the maternity protection standards and incorporation of paternal postnatal leave  
20.480  2010  Modification of the Criminal Code and the Law on Domestic Violence  
20.418  2010  Sets standards on information, guidance and benefits in the field of fertility regulation.  
20.348  2009  Safeguards for the right to equality in remuneration between women and men  
20.399  2009  Grants childcare nurseries for worker s 
20.255  2008  Pension reform to grant women a bonus for daughter and son born alive  
20.166  2007  Extends the right of working mothers to breastfeed their children even when there is no nursery  
20.005  2005  Typifies  and establishes sanctions for sexual harassment  
Article 95 bis 
of the Labor 
Code  2003  Grants childcare nurseries for seasonal workers  
19.591  1998  Modifies the labour code on maternity protection  
 
Source:  Ministry of Women and Gender Equality  of Chile.  https://www.minmujeryeg.cl/ministerio/reformas -legales/leyes -que-benefician -a-
las-mujeres/  
 
 
 
 
 
c) Institutional framework : National machinery for the advancement of women  
 
 
Since its creation in 1991, the National Service for Women has succeeded in mainstreaming the gender 
perspective across all State institutions so that, in their activities, they take into account the differing needs 
of men and women, thereby promoting gender equality. However, the Service's capacity for independent 
action and its powers were limited by its administrative dependence on the Ministry of Social Development. 
That called for a new institutional framework for gender ma tters to bridge any persisting gaps, improve 
legislation and propose further measures to speed up the achievement of substantive equality in all areas 
covered by the Convention (CEDAW, 2016).  
 
Against that backdrop, Act No. 20.820, creating the Ministry fo r Women and Gender Equity and amending legal 
provisions specified in the Act, was promulgated on 20 March 2015 (CEDAW, 2016). Law No. 20,280/2015, 
establishes in its article No.1, the Ministry’s responsibilities for the collaboration with the President of the Republic 
in the design, coordination and assessment of policies, plans and programs destined to “promote gender equality, 
equality of rights and ensure the removal of all types of arbitrary discrimination against women”.  Likewise, this law 
defines that  “gender equality considers the identical or differential treatment between men and women and results 
in a total absence of any mean of arbitrary discrimination against women for being such, with regard to the ability


---
*Page 157*
---

 15 of enjoyment and exercise of all their human rights”  (National Congress, 2015).  The Ministry of Women and Gender 
Equality is responsible for safeguarding the coordination, consistency and coherence of policies, plans and 
programs with regard to gender equality, which shall be incorporated  in a cross -cutting manner to State actions.   
 
Chile has also achieved significant progress in gender -sensitive public policies from the Management 
Improvement Programme (PMG) on Gender commitments, instrument aimed at supporting the gender 
mainstreaming processes wit hin the Public Services. The Council of Ministers for Gender Equality was set up to 
promote the mainstreaming of gender equality in the ministries and services and provide relevant technical 
assistance, so that the gender perspec tive cuts across all State policies and activities (CEDAW, 2016). In this 
framework, the “Inter -ministerial Committee on Equal Rights and Gender Equality”, must collaborate in the 
implementation of policies, plans and programs focused on the equality of ri ghts between women and men, 
incorporating the gender perspective in State actions.  It is headed by the Minister of Women and Gender Equality 
and integrated by Ministers of the Interior and Public Security, of National defense, of Finance, Secretary Genera l 
of the Presidency, Minister of Economy, Development and Tourism, of Social Development, of Education, of 
Justice, of Labor and Social Welfare, of Health, of Agriculture, of Housing and Urbanism, and of the National 
Council of Culture and Arts. Other mini sters may be invited with the right to voice.  
 
In 2014, the National Institute of Statistics established, within the National Statistics Commission, the 
Subcommission on Gender Statistics, in cooperation with the Ministry for Women and Gender Equity. That  
permanent Subcommission aims to provide information as a basis for high -impact public policies with a 
gender perspective (CEDAW, 2016).  
Concerning the institutional mechanisms of gender, the following advances in this matter are highlighted: a) 22 
ministr ies with gender ministerial advisors (as of March 2018), b) 73 units, tables and gender commissions are in 
operation, c) 128 public services have gender managers, d) Fifteen regions have Regional Commissions on 
Gender Equity, e) Six ministries have establi shed regional gender tables in their sector: Justice, Works Public, 
Health, Education, Agriculture and Social Development (Ministry of Women and Gender Equity, 2018b).  
d) National Policies, Plans and Programs on gender equality  
 
 
In Chile, public policies related to gender equality has been developed f rom the 1990s until the current period, in 
the context of different post-dictatorship governments  that sought to correct the inherited socio -economic model 
and improve the livi ng conditions of the population . Several  fundame ntal reforms aimed at guaranteeing 
women's  rights  can be outlined in this line:  
 
- A Social Protection System based on rights was created in 2012 (law 20.595) during the second government of 
Michelle Bachelet, which aims to cove r the most pressing needs of 60% of the poorest population. Within this 
scheme, the following subsystems are running: a) Child Protection Subsystem .13 the b) Subsystem of Securities 
and Opportunities for families in poverty and extreme poverty (that replaced the Chile Solidario  program and the 
Ingreso Ético Familiar  program ); and c) the recently created Subsystem of Supports and Care that is oriented to 
people with special long -term care needs: elderly and dependent people, and their caregivers. However, the 
proportion of the budget allocated in 2018 to the three subsystems is very different: Subsystem of Securities and 
Opportunities (79.3%; Child Protection Subsystem: 17% and Subsystem of Supports and Care, 3.7%. According 
to some evaluations tha t have been made of these programmes, the coverage of these measures is insufficient 
for the existing demand. In spite of the fact that these measures allowed access to health and retirement benefits 
for the poorest population, at present there is no artic ulated system of care that coordinates the diverse existing 
policies of education, health and social security. It is important to highlight, however, the efforts to promote public, 
private and family co -responsibility, and the challenges that exist for the  achievement of "de -feminization" of care, 
which faces deep cultural barriers  (Arriagada y Miranda, 2019) . 
 
- At the local level, one of the main goals of the Ministry of Women and Gender Equality  has been the strengthening 
and expansion of the Municipal O ffices for Women and Gender Equity, with the aim of promoting equal 
 
13  The three Subsystems are: Chile Crece Contigo , Seguridades y Oportunidades y Apoyos y Cuidados.


---
*Page 158*
---

 16 participation in local development policies.  In the framework of a complementarity of actions with different local 
actors, the Fourth National Plan for Women’s and Men’s Equality 2018 – 2030 propose several measures to 
reinforce the alliances with Regional Go vernments and Local Government (municipalities) ( Ministry of Women and 
Gender Equality, 2018 a).14 
 
- Since 2015, the Ministry of National Assets has organized discussion groups for women, particularly 
indigenous ones, in order to disseminate the benefits of the regularization of small real -estate holdings 
for women married under the regime of community of property. Article 37 of Decree -Law No. 2.695 governs 
such regularization and th e establishment of respective titles of ownership, and provides that married 
women shall be considered subject to separation of property for all legal purposes related to the asset 
concerned by the regularization (CEDAW, 2016).  
- On the basis of its strate gic principles for the period 2015 -2018 and the intercultural approach cutting 
across its policies and programmes, the National Service for Women and Gender Equality, in cooperation 
with the Indigenous Affairs Unit of the Ministry of Social Development, he ld in 2014 four meetings with 
indigenous women with a view to the participatory identification of those women’s interests and needs 
and the formulation of a plan of action to address their rights (inter alia, their economic, sexual and political 
rights, an d their right to a life free of violence) in accordance with their world view and culture. The 
Intersectoral Board on Mapuche Women, created in 2015,15 aims to promote intersectoral work addressing 
the gender inequalities faced by Mapuche Women in the Arauc anía region (CEDAW, 2016).  
 
 
  
 
14 The Fourth National Plan for Women’s and Men’s Equality 2018 – 2030 integrates objectives related to collectives and environmental rights such as: 
Guarantee t he availability of water and its sustainable management and sanitation for all; Guarantee access to affordable, safe, sustain able and modern 
energy for all; Significantly reduce the number of deaths caused by disasters, including those related to water, an d of people affected by them; Adopt 
urgent measures to combat climate change and its effects; Conserve and sustainably use oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development; 
Promote the sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, combat desertif ication, halt and reverse land degradation and curb the loss of biological diversity 
(Ministry of Women and Gender Equality, 2018).  
 
15 Exempt resolution No. 265/IX REG approving the Framework Cooperation Agreement on the “Intersectoral Committee for Mapuche 
Women”. Temuco, 11 December 2015.


---
*Page 159*
---

 17 III. Gender Issues Around Forests and REDD+  National Strategy  
 
Chile has progressed steadily in the strengthening of its environmental regulatory and operational framework 
(international, national and sectoral  levels) , which has led to the identification of the main local constraints and 
synergies for the implementation of the ENCCRV,  which REDD+ integrates.   
 
To achieve the results  (2014 – 2016) gender was mainstreamed into activities undertaken  on the bases of the 
enforcement of the related legal framework (see section above) and strengthened with t he CON AF’s Unit for 
Gender equality (UIG) , that  was created in 2014 (Resolution No. 422 of September 15, 2014) in the framework of 
the National Women's Service recommendations for the Constitution of Gender Units by Sector to all State 
agencies, including CONAF (Official Letter No. 414, August 11, 2014 ). The objective of the UIG is to mainstream 
gender into all policies, plans and institutional programs of CONAF. The UIG participated  also in the ENCCRV 
formulation process and currently participates in the Advisory Commission of the Minister for Equality  of 
Opportunities between men and women, at the national level. At the regional level, the representatives of the UIG 
supports the implementation of the Commissions on Equal Opportunities (CRIO) work plan, aimed at proposing 
strategies for the detection an d reduction of gender gaps that threaten the development options of social groups 
in the sector.  
 
A central axis of the ENCCRV consist s on mainstreaming  the gender approach  in all its phases: preparation, 
implementation and payment for results, in constant  feedback from the continuous strengthening of the initiative 
(UCSSA, 2016). The objective of this approach is to address  the necessary broad and equal inclusion interests, 
needs and proposals  of women,  thus assuring that benefits are equitable between men  and women ( ENCCRV , 
2017).   
 
Additionally, t he gender mainstreaming strategy of the ENCCRV  integrates  a methodological perspective based 
on interculturality  principles proposed by  the UN "Guide for the Evaluation of Programs and Projects with a Gender 
Perspective, Human Rights and Interculturality", which contains guidelines to evaluate this process in the different 
phases of the ENCCRV ( UCCSA, 2016).   
 
The mainstreaming of the gen der approach will be also evaluated through specific indicators included in the 
Framework of Social and Environmental Indicators applicable to the ENCCRV, that has considered adding 
indicators that allow monitoring and assessing the effectiveness of the me asures adopted for the inclusion of 
women (UCSSA et al. 2017).  
 
a) Gender gaps within the target groups of the  ENCCRV REDD+ actions  
 
The REDD+ actions included in the ENCCRV strategy , will focus on a significant part of the national territory where 
exists a high concentration and diversity of forests , including temperate rain forests,  in five of the fifteen 
administrative regions of Chile: Maule, Biobío, Araucanía, Los Ríos and Los Lago s. These regions represent 22% 
of the total area of the country and host 41% of the Native Forest, with representation of 11 of the 12 Forest Types 
defined at the national level (ENCCRV, 2017) .  
 
In the national territory , these regions are those that have shown greater pressure on their forests due to the 
occurrence of forest fires, high demand for firewood, poverty and vulnerable population among others. The main 
causes of degradation are based on the need of small lando wners to obtain regular income from the forest land 
they own, for which purpose they try to extract the greatest possible volume of high -value logs, as well as of fuel 
wood for their own consumption and for sale in the informal market. Another common pract ice is to allow livestock 
into the forest for feeding purposes, particularly during the winter season (for shelter in view of the low 
temperatures). These practices lead to the generation of highly fragmented forests where open areas are used for 
livestock  breeding, thus hindering the regeneration process and foiling the possibilities of recovery of the forest 
cover. The subjacent causes of degradation are the poverty of the small landowners and their need to obtain a 
regular income from their lands (monthl y income)  (FCPF, 2012).  The ENCCRV field activities will be focus on four 
main a ctivities: afforestation -reforestation, related to the increase in inventories and will be registered with the tools


---
*Page 160*
---

 18 to estimate changes in land use, f orest fire management to reduce emissions from degradation, f orest restoration 
that promotes increased carbon (UCCSA, 2016 ). 
 
According to the National Institute of Statistics (INE), the total population residing in these regions reaches 5.3 
million people, with an average of 32 inhabitants per square kilometer, with Bíobío being the most densely 
populated region and Los Lagos having the lowest density population.  From the beginning the ENCCRV will 
consider this subnational area and will include actions for different types of prop erty (fiscal and private), not ruling 
out that later it will be extended to other regions of the country (ENCCRV, 2017).  Indigenous organizations, small 
and large landowners are key stakeholders in the process of developing and implementing the  actions.  
 
Most of the local populations in the prioritized areas of the actions REDD+ of the ENCCRV live in rural zones and 
depend on forest resources, including a high use of firewood for domestic use in heating and cooking. Men and 
women have different dependency on the natural resource s, being women more vulnerable when facing 
environmental issues or the consequences of climate change.  According to the National survey CASEN (2015), 
in some regions the p ercentage of individual s living in rural areas  is higher than those living in urban ones, 
especially in Maule, Araucanía and Los Lagos (Figure 9). It should be noted that, d ue to the lack of educational 
and employment opportunities, especially among the younger population, these are regions with high rural 
migration to urban areas  (ENCCRV, 2017).  
 
Figure 9. Percentage of individuals living in urban and rural areas  
 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN), 2015.  
 
Concerning the working opportunities existing in these territories, the National Employment Survey (ENE), 2019) 
shows that women labour force participation rate is below , in all regions covered by the actions REDD+ of the 
ENCCRV,  the national  average  rate (49,3%) . Women ’s labour force participation is higher in Los Ríos (48.4%) 
and lower in Bíobío (44.7%) ( National Employment Survey (ENE), 2019) .16  
 
 
Figure 10. Percentage of individuals participating in the labor force, by gender  
 
 
16 At the national level, the participation rate is 59.6%, in which 70.2% correspond to men and 49.3% corresponds to women. Acco rding to the National 
Employment Survey (ENE), 2019.  17,543,8
16,8
6,415,487,3
25 24,3 23,6
8,618,612,7
020406080100
Maule Bíobío Araucanía Los Ríos Los Lagos National
Urban Rural


---
*Page 161*
---

 19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: National Employment Survey (ENE), 2019.  
 
 
In addition, a ccording to the National Employment Survey (ENE)  men are those who perform the main economic 
activities related to forests and natural resources, having more access than women to employment  in the formal 
sectors of agriculture, livestock, forestry and fishing  (figure 1). The highest percentage of women working in this 
type of employment is in the Maule region (29.86%) and the lowest percentage is in the Bíobío region (16.5%).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 1. Percentage of Employed agriculture, livestock, forestry and fishing, by gender  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: ODEPA, Employment regional mobile quarter Jan - Mar 2019  
 
 
In these regions, women use and make the most of the different services that forests provide, both in order to 
obtain food that assures livelihood and/or for small -scale trading, which, occasionally shifts to being a significant 
family income, e.g. medicin al herb gathering, harvesting of non -timber forest products such as fruits, fungi and 
others, production of handcrafts, beekeeping promotion, dye gathering, tree nurseries , etc. In case of men, there 
is a historical productive relation with forests and veg etation resources in general, but it is all mainly associated to 
timber harvesting through their own products for livelihood, from firewood gathering for heating to large -scale 
trading. The previous examples are traditional manifestations and relations of both genders with vegetation 
resources; however, generational changes are reflected in, e. g. the fact that the activities which were traditionally 
performed by women are now assumed by men, meaning that men now have a positive valuation of the activities 70,1483,5
72,04 72,6781,5775,18
29,86
16,527,96 27,3318,4324,82
020406080100
Maule Bíobío Araucanía Los Ríos Los
LagosNational
Male Female71,263,968,6 68,7 69,8 70,2
47,3 44,7 47,8 48,4 45,7 49,3
020406080100
Maule Bíobío Araucanía Los Ríos Los Lagos National
Male Female


---
*Page 162*
---

 20 considered for women, which were usually not valued with the importance they have always had, among others 
that have allowed –for generations - assuring women’s feed and diversity at a family level.  
 
The e ducation levels for men and women in the area comprised between Maule and Los Lagos also show some 
gender gaps, in particular concerning the  average years of schooling in those regions . According to the results of 
the CASEN 2015, Maule, Araucanía and Los Lagos regions have lowest average years of schooling (9.74, 9.97 
and 9.77 respectively)  than the national average (10.99). Concerning the percentage of students enrolled in regular 
educatio n, no large gender gaps are observed (INE, 2014 -2016)  (table 1) .  
 
Table 1 0. Students enrolled in regular education by gender and region  
 
Year  2014  2015  2016  
Region   Number   Male (%)   Female (%)   Number   Male (%)   Female (%)  Number   Male (%)   Female 
(%) 
Maule  262.480  49,89  50,11  264.115  49,92  50,08  266.608  49,88  50,12  
Bíobío  580.172  50,12  49,88  583.152  50,02  49,98  579.756  49,99  50,01  
Araucanía  258.865  49,71  50,29  259.369  49,62  50,38  262.262  49,42  50,58  
Los Ríos  101.247  50,34  49,66  101.159  50,46  49,54  102.281  50,41  49,59  
Los 
Lagos  223.934  49,41  50,59  226.442  49,33  50,67  226.652  49,21  50,79  
National 
Total  4.756.731  50,42  49,58  4.781.526  50,45  49,55  4.797.967  50,36  49,64  
Source from 2014 to 2016: Statistical compendium, National Statistics Institute (INE).  
 
 
It should be also not ed that these regions show high levels of illiteracy, in comparison  with the national level (3,1%),  
being the rate in rural sectors notably higher (7.8% ) (CASEN,  2015).  In the regions of Araucanía, Los Lagos and 
Los Ríos, where there is also a high percentage of indigenous population,  clear gender gap exists in illiteracy rates 
(Figure 2).    
 
 
Figure 12. Percentage of 15 years or more people who can not read or write by gender  
 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN), 2015.  
 
In other hand, according to the National Socioeconomic Characterization Survey (CASEN) of 2013,17  the regions 
of Araucanía (32.0%), Los Lagos (24.8%) and Bíobío (5.2%) concentrate the indigenous population living in the 
ENCCRV REDD+ foot print area (the lowest concentration is located in Maule, with 2.0% of a national total of 
9.1%) (ENCCRV,  2017).  Of these percentages, 16.09% corresponds to Mapuche women in Araucanía, 12.81% 
corresponds to Mapuche women in Los Lagos, and 11.81% corresponds to Mapuche women in Los Ríos (INE, 
2018) . According to the information provided by CASEN 2015, the Araucanía reg ion reports the highest 
 
17 Available in http://observatorio.ministeriodesarrollosocial.gob.cl/documentos/Casen2013_Pueblos_Indigenas_13mar15_publicacion.pdf  6,5
4,4 4,84,1 3,936
4,36,25,6 5,3
3,3
0246810
Maule Bíobío Araucanía Los Ríos Los
LagosNational
Male Female


---
*Page 163*
---

 21 percentage of indigenous people in condition of poverty  (33.9%) and the largest gap between indigenous an not 
indigenous people , with a difference of 15.1 percentage points.  
 
Figure 13. Percentage of individuals in condition of poverty, by indigenous condition  
 
 
Source:  Ministry of Social Development, National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN), 2015.  
 
 
In general, the access to benefits, funding or incentives related to forests and vegetatio n resources  seem s 
hindered for the most vulnerable population when they do not have the legal regularization of their property’s 
ownership.  In Chilean rurality, most of the area is owned by men, which is complemented by the fact that -in terms 
of access to bank credits or instruments in general - women own a lower percentage of lands, since by not being 
their formal proprietor, they do not have access to bank instruments  (ENCCRV, 2017).  It is common for properties 
managed by women not to be regularized since generally, they  have been acquired through inheritance18 or 
marriage (having become widowed or separated), among other less common cases, but which do not allow them 
to have legal control over their real property. Not  withstanding the foregoing, it is worth noting that in  Chile women 
have the same rights to inheritance than men. Based on the results of the seventh national agricultural and forestry 
census (2007), the figures for land tenure in monopredial farms show that only 31.76% belonged to female leaders. 
Regarding th e percentages of agricultural and forestry farms, 23% had female heads. This shows that there is a 
high gender gap with respect to land rights and exploitation, where women are at a clear disadvantage compared 
to men.  
Under the ENCCRV, Chile has designed a  specific list of Action Measures that addresses land tenure through 
adjustments in order to include owners with poor legal security of tenure on the land. This measure considers two 
procedures: (i) Adjustments to current legislation and regulation includi ng an analysis of the different conditions of 
improper documentation, and the design of the regulatory modifications that will enable the inclusion of an 
improperly documented owner into the ENCCRV. A technical legislation feasibility analysis has been  carried out,  
and an amendment process will be carried out at the corresponding bodies. There are international experiences 
with regard to this type of measure, which will be examined to assess their potential ratification to the Chilean case. 
(ii) Targete d program for the rectification of ownership titles. Forest owners from communities prioritized by the 
ENCCRV, who are in an improperly documented situation regarding the ownership title for the property, and who 
intend to join any of the management, fores tation and / or restoration programs associated with ENCCRV will 
receive free legal support to rectify the situation, as part of the technical assistance provided by CONAF. This 
support for the owner will be conditional to specific technical requirements a nd criteria that will be defined for the 
 
18 Generally, inheritances  take time to regularize, as a consequence of formalities, costs and/or because it is difficult for heirs to reach 
agreements.  22,227,933,9
23,4 21,3
8,818,6 17 18,815 14,49,2
010203040
Male Female


---
*Page 164*
---

 22 Strategy, so that the permanence and continuity of the owners' commitment to mitigation actions can be assured, 
once the land tenure has been sorted out  (UCCSA, 2016) . 
 
b) ENCCRV frameworks and policies supporting g ender equality and women’s 
empowerment  
 
 
The ENCCRV considered a number of Strategic Activities and Action Measures, which as well as providing a 
contribution in fulfilling the international env ironmental commitments, include  adjustments to the main  national  
legislative bodies or frameworks concerning forestry matters . The focus of the ENCCRV is based on compliance 
with the international agreements adopted by Chile with the UNFCCC, the UNCCD and the CBD, as well as 
contributing to compliance with the  SDGs, which  is supported as a State policy.  At country level, a series of treaties, 
plans, inventories and activities have been set up that have been fundamental pillars prior to the implementation 
of REDD+.   
 
In the national context  the formulation of the ENCCRV is directly aligned with the four strategic axes and the goals 
set out in the Forest Policy 2015 -2035 , approved in 2016, which correspond to: Forest Institutionality; productivity 
and economic growth; Equity and social inclus ion; and Protection and restoration of forest heritage.  The Forest 
Policy 2015 -2035 recognizes the extraction, processing and commercialization of non -wood forest products as 
activities with strong gender component and includes goals for 2015, 2020 and 202 5 aimed at supporting regional 
associations of producers. It recognizes the forest sector with a high degree of heterogeneity, presenting gender 
gaps in d ecent work and  it also foresees the implementation of training programs and continuous technical -
profe ssional training ( MINAGRI, 2015).  
 
In addition, the ENCCRV  is aligned  with the National Action Plan on C limate Change  (PANCC) II (2017 -2022) 
and the National Action Plan on Climate Change (PANCC) I (2008 -2012 ). The National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (PANCC) II (2017 -2022) include a specif ic Line of Action (N° 21), conc erning the Education and 
awareness strategy  to address climate change, that is expected to identify the connections between the gender 
and change agendas climate change, as well as the analysis of other socio -cultural aspects, in order to integrate 
both approaches in the implementation of a ll the associated actions in exchange climate change, initiating this 
task through the creation of capacities generated  by the education and awareness (Ministry for the Environment , 
2017).19  It should be noted that CONAF, with other governmental institutio ns, was actively involved and worked 
at the inter -ministerial level to launch the National Climate Change Action Plan from 2012 to 2014 and has directly 
participated in two sectoral plans "Plan for Climate Change Adaptation for Biodiversity" and " Plan for  Climate 
Change Adaptat ion for the Agroforestry Sector " (MINAGRI, 2017) . 
 
The formulation of the ENCCRV has been developed in accordance  with national legislations that support the 
implementation of strategies to promote the development and wellbeing of the country’s indigenous peoples .. 
Additionally, there are regulations in force which establish the consultation  procedures in accordance with the 
provisions of ILO Convention No.169, making Supreme Decree No.66 the instrument that regulates t he Indigenous 
Consultation Procedure by virtue of Article 6 No.1, letter A, and No.2 of the Convention.  The legal framework with 
which the ENCCRV is directly aligned also includes:  
 
- The Indigenous Law N ° 19.253, which established norms on protection, pr omotion and development of 
indigenous people, and created the CONADI, this Law grants "(...) the duty to society in general and the State in 
particular to respect, protect and promote the development of indigenous peoples, their cultures, families and 
comm unities, adopting appropriate measures for such purposes and protecting indigenous lands, ensuring their 
proper exploitation, for its ecological balan ce and tend to its expansion " (Article 1) ( MINAGRI, 2017).  
 
- The Law No. 20,249 that created and protects the coastal marine space of the Indigenous Peoples, expressly 
establishes in its article 3 ° "Create the coastal marine space of native peoples, whose objective will be to 
safeguard the customary use of said spaces,  in order to maintain the traditions and the use of natural resources 
 
19 Ministry for the Environment (2017), National Action Plan on Climate Change (PANCC) II (2017 -2022).


---
*Page 165*
---

 23 by communities linked to the coastal edge ". It also establishes the scope of the delimitation, administration, access 
and use of the spaces, with a clear procedure to require thei r reco gnition before the State ( MINAGRI, 2017).   
 
- The Decree No. 66/2013 of the Ministry of Social Development, which regulated the procedure for Indigenous 
Consultation under Article 6 No. 1 and No. 2 of ILO Convention No. 169, which aims to "(...) give execu tion of the 
right of consultation to indigenous peoples "through a procedure established in said regulation. In this case, since 
the ENCCRV is a public policy and not a legislative or administrative measure, but rather a national development 
plan or progra m, an indigenous consultation process is not relevant in this matter, but rather a process of 
"Participation". Indigenous ", understood in the case of national regulations (Figure 9). However, the provisions of 
Article N ° 7 are considered that "(...) said  peoples must participate in the formulation, application and evaluation 
of national and regional development plans and programs that may directly affect them". premises that involve 
traditional lifestyles relevant to the conservation and sustainable use o f biological diversity and will promote their 
broader application, with the approval and participation of those who possess such knowledge, innovations and 
practices, and will encourage the benefits derived from use of that knowledge, innovations and pr actices are 
shared equitably "  (MINAGRI, 2017).  
 
On other non -binding agreements considered in the matter, areLaw No. 19.300, on General Bases of the 
Environment and Regulation of the SEIA, which in its article 4, referring to the participation citizen, urges  the 
organs of the State in several aspects, in facilitating the process of participating to the citizenship, allowing the 
access of environmental information and "(...) put forth for the adequate conservation, development and 
strengthening of the identity , languages, institutions and social and cultural traditions of indigenous peoples, 
communities and ind ividuals ", among other aspects ( MINAGRI, 2017).  
 
c) National REDD+ s trategy design from a gender approach  
 
During the formulation and validation stage of the ENCCRV  and its SESA , a widespread participative process was 
conducted in all regions of the country,  which sought through the multi -stakeholder, multi -sector and multi -level 
criteria - to incorporate the opinions and prop osals of all sectors of society , particularly focusing on women, 
indigenous peoples, and vulnerable communities in general.  
 
The Participatory Process as a methodological base for mainstreaming the gender approach  
 
This participative  process included  the organization of 15 Regional Workshops for the Participatory Formulation 
of the ENCCRV (SESA workshops) in all regi ons of the country , with small -, medium - and large -sized producers, 
social organiz ations (Neighbourhood Councils, Drinking Water Committee s, Farmers Trade Associations, 
amongst others), associations and groups made up of the public, universities and educational centres, companies, 
Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs), government au thorities and local governments, etc . The first pilot 
works hop was held on July 26th, 2013  and the remaining workshops  were held during 2015 and 2016. From the 
methodology used in the Regional Workshops it was possible to d raft the Map of Regiona l Stakeholders . 
Additionally, a  national workshop, based on 10 Focus Groups, was organized  with relevant stakeholders or groups 
of interest on march 2016 (UCCSA et al., 2017).   
 
Since the participatory process developed had as objective to obtain inputs for the design of the guidelines and 
the validation of the ENCCRV and the SESA, the early participation of women was assured establishing that 
beyond being part of the process participation, the ideas, visions and proposals that this arise should be present 
in a cross -section i n the ENCCRV and its projects, ensuring benefits and respecting women's rights, as k ey actors 
of this public policy (UCCSA et al., 2017).  The document of the ENCCRV, after submitting to the final adjustments, 
obtained the approval sanction at the national and international level at the end of 2016, with the participation of 
different State services, Non -Governmental Organizations (NGO) associated with the forestry -agricultural and 
livestock sectors. of the country, as well as the different international age ncies linked to the ENCCRV, such as:


---
*Page 166*
---

 24 UN-REDD Program (FAO, UNDP and UN -Environment), World Bank, the Swiss Government through the Swiss 
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), among others  (CONAF, 2018).  
 
Table 11. Participative  process for the formu lation  of the ENCCRV  
 
Source: Prepared by the author based on:  Corporación Nacional Forestal (CONAF ) (2018  b), Primer Resumen de Información sobre el 
Abordaje, Respeto y Cumplimiento de las Salvaguardas para la Formulación de la Estrategia Nacional de Cambio Climático y Recu rsos 
Vegetacionales (ENCCRV) de Chile. Período del reporte 2013 -2017. Santiago. Chile.  
 
Table 12. Summary of the ENCCRV validation participative process  
 Formulatio
n Process 
of the 
ENCCRV  Women’s 
participation   Attendee
s 
(N°) Women  
(%) Indigenou
s peoples  
(%) Gender considerations  
 
Regional 
Workshops 
for the 
Participator
y 
Formulation 
of the 
ENCCRV 
(SESA 
workshops)  
  
As part of the 
gender approach 
mainstreaming 
process, a minimum 
percentage of 
women attendance 
of 30% was 
determined.  
 
The regional 
workshops reached 
the minimum 
attendance required, 
with 31.2% women 
and 68.8% men.  
 
 1.266  37% 
 9% 
  
• There was special attention to identify the 
necessary quantity of women representatives in the 
Regional Map of key stakeholders.  
• In order to facilitate women participation, logistic 
measures were taken, such as allowing and 
facilitating assistance for women caring for minors; 
having female facilitators for the focus groups, and 
when necessary, incorporating intercultural 
interpreters.  
• A specific FG named “Women Organizations”, 
including the participation of women leaders from 
different organizations and small  entrepreneurs 
related to forests and vegetation  
 
National 
Workshop 
for 
Integration 
of the 
Participator
y 
Formulation 
Process of 
the 
ENCCRV  
 The National 
Workshop was 
conducted with the 
attendance of 125 
key parties 
belonging to the 15 
regions of Chile.  
 
A participation of 
36.3% of women 
with regard to the 
total national -level 
attendants was 
achieved.  
 
 125 31% 8%   
The National Workshop included the participation of:  
• 29 women (v/s 88 men) from Indigenous peoples  
• 73 representatives of Women’s Organizations  
• 13 women from  small and medium -size landowners 
(v/s 155 men)127 women from Indigenous, small 
and medium -sized women landowners (v/s 6 Men)  
 
• The“Institutional Sector” and “Nongovernment 
Organizations” FGs accounted for the greatest 
presence of  women. On the contrary, the “Private 
Sector”, “Consultants and Extension Agents” and 
“Academy” FGs were the ones with the least 
percentage of women participation . 
 
• Women belonging to towns indigenous peoples, 
peasants and the rural grouped in a GF called 
"Women Indigenous, Small and Medium Owners.  
 
Validation 
Process of 
the 
ENCCRV  Women’s participation   Attendees  
(N°) Women  
(%) Indigenous 
peoples  
(%) Gender considerations  
Dialogue 
and 
Indigenous 
Participation 
in the 
ENCCRV  
  
The Process for Dialogue 
and Participation of the 
Indigenous People taking 
into account the 
engagement with ILO 
Convention No. 169.  
 
Included the execution of a 
total of 88 activities in 10 
regions of Chile with 1.813  
 48% 987 
communities  
  
• To tackle this Process of Dialogue and 
Participation of the Indigenous People, 
CONAF's UAIS designed a document that 
considers the methodological aspects that 
properly articulate and organize  the progress 
of the process to meet the objectives thereof, 
ensu ring the quality of inputs to obtain and the 
good faith that supports this national process


---
*Page 167*
---

 25 Source: Prepared by the author based on: UCCSA  et. al ( 2017), Mainstreaming of the Gender Approach in Chile’s National Strategy on Climate 
Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV),  Informative Note N° 08, ENCCRV, UCCSA, GEDEFF), CONAF , Chilean Ministry of Agriculture ; 
UCCSA (2016), Readiness Package for the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility Within the Framework of the National Strate gy for Climate 
Change and Vegetation Resources, Climate Change and Environmental Services ,  Unit Management Office on Forest Sup port and 
Development, CONAF,  Santiago de  Chile)  ; CONAF  (2018 ), First Summary of Information on the Approach, Respect and Compli ance of the 
Safeguards for the Formulation of the  ENCCRV of  Chile. (2013 -2017 ), Santiago , Chile.  
 
 
The processes of formulation, public consultation, participation and indigenous dialogue and the self -assessment 
of the ENCCRV seek ed the creation and strengthening of capacities, both in the potential beneficiaries and / or 
affected with this initiative, as the institution responsible for its implementation to ensure adequate management 
 
20 The self -assessment was based on a requirement established by the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) with the aim of measuring the progress 
made in the preparation stage of the ENCCRV.  presence of rural  
continental indigenous 
peoples , between June 
and September, 2016.  
 
1.813 participants  
48% women  
987 indigenous 
organizations  
 (UCCSA, 2016) . In general terms, the 
summons of the Indigenous People includes:  
 
• National Councillors of the National 
Indigenous Development Corporation 
(CONADI acronym in Spanish),  Indigenous 
Communities, indigenous Associations and 
Traditional authorities, persons, mentors 
and/or representatives of other kinds of 
indigenous organi zations that are involved in 
the ENCCRV.  
 
• According to information from CONADI, 
amongst the Indigenous Communities and 
Associations there is a total number, 
nationally, of 5,056 bodies . Intercultural 
facilitators were available in working groups 
with indige nous peoples, including 
interpretation in the native language of those 
present  (UCCSA, 2016).   
Public 
Consultation 
of the 
ENCCRV   
This virtual consultation 
was conducted between 
June and September, 
2016, with a participation 
of a total of 506 
individuals, out of which 
41% were women.  
 506 
 41% 
 42% 
regional  
participation  
 • The general aim of this process consist ed in 
raising awareness of the ENCCRV and to 
consult the public about central issues 
associated with the implemented of its Action 
Measures  (UCCSA, 2016).  
 
Self-
assessment  
  
This instance included two 
macro zone workshops 
(north and south zones) 
and an institutional expert 
workshop. The total 
attendance accounted for 
74 key stakeholders -
which had previously 
participated in other 
participatory instances -, 
out of which 35% were 
women.20 
  74 31% 8% • Process via which groups of Stakeholders who 
have attended other ENCCRV participation 
processes, which  included the public, 
specialists in various technical matters and 
representatives of public institutions, rated  the 
way in which the ENCCRV covers various 
topics of interest such as its governance, land 
ownership,  carbon accounting, participation 
processes, co -benefits, amongst other 
ENCCRV aspects  (UCCSA, 2016) .


---
*Page 168*
---

 26 of the risks and socio -environmental impacts that  may be generated. It is important to hig hlight the high level of 
participation of Indigenous communities, notably those from the region La Arauca nia. 
 
Table 13. National Participation disaggregated by gender and region in the  
 Indigenous Dialogue and Participation Process.  
 
Region  
 Women  Men Total  
N° % N° % N° 
Biobio  94 49,7 95 50,3 189 
La Araucania  405 45,4 487 54,6 892 
Los Rios  77 42,5 104 57,5 181 
Los Lagos  37 46,8 42 53,2 79 
      
TOTAL (national)  874 48,2 939 51,8 1.813  
Source:  UCCSA et al. (2017), Mainstreaming of the Gender Approach in Chile’s National Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation 
Resources (ENCCRV), Informative Note N° 08, ENCCRV. Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA), Forest Development 
and Promotion Management Depar tment (GEDEFF), National Forestry Corporation (CONAF), Chilean Ministry of Agriculture, Santiago  
 
Inputs obtained from the women FGs and ENCCRV response  
 
Women’s proposals during the participatory process were multiple and diverse, and were used for the formulation 
of the ENCCRV’s SESA, particularly for defining the benefits likely to be generated with the implementation of the 
activities contemplated withi n the ENCCRV. The participative workshops performed for the ENCCRV’s formulation 
phase, allowed to recognize and gather the beliefs and perceptions of both genders, where women’s prevailing 
focus was on community -based benefits with inter-generational inclusion (children, adults and the elderly). 21 This 
was conducted with a solid background in environmental education as the tool for raising awareness in new 
generations -in terms of the conservation of vegetation resources and climate change - in order to protect and 
assure the services derived from forests and other vegetation resources. In contrast, men’s perspective was mainly 
focused on sustainability of vegetation resources and the sustainable development of forests within a product ivity 
perspective, where technical training should be primarily focused on forestry, and far ming and livestock 
development. The main inputs obtained from women’s proposals during the participatory process  are presented 
in the table 14. 
 
  
 
21 For more information on the participative works hops of the ENNCRV’s formulation phase, go to: http://www.conaf.cl/nuestros -bosques/bosques -en-
chile/cambio -climatico/enccrv/


---
*Page 169*
---

 27 Table 14. Women’s proposals during the participatory process  and ENCCRV response   
 
Women’s concerns  Women’s proposals  
 
Environmental education as a central axis  for 
promoting any change in the behavior of 
individuals and communities for the benefit of 
the conservation and sustainable use of natural 
heritage.  
  
• Cross -cutting environmental education.  
• Training of technicians for covering local needs.  
• Creation of studies for visualizing the effects or  impacts on flora and fauna.  
• Regulation of agricultural soil land-use change.  
• Transparency in the allocation of state resources.  
• Revaluation of local and ancestral knowledge.  
• Public policies focused on the reality of the territory.  
• Better opportunities for young people, therefore  reducing migration from rural 
areas.  
• For activities to be executed in collaboration with local organizations.  
• For communities to have a cross -cutting participation policy.  
• That the engaged stakeholders are better trained ethically and technically.  
 
 
ENCCRV response  : The ENCCRV answers this proposal by incorporating within its cross -cutting action measures the Environmental 
Education and Dissemination Program (Measure MT.6). This action measure proposes interventions between different stakeholders  linked 
to forests, f or different education levels, and seeks to benefit more than 8,000 people by 202 0. 
 
 
The availability, rights and regulation of the 
use, maintenance and care of water courses  
  
• Efficient management of water resources  
• Monitoring and control of land and water pollution  
• Generating commitments between different society stakeholders  
• Supervising poaching  
• Promoting cultural exchange instances for knowledge feedback among different 
communities, thus maintaining the knowledge of their ancestors  and regional 
identity  
• Reforestation and training programs in forests and/or xerophytic formations  
 
 
ENCCRV response  : The ENCCRV incorporates a facilitating action measure named Adaptation Program for managing vegetation 
resources within the framework of climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought  (Measure GA.1). In its objective, it states 
that “CONAF, as Chile’s focal point before the UNFCCC’s REDD+ approach and before the UNCCD, will coordinate the implementation 
of an Adaptation Program for managing vegetation resources, which will generate inputs that are relevant to the design and ex ecution of 
afforestation, revegetation, restoration and sustainable forest management programs of the ENCCRV.  
 
 
The need of a greater institutional presence in 
the territory often came up, along with further 
assistance, service and accompaniment for 
landowners particular ly for smaller landowners -
, greater supervision, strengthening of 
communication and joint efforts between 
services and the community  
  
• On-site visits that are permanent, programmed and with extended hours  
• Improving and sharing CONAF’s existing information and communication 
channels, such as the OIRS and others  
• Participatory workshops with different stakeholders in regional instances, with 
dissemination of the obtained results  
• Easy -access web contact with permanent updates  
• Briefings at a communal and local level  
• Existence of local and municipal office  
 
 
ENCCRV response  : New programs that will necessarily imply a greater presence of services in the territory in coordination with 
communities, among which are: Strengthening the forest and environmental supervision program (Measure MT.7), Strengthening th e 
Communities Prepar ed Against Forest Fires Program (Measure IF.4), and the Adaptation Program for managing vegetation resources 
within the framework of climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought (Measure GA.1)  
 
Source:  Prepared by the author based on : UCCSA, GEDEFF , CONAF (2017), Mainstreaming of the Gender Approach in Chile’s National 
Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV), Informative Note N° 08, ENCCRV. Climate Change and Environmental 
Services Unit (UCCSA), Forest Development a nd Promotion Management Department (GEDEFF), National Forestry Corporation (CONAF), 
Chilean Ministry of Agriculture . 
 
 
It is also worth noting that the participatory processes and mainstreaming of the gender approach do not end ed 
with the final version of the ENCCRV in terms of an official document, but are rather understood as a continuous 
improvement process that continues with operational work in the areas of development of pilot projects; 
subsequently, with the full implementa tion of each action measure, the application of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) –which includes all of the mitigation measures for the risks and impacts identified


---
*Page 170*
---

 28 in SESA, the creation of the Social and Environmental Indicators’ F ramework; the implementation of the 
Complaints and Suggestions Mechanism; the Safeguard Information System (SIS), the Benefit -Sharing System 
(SDB), among others . 
 
The participative formulation process, as well as other consultation instances for the ENCCRV  (Dialogue and 
Indigenous Participation in the ENCCRV, Public Consultation of the ENCCRV, Self -Assessment) (table 13) were 
integrated synergistically via the Plan for the Implementation of Social and Environmental Safeguards for Public 
and Indigenous Consu ltation and Self assessment.22 All the inputs from the Regional Workshops and the National 
Workshop, as well as its standardi zation and analysis were used for the development of the Strategic 
Environmental and Social Assessment  (SESA) of the ENCCRV and its Management Framework (UCCSA, 2016).  
 
d) Gender in the ENCCRV REDD+ Governance  
 
 
Chile has taken steps in REDD+ implementation to ensure equitable representation of women, within the ENCCRV 
REDD+ governance, and to develop  Institutional mechanisms/arrangements for gender equality and gender 
mainstreaming.  
 
At the national level, to adv ance equality of opportunities and gender equity, the Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) 
has implemented the Advisory Commission of the Minister for Equality of Opportunities between men and women, 
whose function is advice the MINAGRI on matters related to equality of opportunities and gender equity in the 
Silvicultural sector. The Advisory Commission on Equal Opportunities of the MINAGRI was created on March 22, 
1999 by Decree No. 180 of the General Comptroller's Office of the Republic. In this framework, t he MINAGRI has 
assumed several engagements on gender equality (Ministry of Agriculture of Chile, 2017) .23  
 
• Increase the participation of women in the forestry and agricultural sector, in Programs to support the 
development of the sector, in all the Service s and Institutions of the Ministry.  
• Development of human capital and productive capacities of women in the forestry and agricultural sector, to 
face gender barriers.  
• Strengthen the capacities of organized women linked to the forestry and agricultural secto r, in the field of 
production, management and leadership.  
• Increase the regularization of property titles for the benefit of silvicultural owners through the delivery of clear 
and timely information regarding the procedure.  
• Promote the correct use and manag ement of agrochemicals in the activities / occupations of agro -industry 
that mainly affects the health of seasonal agricultural women.  
• Carry out activities or actions within the MINAGRI, its associated Services and Organizations that favor 
equal opportunit ies for men and women, as well as other Ministries, with the aim of implementing a gender 
approach in the provision of their goods and ministerial services Inform rural women or the forestry and 
agricultural sector about their Sexual and Reproductive Right s.  
• Promote, inform and disseminate the prevention of all violence against rural women, in the countryside and 
in the forestry and agricultural sector.  
 
Within MINAGRI, the institution responsible for the design, implementation, follow -up and monitoring of the 
ENCCRV  (including the ESMF ) nationally and regionally is CONAF, through the Climate Change and 
Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA), with the support of the Unit of Indigenous and Social Affairs (UAIS) and 
the Unit for Gender Equality (UIG) .   Therefore the gender expertise for promoting gender mainstreaming within 
the ENCCRV implementation are sited in the UIG. The UIG includes one representative at national level an d one 
representative from each technical and administrative management unit of CONAF (GEFA, GEDEP, GEDEFF, 
 
22 http://www.conaf.cl/cms/editorweb/ENCCRV/PLAN -SALVAGUARDAS -ENCCRV.pdf  
23 Ministry of Agriculture of Chile (2017), Gender Commitments  of the Ministry of Agriculture of Chile:  2017: https://www.odepa.gob.cl/wp -
content/uploads/2016/03/Compromisos -Ministeriales -de-Ge%CC%81nero -en-Agricultura.pdf


---
*Page 171*
---

 29 GEF, GASP, GPRIF, legal department).  It also integrates by 15 regional representatives of the UIG.  The national 
manager of the UIG is charged of su pporting the development of the National Gender Plan; the coordination of 
the Regional Gender Units, being also responsible for the following -up of the implementation of the National 
Management Improvement Program (PMG) on Gender Equity.  On annual bases , a training workshop on the 
mechanism s for promoting gender mainstreaming is delivered to the core team (15 Regional representatives of 
the UIG and the representative at national level).  An example of the activities undertaken by the UIG can be 
consulted i n http://www.conaf.cl/quienes -somos/equidad -de-genero/productos -y-programas/ .    
 
 
Table 15. Mechanisms  promoting  gender mainstreaming within the institutional arrangements for the ENCCRV 
implementation  
 
Governanc
e Structure 
for the 
ENCCRV  National level  Regional Level  
Institutional  mechanisms  
and/or arrangements 
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures 
on gender 
mainstreaming  Institutional  mechanism
s and/or arrangements  
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures on 
gender mainstreaming  
 
MINAGRI    
Advisory 
Commission of the 
Minister for Equality 
of Opportunities 
between men and 
women (CIO,).  
 
Different Institutions 
dependents of the 
MINAGRI, are 
represented in this 
Commission: CIREN, 
CNR, CONAF, INDAP, 
INIA, FIA, FUCOA, 
ODEPA, SAG, INFOR, 
Sub-secretariat of 
Agriculture, and 
Cabinet of the 
Minister. This 
Commission has an 
Executive Secretariat 
that coordinates its 
activities and 
represents it (CIO, 
2012).  
 
 The CIO p rovide s 
advice to the Minister 
of Agriculture on 
matters relat ed to 
equality  of 
opportunities and 
gender equity in the 
Silvicultural sector, 
generating and 
proposing strategies 
for detection and 
reduction of barriers 
and gender gaps or 
others, that threaten 
the options of 
development of the 
most vulnerable social 
groups in the Sec tor 
(CIO, 2012).  
 
 15 Regional Commissions 
on Equal Opportunities 
(CRIO), headed by the 
respective SEREMI (CIO, 
2012).   
The CRIOs integrate women 
public officials from INIA, INDAP, 
CONAF, SAG, etc. At the 
regional level is headed by the 
SEREMI of Agricultu re.  
 
The CRIO aims to propose 
strategies for the detection and 
reduction of gender gaps that 
threaten the development 
options of social groups in the 
sector.24 
 
 
 
 
Council for 
Policy 
Forestry  
 X  
This advisory body of 
the Ministry of 
Agriculture is chaired 
by the executive 
director of CONAF.  
 
The Council is 
integrated by 16 full 
members and 16 
alternate members.  
 
The council is charged 
with promoting 
advances in the law of 
forest fires, measures 
to restore the areas The Council has an 
organizational  structur
e that integrates 
different sectors:  the 
public sector 
organizations, the 
business sector, 
workers organizations, 
NGOs, academics, 
indigenous peoples, 
rural actors, scientific 
institutions and 
organizations of small 
and medium forest 
owners.  
 The council includes 
some regional actors.   
 
4 full members of the 
Council (for the period 
2018 -2021) are women: 
the National Director of 
the Office of Agrarian 
Studies and Policies, 
(ODEPA), the Dean of the 
Faculty of Forest 
Sciences and Nature 
Conservation, (University 
of Chile,) the Associate 
member of the Society of 
Ecology of Chile, 
(SOCECOL). 1 alter nate The Council has established, 
within the third strategic axis of 
the 20 15-2035 Forestry Policy 
(Inclusion and soc ial equity), 
some objectives and  measures 
related to the reduction  of gender 
gaps and the promotion  of the 
decent work, in the forestry 
sector (MINAGRI, 2015, p. 42 -
49).  
 
 
 
 
 
24 For more in formation see the Protocol of cooperation agreement between the Ministry of Agriculture, its undersecretary, its dependent 
services and other entities, related to the National Advisory Commission of Opportunities of the Ministry of Agriculture (San tiago, J uly 14, 
2017). Legal Advice Service/Sub -Secretariat of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture of the Government of Chile.  
http://transparencia.minagri.gob.cl/descargas/2017/convenios/Resoluci%C3%B3n%20Exenta%20N%C2%B0%20329.pdf


---
*Page 172*
---

 30 Governanc
e Structure 
for the 
ENCCRV  National level  Regional Level  
Institutional  mechanisms  
and/or arrangements 
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures 
on gender 
mainstreaming  Institutional  mechanism
s and/or arrangements  
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures on 
gender mainstreaming  
affected by the 
firestorm of 2017, and 
a law of forest 
development that will 
address the 
challenges posed by 
climate change. It 
does not constitute an 
Institutional  mechanis
m or arrangement 
promoting  specifically 
gender mainstreaming 
within the ENCCRV.  
 member is woman for the 
same period: the General 
Manager of the Chilean 
Wood Corporation 
(CORMA).25 In 2015 3 full 
member and 3 alternate 
members were women 
(MINAGRI, 2015, p. 61).  
 
 
UIG  
CONAF  
   
Unit for Gender 
equality (UIG) 
(Advisory unit of the 
Executive Secretariat 
of CONAF)  
 
The objective of the 
UIG is to mainstream 
gender into all 
policies, plans and 
institutional programs 
of CONAF.  
The UIG participates 
in the Advisory 
Commission of the 
Minister for Equality of 
Opportunities between 
men and women  
 
The UIG includes one 
repres entative at 
national level and one 
representative from 
each technical and 
administrative 
management unit of 
CONAF (GEFA, 
GEDEP, GEDEFF, 
GEF, GASP, GPRIF, 
legal department ). 
Nevertheless, these 
representatives are 
not exclusively 
dedicated to work on 
gender  issues within 
their units. It also 
integrates 15 Regional 
representatives of the 
UIG. 
 
 
The national manager 
of the UIG is charged 
with supporting the 
development of the 
National Gender Plan;  
 
The functions of the 
UIG are: to 
incorporate gender 
equity in the 
institutional culture 
and written/visual 
language used by 
CONAF s ervants;   to 
coordinate actions 
aimed to achieve the 
gender  
mainstreaming into the 
management of 
CONAF, in line with 
the Gender Agenda, 
the Ministerial 
Commitments and  
the cross -cutting 
indicators of the 
framework program  of 
CONAF; to  promote 
and suppo rt training 
activities and research 
actions with a focus on 
gender equity;  to 
incorporate and 
monitor the 
formulation of Annual 
National and Regional 
Gender Programs, 
including its budget.  
  
15 Regional 
representatives of the UIG 
(that are not exclusively  
dedicated to address 
gender issues in their 
regions).  
 
The regional 
representative of the UIG 
provides advice to the 
SEREMI of Agriculture on 
gender issues.  The UIG participated in the 
ENCCRV formulation process.  
 
The regional representatives of 
the UIG s upports the 
implementation of the CRIO work 
plan, in accordance with the 
ministerial gender objectives.  
 
During 2014 -2015 the UIG has 
implemented annual meetings 
with its Regional representatives, 
and training activities in order to 
initiate its servants o n gender 
approach.  
 
The challenges of the UIG are:  
To increase the participation of 
all CONAF servants in the e -
learning gender training course; 
to enhance headquarters as 
Administrator of parks and 
programs, heads of departments 
and provinces, in the con cepts of 
gender; to  carry out projects, 
works and reports, including the 
gender perspective, visualizing 
the language and images of 
gender in the Institutional 
Dissemination;  to improve 
internal management and good 
practices, through gender 
analysis diag nostics.  
 
 
 
25  http://www.conaf.cl/wp -content/files_mf/1540998468INTEGRANTESCONSEJODEPOL%C3%8DTICAFORESTAL20182021.pdf


---
*Page 173*
---

 31 Governanc
e Structure 
for the 
ENCCRV  National level  Regional Level  
Institutional  mechanisms  
and/or arrangements 
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures 
on gender 
mainstreaming  Institutional  mechanism
s and/or arrangements  
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures on 
gender mainstreaming  
the coordination of the 
Regional Gender 
Units, being also 
responsible for the 
following -up of the 
implementation of the 
National Management 
Improvement Program 
(PMG) on  Gender 
Equity, the design and 
implementation of the 
work plan of the CIO 
of the Ministry of 
Agriculture.  
 
UAIS  
CONAF  
  Indigenous and 
Social Affairs Unit 
(UAIS)   
Advisory unit of the 
Executive Secretariat 
of CONAF.  
 
The UAIS provides 
technical support to 
the Executive 
Direction of CONAF 
on Indigenous and 
Social rights issues .  
 
  
The UAIS, in 
coordination with the 
UCCSA will be 
responsible for the 
diffusion and 
consultation of 
projects and the 
ENCCRV’s direct 
management action  
measures (CONAF, 
2017).  The Unit has Regional 
Representatives for 
Indigenous and Social 
Affairs, permanent 
professionals within 
CONAF whose main role 
is to link Regional 
Management with the 
UAIS and CONAF’s 
regional offices.  
 These representatives 
are not exclusively 
dedicated t o work on 
Indigenous and Social 
Affairs  within their units 
(except in the Region of 
Araucania).  
 
  The UAIS participated in the 
ENCCRV formulation process.  
 
The UAIS, in coordination with 
UCCSA and the regional 
implementation teams   shall see 
that the soci al and environmental 
safeguards are properly applied 
through the fulfil lment of what is 
established in the ESMF herein, 
including the compliance of its 
national legal framework, mainly 
concerning the rights of 
indigenous peoples. (CONAF, 
2017).  
UCCSA  
CONAF   
 
  
Climate Change and 
Environmental 
Services Unit  
(UCCSA ) 
 
Within the Forest 
Development and 
Promotion 
Management 
(GEDEFF), UCCSA is 
directly responsible for 
the management, 
execution and 
supervision of projects 
conducted within the 
ENCCRV’s 
implementation 
framework.  
 
  
The UCCSA has the 
following main roles  
 
Analyzing and 
categorizing the Action 
Measures and 
determining the 
instruments and/or 
procedures to be 
developed that derive 
from the analysis, 
complying with the 
procedures of the 
herein ESMF; 
Creating supporting 
material for the 
application of the 
safeguards, such as 
categorization forms, 
guides and the 
minimum content for 
each environmental 
and social 
management 
instrument; Performing 
regular assessments 
of fulfillment of 
safeguards for Action 
Measures   through Regional coordinators in 
the 15 administrative 
regions of the country, 
that, within CONAF, in 
general in the Department 
of Forest Development, 
also have the function of 
being Climate Change 
Coordinators.  
 
 
 
 The UCCSA has the following 
main roles:  
 
Providing technical support in 
environmental matters to 
CONAF’s Regional Teams which 
will imple ment the  Action 
Measures  at a local level;  
Assuring the monitoring of the 
Indigenous Engagement Plans 
(PPIs), Involunt ary Resettlement 
Plans (PRIs), Procedural 
Standards (NdPs) and the 
adaptation plans, if necessary; 
Reporting, from regional level, 
the follow -up of the safeguards 
fulfillment.


---
*Page 174*
---

 32 Governanc
e Structure 
for the 
ENCCRV  National level  Regional Level  
Institutional  mechanisms  
and/or arrangements 
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures 
on gender 
mainstreaming  Institutional  mechanism
s and/or arrangements  
promoting  gender 
mainstreaming  Objectives/measures on 
gender mainstreaming  
tenders, providing 
feedback and 
recommendat ions for 
all of the necessary 
cases. This shall 
include the 
identification from the 
information generated 
on-site during the 
execution, from the 
possible regulation 
loopholes or gaps that 
may arise and the 
proposal for its 
amendment or 
correction.  
 
 
 
Source: Equal Opportunities Commission (CIO) (2012), Gender and public policie s: advances and impacts of gender equity policies for women 
in the forestry and agricultural sector, MINAGRI , Santiago, Chile.  
 
e) Gender considerations i n the national REDD+ safeguards  
 
The COP 19 established methodological guidelines for developing countries to demonstrate compliance with the 
social and environmental safeguards in the implementation of REDD+, with three requirements to access 
payments based on results:  
 
• REDD+ activities, regardless of the source and type of funding, are implemented in a manner consistent 
with the safeguards adopted by COP 16 (Cancun safeguards)  
• Countries should develop a Safeguards Information System (SIS) to provide information on how t hey are 
addressing and respecting the Cancun safeguards .26 
• Countries must provide a summary of the information on how they are addressing and respecting all the 
Cancun safeguards during the deployment of the REDD+ activities, i.e. they must “report”.  
 
The a pplication of the UNFCCC REDD+ safeguards requires adapting them to the reality of each  country, taking 
into account national and regional context, and aligning them with existing policies and  national REDD+ actions  
The safeguards are measures, directives, guidelines and regulations that enable the prevention, mitigation and 
minimization of socio -environmental risks and the non -infringement of rights in the implementation of projects, in 
additio n to the maximization of profit (CONAF, 2015).  CONAF  has considered the incorporation of the social and 
environmental safeguards throughout all the phases of the Strategy. To adequately follow this rule, the UCCSA 
has an “Implementation Plan for the Environmental and Social Safeguards for the ENCCRV”, devel oped and 
carried out by the Indigenous Affairs Unit of CONAF.  The gender approach has been raised in different ways 
throughout the ENCCRV  (table 16).  
 
 
 
26 The mainstreaming of the gender approach will be evalua ted through specific indicators included in the Framework of Social and Environmental 
Indicators applicable to the ENCCRV, which is currently in the development stage, being able to monitor  the real performance in relation to this topic.


---
*Page 175*
---

 33 Table 16. Gender considerations in the national REDD+ safeguards  
Compliance with 
Cancun safeguards   National interpretation  Measure for addressing the safeguard/Gender and/or participative 
approach  
 
That actions complement 
or are consistent with the 
objectives of national 
forest programmes and 
relevant international 
conventions and 
agreements   
Complementarity/compa
tibility of the ENCCRV’s 
action measures with 
the objectives of the 
national forestry and 
environmental 
programs, and with the 
international agreements 
related  to fores t and 
vegetational resources 
ratified by Chile.  
  
The ENCCRV is based on compliance with international agreements adopted by 
Chile with the UNFCCC, the UNCCD and the CBD, as well as contributing to 
compliance with the SDGs, which is supported as a State policy valid for one 
year 2025.  
 
The ENCCRV currently responds to the guidelines associated with REDD + of 
the UNFCCC (Cancun safeguards), World Bank Operational Policies and other 
guidelines emanating, for example, from the UN -REDD Program, among ot hers 
(CONAF, 2018b), and the current national legislation.  
  
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): management 
instrument that establishes the protocols and procedures to be followed to avoid, 
mitigate, reverse and / or compensate eventu al adverse socio -environmental 
risks and impacts, and maximize the potential benefits associated with the 
implementation of the measures of action of the ENCCRV, in order to ensure the 
protection of the safeguards applicable to the initiative.  
Transparent  and effective 
national forest 
governance structures, 
taking into account 
national legislation and 
sovereignty   
In the different phases 
contemplated by the 
ENCCRV, the 
transparency and 
effectiveness of the 
national forest and 
environmental 
governance struc tures 
are promoted, taking 
into account the 
legislation and national 
sovereignty  
  
Following Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 
at the national level, everyone should have adequate access to information 
about the environmen t available to public authorities. In terms of transparency 
and access to public information on forest governance structures, there are 
several participatory structures: Forest Policy Council (CPF), the CIO, the 
CRIOs, etc. CONAF has also the Comprehensive  Information and Citizen 
Attention System (SIAC), which provides various spaces for attention to the 
requirements of citizens, among which are the Information Offices, Claims and 
Suggestions (OIRS).  
 
The Observatory of Climate Commitments was launched on D ecember 5, 2017 
as a tool to monitor national progress in these matters, an instance in which the 
ENCCRV is included, given its key role in achieving the forest goals contained in 
the NDC. The public WEB site of this initiative is available at: http: 
//www .compromisosclimaticos. cl.  
 
The Observatory of Climate Commitments was launched on December 5, 2017 
as a tool to monitor national progress in these matters, an instance in which the 
ENCCRV is included, given its key role in achieving the forest goals contained in 
the NDC. The public WEB site of this initiative is available at: http: 
//www.compromisosclimaticos. cl /  
In this area, the State of Chile has the following internet sites to facilitate 
compliance with the Law: National interpretation, approach , respect and 
compliance with safeguards  -  
 
- Office of Information, Claims and Suggestions (OIRS), in each of the State 
institutions, with the purpose of assisting citizens in their right to submit petitions, 
suggestions or complaints to public institut ions. Currently, they exist in all 
services, including CONAF, with the objective of complying with Law No. 20,285. 
instance so that citizens can register their claims and suggestions related to the 
implementation of the action measures of the ENCCRV ( http://oirs.conaf.cl/ ). 
 
 - Website of the ENCCRV ( https://www.enccrv.cl/ )  
 
- CONAF website ( http://www.conaf.cl/ ) 
 
Respect for the 
knowledge and  rights of 
indigenous peoples and 
members of local 
communities, by taking 
into account relevant 
international obligations, 
national circumstances 
and laws, and noting that 
the United Nations  
The ENCCRV protects 
the respect of the 
knowledge and rights of 
indigenous peoples and 
members of local 
communities, complying 
with international 
obligations ratified by 
Chile and the 
circumstances and  
- The participative process in the formulation and validation of the ENCCRV was 
carried out in the terms established in the Law No. 20.500 on Associations and 
Citizen Participation in Public Management and, Article 7 of Convention No. 169 
of the ILO and OP 4.10 of the World Bank for the case of the Peoples Indigenous 
people, among other normative pillars of l egal order that support the full, 
effective and transparent participation of the civil society.   
 
The most relevant technical inputs that were used to give technical content to the 
various instances of participation and validation, correspond among others:


---
*Page 176*
---

 34 General Assembly has 
adopted the United 
Nations Declaration on 
the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples.  
 
 
 national legislation, 
considering the General 
Assembly of the United 
Nations has approved 
the United Nations 
Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples, which has 
been ratified by Chile  
 - Identification and prioritization of causes of deforestation, devegetation and 
degradation of vegetational resources and associated problems to increase their 
coverage and quality, which was used as a basis for the design of action 
measures of the EN CCRV. Within the framework of the ENCCRV it was decided 
to include not only forests, but also xerophytic, wetland and bofedal formations, 
taking into account the national scope of this initiative and the environmental and 
social relevance assigned to these  resources in the various instances of 
dialogue.  
 
- The Plan for the Implementation of Social and Environmental Safeguards 
provided the country's guidelines in terms of citizen participation and indigenous 
participation to address the safeguards of Cancún.  The Safeguards Plan was 
made operational through the participatory process developed between 2015 
and the beginning of 2016, in the 15 regions of the country plus a national 
workshop. It should be noted that this process was piloted in 2013 in the city of  
Temuco, La Araucanía Region, with the support of social and communication 
experts from the World Bank. The Safeguards Plan It allowed guiding an orderly, 
systematic and methodologically s process to generate inputs that contributed to 
the formulation of t he Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA, 
acronym in English) and the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF).   
 
- It is not anticipated that the ENCCRV REDD+ activities Program will have any 
negative impacts on in areas containi ng sites deemed physical cultural resources 
(PCR). The existence of any such sites in areas affected by the ENCCRV will 
trigger provisions included in the ESMF on how to address preservation of 
known PCR sites, especially in areas inhabited by indigenous c ommunities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The full and effective 
participation of relevant 
stakeholders, in particular 
indigenous peoples and 
local communities, in the 
actions referred to in 
paragraphs 70 and 72 of 
1/CP.16.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The full and effective 
participation of 
stakeholders, 
particularly indigenous 
peoples and local 
communities, in the 
planning, design, 
implementation and 
monitoring of the action 
measures of the 
ENCCRV.  
  
Methodological design of the participatory process for the formulation and 
validation of the ENCCRV. Para la formulación y validación de la ENCCRV 
participaron representantes de 8 pueblos indígenas.  As part of the readiness 
phase, indigenous peoples partic ipated in most of the 16 Regional and National 
Workshops performed as part of the SESA process, which included a total of 
more than 1,300 people. Also an Indigenous People National Dialogue was 
carried out during 2016, with 1813 IP participants in 90 works hops. Through the 
SESA, Indigenous Peoples assessed the risks and benefits of the proposed 
REDD+ strategic options from their own perspective and contextual realities, 
providing also suggestions for potential mitigation measures (CONAF, 2017).  
 
- Strategic  Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA):  this input was 
prepared on the basis on the participatory process. 44 approved environmental 
and social risks were identified, which incorporated considerations  on those 
issues , in order to ensure the sustainab le implementation of the action measures 
of the ENCCRV.  During the SESA, risks for the national cultural heritage linked 
to the implementation of some action measures were identified.  
 
- Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): management 
instrument that establishes the protocols and procedures to be followed to avoid, 
mitigate, reverse and / or compensate eventual adverse socio -environmental 
risks and impacts, and maximize the potential benefits associated with the 
implementatio n of the measures of action of the ENCCRV, in order to ensure the 
protection of the safeguards applicable to the initiative.  The ESMF includes a 
(preliminary) Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). It should be noted 
that It is not expected that ENC CRV measures will result in the displacement of 
peoples. The IPPF will serve a guidance for preparing site -specific Indigenous 
Peoples Plans (IPPs) during the implementation of the ER Program under the 
principle of free, prior and informed consultationTo a ddress this kind of impacts, 
a Process Framework (PF) is being prepared as part of the draft ESMF, 
including instruments to be applied, such as Plans for Indigenous Peoples and 
the specific models developed by Chile for its South and North Macrozones, 
which have been incorporated as ESMF instruments.  
 
- The ESA and The ESMF include several operational instruments as well as 
prevention and/or mitigation measures to address environmental and social 
risks. These measures include screening checklists (to determ ine potential 
impacts), negative lists (to exclude certain activities that are considered high -
impact), and procedures to determine the need for development of site -specific 
assessments and safeguard instruments.


---
*Page 177*
---

 35 Source:  Prepared by the author based on : UCCSA, GEDEFF , CONAF (2017), Mainstreaming of the Gender Approach in Chile’s National 
Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV), Informative Note N° 08, ENCCRV.  Climate Change and Environmental 
Services Unit (UCCSA), Forest Development and Promotion Management Department (GEDEFF), National Forestry Corporation (CONAF) , 
Chilean Ministry of Agriculture;  National Forest Corporation  (CONAF) (2017), Environmental and  Social Management Framework for the 
REDD actions of the ENCCRV, Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA), Forest Development and Promotion 
Management (GEDEFF), National Forestry Corporation (CONAF); National Forest Corporation (CONAF) (2015) , Mid -Term Review (MTR) 
Chile, Request for Additional Funds Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), Development Management and Forestry Developmen t 
(GEDEFF), Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA).  
 
 
  - CONAF’s Indigenous and Social Affairs Un it (UAIS) supported the Participatory 
Process. En total, para la formulación y validación de la ENCCRV se contó con 
los aportes de 3.784 actores claves representados en los distintos sectores de la 
sociedad. Lo anterior, constituye un reto para los Servici os del Estado en la 
construcción de una política pública inclusiva y participativa.  
 
Actions to address the 
risks of reversals.  
  
Actions that allow to 
face the risks of 
reversion that could be 
generated with the 
implementation of the 
ENCCRV, as well as 
those that could affect 
the planned results, 
ensuring the 
permanence of the 
reduction of emissions  
  
Actions to reduce 
displacement of 
emissions.  
 Actions that prevent the 
territorial mobility of 
activities that generate 
GHG emissions 
associated with 
deforestation and forest 
degradation


---
*Page 178*
---

 36 IV. Conclusions  and recomme ndations  
 
 
Chile is currently in the second phase of implementing policy reforms and REDD+ pilots and 
transitioning towards the third phase of performance -based payments. During this third phase, the 
ENCCRV REDD+ policies and activities will be fully implemented in 5 regions of the country. This 
gender analysis acts as an entry point for gender mainstreaming throughout design and 
implementation of the ENCCRV. The results and findings of the gender analysis has also informed 
and guided the development of a Gender Action Plan.  
 
Chile has made progress in recent years in integrating gender perspectives and awareness into forest 
policies and ENCCRV strategies. Guidelines for REDD+ safeguards are available , and the national 
REDD+ str ategy includes several references to gender/women, which reflects the increasing 
awareness and commitment to integrate gender into REDD+ policies and implementation.  
 
In Chile, the  progress of mainstreaming gender into the ENCCRV has been based on a wides pread 
participative process that included proposals of all sectors of society, focusing on women, indigenous 
peoples, and vulnerable communities (formulation and validation stage of the ENCCRV and its 
SESA). The national -level territorial coverage, the tot al of key stakeholders engaged, the 
methodology used, the characteristics of the implementation of the participatory process, the 
mainstreaming of the gender approach and cultural relevance: all of these are unprecedented 
measures for the formulation of pu blic policies that seek to represent the country’s territorial vision 
with regard to forests and vegetation resources.  
 
Through this participative process , gender considerations and women’s and indigenous peoples 
demands, regarding the causes of degradatio n and deforestation, were integrated into the ENCCRV’s 
design and action measures. They contributed to identify the target groups of the ENCCRV: 
vulnerable groups in rural areas of the country, indigenous and non -indigenous rural communities, 
indige nous wo man, small and medium -sized landowners, among others stakeholders . The 
participative process  was used for defining the benefits likely to be generated with the implementation 
of the activities contemplated within the ENCCRV:  
 
The need of Environmental educ ation: The Measure MT.6 of the ENCCRV includes the 
Environmental Education and Dissemination Program that seeks to benefit more than 8,000 
people by 2020.  
 
The availability, rights and regulation of the use, maintenance and care of water courses: The 
ENCCRV incorporates a facilitating action measure named Adaptation Program for managing 
vegetation resources within the framework of climate change, desertification, land 
degradation and drought  (Measure GA.1), which will generate inputs that are relev ant to the 
design and execution of afforestation, revegetation, restoration and sustainable forest 
management programs of the ENCCRV.  
 
The need of a greater institutional presence in the territory and further assistance, service 
and accompaniment for lando wners particularly for smaller landowners: Different programs 
will imply a greater presence of services in the territory in coordination with communities, 
among which are:  
- Strengthening the forest and environmental supervision program (Measure MT.7).  
- Strengthening the Communities Prepared Against Forest Fires Program (Measure 
IF.4). 
- Adaptation Program for managing vegetation resources within the framework of 
climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought (Measure GA.1) . 
 
Effective  gender  integration in these programmes depend on  whether initial gender and territorial 
analysis is done, whether it is applied to the projects, and whether gender it is reflected in all relevant


---
*Page 179*
---

 37 projects components. Additionally, the commitment of project teams to achieving gender equality 
results and to reporting them, including disseminating gender related lessons learned, i s critical.  
 
The following recommendations can help ensure  women and  indigenous benefit from REDD+:  
 
Establish gender baseline data for targeted ENCCRV’s groups   
 
Ensuring gender sensitive in REDD+ processes will require additional efforts related to the 
establishment of a national and sub -national baseline, through a gender analysis, for all the 
programmes that will be implemented by the ENCCRV.  Until now,  some forestry initiatives are being 
determined without adequate gender disaggregated data. Ther efore, the collection of gender 
disaggregated data should be a mandatory contribution to available national and local -level 
databases.  
 
A gender analysis should ideally  been carried out in the beginning of REDD+ actions in order to : a) 
summarize the key characteristics of the target groups (in terms of assets, livelihood   activities, how 
they are involved in project theme and outcomes) and their priority needs  ; b)  ide ntify the potential 
for gender -based risks and adverse impacts throughout the project’s implementation (particularly in 
the design stage) so that they can develop plans to mitigate these impacts.   
 
Gender capacity building will be indispensable to generat e Gender -specific data collection,  that may 
include specific forestry data (employment, income, market information), land data (ownership, rights, 
use) and forest use data (non -cash income, medicinal value, cultural use).  As gender roles interact 
with other relationships (intersectional approach) such as ethnicity, culture, class, religion, income, 
education, age, disability, and/or other status – and that these relationships change over time – 
gender analysis should theref ore be cautious not to treat women and men as homogenous groups. 
Following these guidelines, the ENCCRV should continue reinforcing the integration of gender and 
social -cultural inclusion considerations, based on a Human’s Rights approach.  
 
 
Strengthening  gender equality in local and national planning processes  
 
At CONAF’s institutional level, a work methodology that safeguards gender equality mainstreaming 
and interculturality is starting to be implemented by different measures:  
 
 
Challenges involved in this process are related to the availability of a gender expertise, both at 
national and sub national level, within the UIG, the UCCSA  and the UAIS  teams (whose are 
responsible for the diffusion, consultation of projects and the ENCCRV’s direct management action 
measures). The UIG includes one representative at national level (from each technical and 
administrative management unit of CONAF) and 15 Regional representatives. The UAIS  and the 
UCCSA  have  also representatives in all the 15 administrative regions of the country. Nevertheless 
these representatives are not exclusively dedicated to work on gender issues within their units. It 
would be necessary to increase the participation of all CONAF servants in gender training courses; 
to enhance regional headquarters as Administrator of parks and programs, heads of departments 
and provinces, in the concepts of gender; to carry out projects, works and reports, including the 
gender perspective, visualizing the language and images  of gender in th e institutional d issemination; 
to improve internal management and good practices, through gender analysis diagnostics. A clear 
identification of roles and responsibilities -among the UIG, the UCCSA  and the UAIS - of implementing 
and monitori ng the gender action plan, must be established.  
 
It is also important to mention the efforts that have been made through the development of territorial 
management instruments with an eco -cultural approach (Andean Intercultural Environmental Model 
(MAIA), Mapuche Intercultural Forest Model, MOFIM) and other participation measures carried out to 
include indigenous demands in the ECCRV (Dialogue and Participation Process with Indigenous 
Peoples developed in 2016, characterization of the actors involved the fi rewood supply chain within


---
*Page 180*
---

 38 the Wood Energy Strategy). Additionally, other instruments are used to increase and regulate the 
participation of these groups: the Guidelines on the Free, Prior and Informed Consent of the UN -
REDD Program and the Program and the  Project Evaluation Guide with a gender, human rights and 
intercultural perspective of UN - Women, that is oriented towards professionals who implement or 
manage programs and projects in which human rights, gender equality and interculturality are 
included transversely, among other tools.  
 
Despite the availability of these frameworks, supporting gender training and capacity building at all 
levels is fundamental to ensure a shift in conceptual thinking in terms of appreciation of gender issues 
and in terms of  overall project design and conceptualization of impacts. Some policy gaps to gender 
mainstrea ming in the forestry sector are : inadequate understanding and lack of clarity on the concepts 
of gender and gender mainstreaming ; limited attention by policy make rs to the heterogeneity of 
communities, including gender, class, ethnicity and other socio -cultural aspects, so different 
subgroups are often overlooked despite their unique contributions and characteristics, different levels 
of capacities, skills, experti se and motivations for mainstreaming gender among members of gender 
working groups limits their ability to fulfill their assigned duties and responsibilities  ; the absence of 
gender -disaggregated data.  
 
Challenges involved in this effort  are related to the availability of gender expertise within the ENCCRV 
REDD + institutional arrangements, as well as with the availability of gender specialists in local 
decision instances, the need of improving knowledge and defining mandates and roles on  gender 
issues among regional representatives of UIG, UCCSA and UAIS, the coordination between 
agencies; the need, at sub -national level to achieve a greater link between forest development and 
gender equality policies and projects.  
 
 
Ensure the effective participation of women  through reducing gender gaps  
 
One of the main challenges while implementing Chile’s REDD+ processes will be to empower women 
through recognition, assimilation, capacity -building and leadership for ensuring gender considerat ion 
into REDD+ actions (beyond the misconception that gender refers to merely the inclusion or targeting 
of women in projects , beyond the establishment of the social and environmental safeguards ). Efforts 
need to be done to more comprehensively explore the  ways in which men and women interact and 
differ with regard to the national REDD + implementation in their respective sites, and incorporate 
such dimensions into national efforts on REDD +. Gender analyses need to be prioritized in the 
ENCCRV design and implementation to better  understand gender and socially differentiated 
interests, behavior, involvement, constraints and opportunities.  
 
Supporting the effective participation of women within the ENCCRV’s implementation requires an 
enabling environment , capacity building and the implementation of appropriate systems of 
engagement. In order to ensure the meaningful participation of women, it will be necessary to 
consider, throughout all the ENCCRV's programs and projects, the practical and strategic need s of 
women (access to water, workload, food, health services/access to land ownership, decent work, 
education, decision making, public policy). In this framework, using a methodology allowing the 
establishment of gender -responsive baselines and the assessm ent of gender -differentiated impacts 
of value chain development , among smallholders and other resource -poor groups involved in value 
chains, is recommended.27 The collaboration  with local women’s  and indigenous organizations28 in 
capacity building project ( that is part of the approach that will guide the execution of ENCCRV’s 
programmes ), could be reinforced. A community based pilot project on this topic, could up -scale 
CONAF’s gender tools and methodologies, to other regions.  
 
27 See:   Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) (2015), Developing Gender -sensitive Value Chains  Guidelines for Practitioners, Santiago 
de Chile, F ood & Agriculture Organization..  
28 National Councilors of the National Indigenous Development Corporation (CON ADI acronym in Spanish), Indigenous Communities, 
indigenous Associations and Traditional authorities, persons, mentors and/or representatives of other kinds of indigenous org anizations 
that are involved in the ENCCRV.


---
*Page 181*
---

 39  
The ENCCRV actions include changes and improvements in operational practices of afforestation, 
restoration and sustainable management, promoting associations among communities vulnerable to 
climate change and also fostering inter -institutional work, with  the inclusion of the private sector. In 
order to enhance the effective participation of women in Nation al REDD + strategy, the ENCCRV has 
taken into account specific measures:  
 
- With regards to the type of landowners that will be eligible to receive bene fits, "small forest owners" 
will be prioritized. Equally, those beneficiaries classified as "medium owners" will be considered. The 
prioritization considers aspects of environmental, economic, and social vulnerability to be specified 
at regional level, tak ing into account aspects such as gender, presence of indigenous peoples and 
vulnerable population.  
 
- Small forest owners include “agricultural communities” according to the law 5/1968, the indigenous 
communities regulated by law 19.253/1993; the “communit ies on common goods resulting from the 
Agrarian Reform process”; “rain fed companies” formed according to article 1° of the decree 
2.247/1978, and the companies referred to in article 6 of the law 19.118/1992 provided that, at least, 
60% of the social capi tal of such companies is held by the original partners or people that have the 
quality of small forest owners, as certified by the Agricultural and Livestock Service.  
 
- Aspects related to land tenure, such as the requirements established by law to regula rize property 
titles over land or the relevance of customary law, certainly cover a relevant function, although it is 
intended that those persons/groups that do not hold tenure rights might also be included in the 
category of beneficiaries.  
 
-CONAF will pr omote the participation of women in forest governance structures such as the Regional 
Committee on Climate Change (CORECC), that will lead a multi -stakeholder engagement process at 
the subnational level.  They are constituted by the public sector, academia , NGOs and the private 
sector depending on the region, the figure below shows the relationships between the institutions.  
 
- The funds allocation within each region will allow the definition of eligible areas, taking into 
consideration aspects of environme ntal, economic and social vulnerability. Among the criteria for the 
allocation of resources, the benefit -sharing distribution plan will take into account aspects of gender, 
the presence of indigenous peoples and vulnerable populations, to ensure positive s ocial and 
environmental impacts.  
 
Other recommendations that result from the gender assess ment are  :  
 
• Diagnose on land tenure problems by gender and gender gaps on natural resource 
management and land management programs. Currently, land tenure ownership  data is 
only available at the national level (not disaggregated at sub -national level).  
• Incorporate into the information systems and sub -systems, data disaggregated by sex on 
agro-forestry development: production, sustainable resource management, environ mental 
protection, industrialization, commercialization, caring responsibilities, social protection, etc.  
• Strengthen the gender capacities of women’s and indigenous organization.  
• Strengthen and promote the integration of women in the discussion and community. 
decision on the legalization of land in economic solutions related to afforestation, train men 
and women promoters and leaders with a gender vision with equal opportunities to 
participate in community forestry development and social risks such a s violence against 
women.  
• Facilitate women's access to resources: credit technology training technical assistance inputs 
and implements in order to influence: the strengthening of their organizational capacity; the 
development and strengthening of their se lf-esteem; the resolution of the problems it faces 
in the use and management of the conservation of natural resources; The generation and 
increase of incomes.


---
*Page 182*
---

 40 • Raise awareness among women and men about the problems of deforestation and rational 
management of natural resources with a gender approach.  
• Incorporate the concept of production systems in which the tree and its derivatives are one 
of the fundamental elements in the training and practice of forestry technicians


---
*Page 183*
---

 41 V. Biblography  
 
 
− Angelsen, A., Brockhaus M., Kanninen M., Sills E., Sunderlin W.D., Wertz -Kanounnikoff S., et 
(eds.). (2010) The implementation of REDD +: national strategy and policy options. Center for 
International Forestry Research (CIFOR). https://doi.org/10.17528/cifor/003178 . 
− Arriagada, Irma and Miranda, Francisca (to be published in 2019), The social organization of 
Care in Chile, en: Araujo, Nadya, Hirata, Helena (eds.), Care and care workers. A Latin 
American p erspective. Springer Eds., Switzerland.  
− CEDAW (2016), Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 18 of the 
Convention, Seventh periodic report of States parties due in 2016 (CEDAW/C/CH/7).  
− ENCCRV (2017), Environmental and Social Man agement Framework for the REDD actions 
of the ENCCRV, Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA), Forest 
Development and Promotion Management (GEDEFF), National Forestry Corporation 
(CONAF), Santiago.  
− Equal Opportunities Commission (CIO) (2012) , Gender and public policies: advances and 
impacts of gender equity policies for women in the forestry and agricultural sector, MINAGRI 
of Chile.  
− Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (2017), Guidelines for the 
assessment of gender mainstreaming, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations Office of Evaluation (OED), Rome.  
− Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) (2012), The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility 
(FCPF) (R -PIN) Template, January 06, 2012, Country submitting the R -PIN: CHILE Date 
submitted: 06 -10-2011  
− National Institute of Statistics (INE)  (2019), National Employment Survey (ENE) 2019, 
National Institute of Statistics (INE), Santiago, Chile.  
− National Institute of Statistics (INE) (2014), Vital Statistics. INE’s 2014 Yearbook, National 
Institute of Statistics Santiago.  
− National Institute of Statistics (INE) (2015), Statistical Compendium, National Statistics 
Institute of Chile, Santiago.  
− National Institute of Statistics (INE) (2015b). Time Use Survey 2015. www.ine.cl . 
− National Institute of Statistics (INE) (2016) Document with the main results of the Time Use 
Survey, ENUT 2015. Department  of social Studies   of the INE, Santiago de Chile.  
− National Institute of Statistics (INE) (2018), Gender radiography of original peoples in Chile 
2017, National Institute of Statistics (INE), Santiago.  
− Ministry of Health (MINSAL ) (2016), Department of Health Statistics and  Information (DEIS). 
Ministry of Health of Chile.  
− Ministry of Health (2014), National Food Consumption Survey, School of Nutrition Public 
Health, Faculty of Economy and Business, University of Chile, Santiago.  
− Ministry of Agriculture of Chile ( MINAGR I) (2015), Forest Policy 2015 -2035, Ministry of 
Agriculture of the gouvernement of Chile . 
− Ministry of Agriculture of Chile (MINAGRI) (2017), Gender Commitments of the Ministry of 
Agriculture of Chile:  2017. https://www.odepa.gob.cl/wp -
content/uploads/2016/03/Compromisos -Ministeriales -de-Ge%CC%81nero -en-Agricultura.pdf  
− Ministry of Labo r and Social Security (2015), Social Protection Survey (EPS) 2015: A look at 
social protection in Chile, Sub secretariat of Social Security, Directorate of Pension Studies, 
Pension Observatory.  
− Ministry of Social Development (2017a), Poverty Situation Summ ary of Results CASEN 
2006 -2017, Ministry of Social Development, CASEN Survey,  
− Ministry of Social Development (2017b), Gender equality, Ministry of Social Development 
Sub secretariat of Social Evaluation, Santiago Chile, March 7, 2017.  
− Ministry of Social D evelopment (2016), Expanding the look on the poverty and inequality 
CASEN 2015, Ministry of Social Development Sub secretariat of Social Evaluation, Santiago 
Chile, September 22, 2016.


---
*Page 184*
---

 42 − Ministry of Social Development, National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN), 2015. 2003, 
2006, 2014, 2015, 2017. www.ministeriodesarrollosocial.gob.cl  
− Ministry for the Environment (2017), National Action Plan on Climate Change (PANCC) II 
(2017 -2022).  
− Ministry of Women and Gender Equality of Chile (2018 a), Fourth National Plan for W omen’s 
and Men’s Equality 2018 – 2030, Ministry of Women and Gender Equality, Santiago.  
− Ministry of Women and Gender Equality of Chile (2018b),  Ministry of Women and Gender 
Equality of Chile. Presidential message.  
− Ministry of Women and Gender Equity (2017), Rural women in chile: systematization of some 
elements, Division of Studies and Training in Gender, Ministry of Women and Gender Equity, 
Santiago, Chile.  
−  National Forest Corporation  (CONAF) (2018 a), System of Measurement and Monitoring of 
the Nat ional Strategy of Climate Change and Vegetational Resources, Santiago. Chile.  
− National Forest Corporation  (CONAF) (2018b), First Summary of Information on the 
Approach, Respect and Compliance of Safeguards for the Formulation of the National 
Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetational Resources of Chile (ENCCRV). 2013 -2017, 
Santiago.  
− National Forest Corporation  (CONAF) (2017), Environmental and Social Management 
Framework for the REDD actions of the ENCCRV, Climate Change and Environmental 
Services Unit (UCCSA), Forest Development and Promotion Management (GEDEFF), 
National Forestry Corporation (CONAF).  
− National Forest Corporation (CONAF) (2015), Mid -Term Review (MTR) Chile, Request for 
Additional Funds Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), Developme nt Management and 
Forestry Development (GEDEFF), Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit 
(UCCSA ). 
− UCCSA (2016), Readiness Package for the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility Within the 
Framework of the National Strategy for Climate Change and Vegetat ion Resources, Climate 
Change and Environmental Services Unit Management Office on Forest Support and 
Development National Forestry Corporation (CONAF) Santiago de Chile).  
− UCCSA, GEDEFF, CONAF (2017), Mainstreaming of the Gender Approach in Chile’s 
Nationa l Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV), Informative 
Note N° 08, ENCCRV. Climate Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA), Forest 
Development and Promotion Management Department (GEDEFF), National Forestry 
Corporation (CONAF), Chilean Ministry of Agriculture;  
− Sub-secretariat  of Agriculture (2017), Protocol of cooperation agreement between the 
Ministry of Agriculture, its undersecretary, its dependent service s and other entities related to 
the National Advisory C ommission of Opportunities of the Min istry of Agriculture (Santiago, 
July 14, 2017 ), Legal A dvice Service/ Sub Secretary of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture of 
the Government of 
Chile. http://transparencia.minagri.gob.cl/descargas/2017/convenios/Resoluci%C3%B3n%20
Exenta%20N%C2%B0%20329.pdf  
− UN Women, GCF (2017), Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects. A practical 
manual to support the integration of gender equality in climate change interventions and 
climate finance, The Green Climate Fund (GCF), Republic of Korea.


---
*Page 185*
---

 
 1  
 
 
Part II: Gender Action Plan  
 
ENCCRV Action Measures indicators  
 Gender Indicators and targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  
 
Impact Statement  
 
 
Supporting the effective participation of women within the ENCCRV’s implementation  and empower women through recognition, assimilation, capacity -building and leadership for ensuring gender consideration into REDD+ actions . 
 
Outcome Statement: Results statement  
 
 
In the framework of the integration of the gender approach within the ENCCRV,  in capacity buil ding activities related to implement the maintenance of restored, afforestation, and restoration areas after forest fires wit h stakeholders, equitably 
and meaningfully involve and target women, men and youth from communities. Design all consultations and t raining associated with this activity to encourage women’s active involvement.  
 
As per the Gender Assessment , in the traditional manifestations and relations of both genders with vegetation resources , women use the different services that forests provide, to obtain : medicinal herb gathering, harvesting of non -timber forest 
products such as fruits, fungi and others, production of handcrafts, beekeeping promotion, dye gathering, tree nurseries , etc. In case of men, it is mainly associated to timber harvesting , firewood gathering for heating to large -scale trading .  The 
project will promote that actions that will be implemented will ensure that women can derive value from the forestry activities that they use to do.  
 
Gender indicators have also been defined wit h regard to the ENCCRV action measures that include education/training and audit activities (MT.6, MT.7 , respectively ) and the ENCCRV action measures related to afforestation, restoration, soil 
management and preventive forestry activities, which will be implemented directly in the territory (, MT.4, MT.5, IF.2, IF.3, US.1, US.3).  The indicators are related to the integration of the gender approach in all the cycle planning of ENCCRV 
projects (gender -sensitive programming , gender responsive project results  framework ). Other indicators focus on the reduction of gender gaps in the territories concerned by the ENCCRV.  
 
 
Objective  Gender -responsive 
actions  Gender indicators  Responsible 
Institutions/  
Individuals  Years  Budget (USD)  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
 
 
Output 1 
Implementation 
and investment   
 
 Preparation  
 
Gender -responsi ve 
actions:  
 
1.1 Prepare 
methodologies for 
developing projects with 
gender analysis.  
 
1.2 Review the effective 
incorporation of the 
gender approach in 
project design.  
 
1.3 Develop criter ia for 
the selection of projects 
that favor the Baseline : 0 
Indicators :  % or  of projects that 
have conducted gender analysis 
during project preparation.  
Target : One pilot project designed 
to fully integrate ge nder concerns.  
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicators :  % or  of projects that 
have incorporated gender 
responsive project cycle framework 
(e.g. gender responsive objectives, 
output, outcome, indicator, budget, 
monitoring and evaluation, etc.).  
Target : 40 % of project designs fully 
integrate gender concerns (pilot 
projects).  
  
 
 
CONAF: the institution 
responsible for the 
design, implementation  of 
the GAP, through the : 
- Climate Change and 
Environmental 
Services Unit 
(UCCSA),  
- The support of the 
Unit of Indigenous 
and Social Affairs 
(UAIS)  
- The Unit for Gender 
Equality (UIG).  
         
761.402


---
*Page 186*
---

 
 2 incorporation of direct 
beneficiary women.  
 Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or # of project  activitie s 
that are designed to allow women 
derive value from the forest .  
Target : 30% 
 
 FAO: monitoring and 
oversight  the 
performance of the GAP 
through:  
 
- Project Coordinator,  
- Lead Technical 
Officer and  
- Project Task Force  
 Implementation  
 
Afforestation and 
revegetation program 
(MT.4)  
Strengthening the 
ecological restoration 
program (MT.5)  
Program of restoration 
after forest fires (IF2)  
Preventive forestry 
program with emphasis 
on rural urban interface 
(IF.3)  
Forest management 
program. Arrangement 
and comprehensive 
management of the 
native forest in buildings 
or groups of buildings 
that incorporate multiple 
forestry activities (US.1)  
Strengthening the wood 
energy program (US.3)  
 
Gender -responsi ve 
actions   
1.1 Ensure the 
participation of women 
beneficiaries, including 
indigenous women, in 
the development of 
projects.  
1.2 Monitor during the 
implementation of the 
project the fulfillment of 
the gender actions 
considered in the design 
stage (supervision and 
reports, with gender and 
inclusive language)  
1.3 Verify that the 
results of the projects 
guarantee an equitable 
distribution of benefits.  Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or  of women 
participation in the activities and 
outputs associated with these 
projects.  
Target : 40% of people who are 
involved in activities and outputs 
assoc iated with these projects are 
women.  
  
Baseline : 0 
Indicator :  % or # of the outreach 
activities and outputs associated 
with these projects are designed 
taking into account women’s and 
indigenous people use of wood and 
forest.  
Target : 100% of the outreach 
activities and outputs associated 
with these projects are designed 
taking into account women’s and 
indigenous people’s use of wood 
and forest.  
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or # of project activities 
reports that use an inclusive and 
gender language in its mid -term and 
final reports.  
Target : 60% of the mid -term and 
final project reports use an inclusive 
and gender language, a s defined by 
the inclusive and gender language 
guidelines of the  MINAGRI.  
 
 
 
       
22.130.747


---
*Page 187*
---

 
 3  
 
Output 2. 
Enabling 
conditions for 
ENCCRV 
implementation   
 
 Preparation  
 
2.1 Ensure the 
participation of 
women 
beneficiaries, 
including indigenous 
women, in the 
development of 
projects.  
 
2.2  Strengthen the 
capabilities of 
CONAF 
professionals (UIG, 
UCCSA, UAIS) on 
gender issues (by 
CONAF central level 
and FAO 
specialists)  Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or  of indigenous and 
women participation in the activities 
and outputs associated with these 
projects.  
Target : 40% of people who are 
involved in activities and outputs 
associated with these projects are 
women.  
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or # of CONAF 
regional officials (UIG, UCCSA, 
UAIS) trained to include climate 
change adaptation measures in their 
policies and plans, with a specific 
focus on gender and forest sectors.  
Target : 100% of the national and 
regional represen tatives of those 
units.  
 CONAF: the institution 
responsible for the 
design, implementation  of 
the GAP, through the : 
-  Climate Change and 
Environmental 
Services Unit 
(UCCSA),  
-  the support of the 
Unit of Indigenous 
and Social Affairs 
(UAIS)  
- the Unit for Gender 
Equality (UIG).  
   
FAO: monitoring and 
oversight  the 
performance of the GAP 
through:  
 
- Project Coordinator,  
- Lead Technical 
Officer and  
- Project Task Force  
       
300.000  
Implementation  
 
Environmental 
Education and 
Dissemination Program 
(MT.6)  
Strengthening of forest 
and environmental 
enforcement (MT.7)  
Programme for the 
technological transfer of 
management and use 
alternatives for 
silvoagricultural waste 
(IF.6)  
Adaptation programme 
for the management of 
vegetation resources in 
the context of climate 
change, desertification, 
land degradation and 
drought (GA.1)  
 
Technical assistance to 
support consolidation of 
Warsaw Framework 
elements.  
 
2.3 Incorporate the 
gender approach in 
measure MT.6, Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or  of direct women 
beneficiaries that are trained and / 
or receive information on matters of 
i) effects of climate change and the 
importance of forests, ii) 
conservation of biodiversity, iii) 
forest regulations, iv) use of fire and 
v) prevention and control of pests.  
Target : At least 40% of the direct 
women beneficiaries of the 
ENCCRV have been trained or have 
received information on at least one 
of the following subjects: i) effects of 
climate change and the importance 
of forests, ii) co nservation of 
biodiv ersity, iii ) forest regulations, iv) 
use of fire and, v) prevention and 
control of pests.  
 
Level of confidence (1 -4 scale) of 
training participants (f/m) in their 
ability to use the learned skills in 
forestry activities.  
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator :  % of works hops 
associated with law and 
Environmental education are 
designed taking into account       
3,062,756


---
*Page 188*
---

 
 4 aimed to 
beneficiaries, 
including indigenous 
peoples  
2.4 Monitor during the 
development of the 
project the 
implementation of 
the gender 
approach (reports 
with gender and 
inclusive language)  
2.5 Promote the 
participation of 
women in decision -
making instances.  women’s and indigenous 
communities constraints  
Target : 100% of workshops 
associated with this environmental 
education and diffusion projects are 
designed taking into acc ount 
women’s and indigenous 
communities constraints.  
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or # of project activities 
reports that use an inclusive and 
gender language in its mid -term and 
final reports.  
Target : 100% of the mid -term and 
final project reports use an inclusive 
and gender language, as defined by 
the inclusive and gender language 
guidelines of the MINAGRI.  
 
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator:   % of gender capacity 
building workshops are designed 
taking into account women’s and 
indigenous communities constraints.  
Target: 100% of workshops 
associated with gender and 
environmental education are 
designed taking into account 
women’s and indigenous 
communities constraints.  
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator :  % of gender capacity 
building workshops for   
Target : 100% of workshops 
assoc iated with gender and 
environmental education are 
designed taking into account 
women’s and indigenous 
communities constraints.  
 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or  of indigenous and 
women that participate in the 
activities and outputs in the 
governance of the SDB  , by 
strengthening their capacities of 
organization and promoting the 
integration of women in the 
discussion and community decision


---
*Page 189*
---

5 on the legalization of land in 
economic solutions related to 
afforestation.  
Target : 40% of people who are 
involved in activities in the 
governance of the SDB  are women. 
Baseline : 0 
Indicator : % or # of representatives 
of social organizations and local 
communities informed abo ut climate 
change  
Target : Representatives of 20% of 
the organizations and communities 
involved in the projects will be 
informed on climate change  
FAO will monitor and evaluate the overall performance of the Gender Action Plan against the objectives and requirements of the Environmental and Social Standards within its project Quality Assurance System  and against the ESMF. 
During implementation and monitoring, the E&S risk management process will focus on monitoring the project against the ESMF to track progress and establish relevant operational controls to verify compliance. Monitoring will be 
adjusted according to experience and actions required, as well as by feedback from stakeholders.   Monitoring of activities s hould invol ve direct participation of affected stakeholders, where possible. Monitoring reports as set out in the 
ESMF will be produced.  Such reports will provide an accurate and objective record of project implementation, including compl iance with the ESMF and impr ovement in project quality.  
__________