=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: hahn
/CreationDate: D:20191017171226+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20040
/ModDate: D:20191018101613+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20040
/Title: Microsoft Word - 0) B.24_02_Add.04_Funding_proposal_package_for_FP118.docm


---
*Page 1*
---

 
	
	
	
 
 
 Meeting	of	the	Board	
12 – 14 November 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea Provisional agenda item 14  GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
22 October 2019 	
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum IV 
Funding proposal package for FP118 	
Summary 		
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled “Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (B RCRN)”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technica l Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
		 	 	 	 	 	 GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page b 
 
 
Table	of	Contents 	
Funding proposal submitted  by the accredited entity 	 3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority (ies) or focal point(s) 	 122  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 	 123  
Secretariat’s assessmen t	 125  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessmen t 	 138  
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technica l Advisory Panel's 
assessmen t	147  
Gender documentation 	 148


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Project/Programme Title:  Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN)  
Country/Region:  Nepal 
Accredited Entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nat ions 
Date of Submission:  13 February 2019


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
 
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 117  
 
 
 A A 
A.1. Brief Project/Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme title Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN)  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     Nepal 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) Ministry of Finance 
A.1.5. Accredited entity Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nat ions 
A.1.5.a.Access modality ☐  Direct ☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary Executing Entities: 
Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nat ions (FAO) 
 
Beneficiaries: 
o Direct beneficiaries  – At least 200,681 households with approx. 
963,268 people will directly benefit from the proje ct. At least 
50% of beneficiaries will consist of women with pro portional 
representation of indigenous peoples (31%), Dalits (13%) and 
other marginalized groups. 
o Indirect beneficiaries  – In total 3,216,248 people will indirectly 
and directly benefit from the project. 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD) ☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☐  Mitigation ☐  Adaptation ☒  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 13 February 2019 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, position Daniel Gustafson , Deputy Director-General 
Organization Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nat ions 
Email address DDG-P@fao.org; FAO-GCF-Team@fao.org 
Telephone number +39 0657056320 
Mailing address Viale delle Terme di Caracalla00153 Rome, Italy  
   
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport 
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient building s, energy-efficient equipment for companies and sup ply chain management, etc.)   
☒ Forestry and land use


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 117  
 
 
 A A 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agrofores try, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and m anagement, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of: 
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated wit h climate change – diversification of supply source s and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehous es, etc.)  
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation  systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotou rism, etc.) 
 ☒ 
 
  
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 word s)  
1. The Churia hills are the southernmost range of t he Himalayan foothills, running east-west through N epal and into 
India. They provide vital ecosystem functions to th e heavily-populated Terai plains downstream, includ ing 
groundwater regulation, prevention of siltation, fl ood control, and livelihood services, including fue lwood, fodder and 
construction materials, among others. In addition, the Terai-Madhesh area of Nepal is responsible for the majority 
of the country´s agricultural production. 1 Together, the Terai and Churia are home to about 5 0% of Nepal’s 
population. 2 
2. Climate change is already having a significant i mpact on the Churia’s ecosystems and inhabitants. T hese impacts 
are projected to intensify in the coming decades. I ncreasing temperatures and changing precipitation p atterns are 
expected to undermine the viability of baseline (mo stly agricultural) livelihoods, and significantly i ncrease the 
frequency and intensity of hazards such as floods. Communities in the Churia region are extremely expo sed to such 
climate-induced hazards due to the region’s geologi cal features, while their livelihoods are very sens itive to changes 
in climatic conditions. This vulnerability has been  exacerbated by decades of unsustainable natural re source 
management, including deforestation and forest degr adation. Failure to address these challenges could have severe 
consequences for the Churia region, downstream comm unities (including in northern India), and broader food 
security in Nepal.  
3. The Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) project aims to confront these challenges b y enhancing 
the resilience of ecosystems and vulnerable communi ties in Nepal’s Churia region. It will promote wide spread 
adoption of climate-resilient land use practices, c onfront the challenges of deforestation and forest degradation, 
better maintain the forest ecosystem in the Churia hills, and build resilience to climate-induced haza rds. It will also 
build the capacities of governments, communities an d other stakeholders to better understand and respo nd to 
climate risks and scale up much needed support afte r project closure. The project is conceived as a di rect 
contribution to Nepal´s nationally determined contr ibution (NDC). It will intervene at three levels to  catalyze change 
in the way land, forests and other natural resource s are managed and set in motion a sectoral transfor mation from 
a climate-vulnerable to a climate-resilient, lower- emissions and sustainable development pathway for t he Churia 
region: 
a) support integrated river system-level planning a mong sub-national government, community-based 
organizations (CBOs) and other partners, and streng then their capacities to monitor natural resources and 
climate change impacts to inform future planning an d investment decisions;  
b) support CBOs to directly adopt and invest in cli mate-resilient sustainable natural resource managem ent 
approaches by providing the training, expert guidan ce and inputs, materials, tools and equipment neede d to 
overcome barriers to adoption; and 
c) strengthen extension services and awareness to s upport sustained and widespread adoption of project -
promoted practices.  
                                                                 
1 PCTMCDB 2016 
2http://www.rccp.gov.np/


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 117  
 
 
 A A 
4. Post-project sustainability considerations have been embedded at all three levels to ensure benefic iaries continue 
managing natural resources in a climate resilient a nd sustainable manner, to enable key actors to scal e up support 
(and thus benefit) additional beneficiaries, and co ntinue driving the process of transformation. 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable) N/A  
Estimated implementation start and end date Start: 01/01/2020 
End:  31/12/2026 
Project/programme lifespan 7-year project implementation period 
20-year lifespan of project outcomes/benefit stream s


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 117  
 
 B B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
5. The BRCRN project requests USD 39.3 million in g rant financing from the GCF. This is matched by USD  8.04 in 
co-financing from the Ministry of Forests and Envir onment (MoFE). This is a clear sign of the governme nt’s 
commitment to the project. Additional funds from na tional entities could not be mobilized due to the c onstrained 
fiscal situation in Nepal. An overview of project c osts is included in Table 1 below. A more detailed overview of 
project costs is included in Annex 3 – Integrated Financial Model . 
6. The BRCRN project is also expected to unlock con siderable additional investment in climate-resilien t and low-
emissions land use in the medium/long term. Investm ent by government and local communities beyond proj ect 
closure will continue to drive the transition towar d a climate-resilient and low-emissions development  pathway for 
the Churia region. 
 
Table 1. Overview of financial information for the BRCRN project * 
Component Sub-Component Total cost (USD) Total cost (NPR) GCF total (USD) Co -financing 
total (USD) 
Component 1: Scaling 
up climate-resilient 
SNRM 1.1: Climate -resilient 
land use practices 
are adopted 10,518,897 1,239,803,512 9,659,402 859,495 
1.2: Natural forest 
ecosystems are 
better maintained 
and protected 4,287,608 505,356,309 4,287,608 - 
1.3: Forests and tree 
cover are restored 
and maintained in 
the river system 
landscapes 19,177,200 2,260,309,202 19,081,863 95,337 
Component 2: 
Strengthening 
institutions and 
planning for climate-
resilient SNRM 2.1: Planning for 
climate-resilient 
SNRM is enhanced 2,087,222 246,009,122 2,087,222 - 
2.2: CBOs are 
equipped to scale up 
climate-resilient 
SNRM 1,226,525 144,563,627 954,825 271,700 
Component 3: 
Improving 
knowledge, 
awareness and local 
capacity for climate-
resilient SNRM 3.1:Local knowledge 
on climate-resilient 
SNRM is enhanced 702,364 82,783,717 702,364 - 
3.2: The extension 
system is equipped 
to promote climate-
resilient SNRM 7,304,378 860,926,130 948,578 6,355,800 
Project management costs (PMC) 2,037,960 240,202,903 1,578,044 459,916 
TOTAL 47,342,154 5,579,954,523 39,299,905 8,042,248 
* Project cost estimates in Nepalese Rupee (NPR) us e the UN Operational Rate of Exchange as at 1 Novem ber2018, which was 
USD 1 = NPR 117.8644.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  47.34 million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financingto 
recipient  
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
39.3 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) (  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 117  
 
 B B 
* Please provide economic and financial justification  in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected 
to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Ple ase specify difference in tenor and price between G CF financing 
and that of accredited entities. Please note that t he level of concessionality should correspond to th e level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against th e investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  39.3 million USD 
($)  
(c) Co-financingto 
recipient 
 Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of 
Institution Tenor Pricing  Seniority  
Grant 
 8.04 
 million USD 
($) Ministry of 
Forests and 
Environment 
(MoFE) 
 (  )  years 
 (   ) %  
IRR 
  
(d) Financial terms 
between GCF and 
AE (if applicable) In addition to the project budget outlined above, a n Accredited Entity fee is requested to enable FAO 
to perform supervision, oversight, reporting, closu re and other roles expected of Accredited Entities.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 117  
 
 C 
C.1. Strategic Context 
SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT 
7. Nepal is one of the world’s Least Developed Coun tries (LDCs). Despite recent economic progress, the  country has a per 
capita income of only USD 766. 3In addition, Nepal has experienced several shocks i n the last three years that have had 
a substantial impact on its economy, including: the  devastating 2015 earthquake; trade disputes that l ed to a fuel crisis 
shortly after the earthquake; and devastating flood s in 2017 that affected over 1.1 million people. 4 
8. Agriculture (including livestock) and forestry a re key economic sectors and are responsible one thi rd of the country´s GDP. 
These sectors employ over 70% of the population. 5 The prevalence of the primary sector in the econom y makes the 
country extremely dependent on natural resources, a s well as stable and predictable climatic condition s.  
CLIMATE CHANGE CONTEXT 
Climate change: Risks and vulnerability 
9. Nepal is ranked as the world’s 4 th  most vulnerable country to anthropogenic climate c hange. 6 The most profound impacts 
will be on the agriculture sector, water resources,  public health and energy. 7 
10. Historical analysis  of climate data indicates that a large part of the  Eastern Himalayan region is undergoing warming. 
Overall, the analysis indicates that the Eastern Hi malayas are experiencing widespread warming of gene rally 0.01 to 
0.04°C per year. The highest rates of warming are g enerally in the winter. 8Long-term trends for annual precipitation in 
Nepal (1970 – 2012) indicate a signiﬁcant increase of precipitation over the middle mountains and hill s within the western 
region of Nepal, and over the high mountains within  the central region. Monsoonal and annual precipita tion feature 
signiﬁcantly decreasing trends over the whole centr al and eastern regions, except for the eastern midd le-mountain and 
hills. On the other hand, winter precipitation demo nstrates a decreasing trend over most of Nepal. 
11. Future projections for Nepal suggest a continued increase in mean annu al temperature, shifting precipitation patterns – 
with many models suggesting that the monsoon season  will become wetter and the dry season will become drier – as well 
as an increased likelihood of heavy precipitation e vents. While there is considerable uncertainty in c limate models with 
respect to precipitation, 9 it is likely that annual average precipitation in Nepal will increase in the future, albeit with 
differences in the regional and temporal distributi on of this precipitation.10  
12. Among other impacts, the above-mentioned change s in climatic variables are expected to increase th e frequency and 
intensity of climate-related hazards in many region s of Nepal. This is particularly true of the Churia  Terai-Madhesh region.  
Climate change context of the Churia Terai-Madhesh region 
13. The Churia hills are located between the mid hi ll areas to the north and the plains in the south o f Nepal (Terai), where the 
Churia hills perform critical ecological and socio- cultural functions both upstream and downstream ( Error! Reference 
source not found. ). With more than 50% of its territory under forest s and riverine areas, the Churia hills render 
hydrological services such as regulating surface wa ter flows and recharging groundwater. All major riv er systems in Nepal 
pass through the Churia hills before reaching the d ensely populated alluvial plains in the Terai and n orthern India. In 
addition, the Terai-Madhesh area of Nepal is known as the country´s ´rice basket´– responsible for the  majority of the 
country´s agricultural production. 11  Together, the Terai and Churia comprise about 25% of Nepal’s land area, but harbour 
close to 50% of its population. 12  
                                                                 
3 MoF 2016 
4 United Nations office of the Resident Coordinator,  2017. 
5 MoF 2012 
6Maplecroft 2011 
7World Bank 2011; NAPA 2010 
8 ICIMOD 2009 Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabili ty in the Eastern Himalayas 
9Described in further detail within the Feasibility Study in Annex B.  
10  NCVST 2009 NCVST. 2009. Vulnerability Through the Eyes of Vulnerable: Climate Change Induced Uncertai nties and Nepal’s 
Development Predicaments. Boulder, CO and Kathmandu , Nepal: Nepal Climate Vulnerability Study Team (NC VST), Institute for 
Social and Environmental Transition (ISET), Institu te for Social and Environmental Transition-Nepal (I SET-N). Available at: 
http://lib.icimod.org/record/14405/files/7156.pdf 
11  PCTMCDB 2016 
12 http://www.rccp.gov.np/


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 117  
 
 C 
14. Agriculture is the main form of employment in t he region, with 62% of the economically active popu lation involved in the 
sector. 13  In addition, forests are an essential resource and  safety net for communities, providing key ecosyste m and 
cultural services, as well as diverse products incl uding timber for construction, fuelwood, and other non-timber forest 
product (NTFPs).Thus, households in the Churia regi on are directly dependent on the health of Churia e cosystems to 
ensure their food, water and energy security. 
 
Figure 1: Location of the Churia hills along the Hi malayas and within Nepal 
 
Source: Bharti et al. 2017; GoN 2014  
15. The Churia-Terai Madhesh region is already experien cing the impacts of climate change. These impacts a re 
expected to increase in the coming decades. Although available data and models indicate that th ere is uncertainty 
regarding the severity of negative climate change i mpacts, the overall risks and associated trends are  clear and warrant 
a concerted response. These are outlined in Section  2 of the Feasibility Study, and briefly summarized  here below. 
a) Average annual temperatures have increased – dri ven in part by particularly notable increases in te mperatures 
during winter months – over the past 40-60 years, w ith many models indicating annual increases of 0.02 -0.05  oC 
over the past few decades (see for example ICIMOD 2 009). Temperatures are expected to continue increas ing in 
both summer and winter months in the coming decades , with some models predicting that average annual 
temperatures in Nepal could increase by 1.3-3.8 oC by 2060, and 1.8-5.8 oC by 2090 compared to a reference period 
of 1986-2005. 14  In addition, the number of hot days and extremely hot days is expected to increase in the pre-
monsoon, monsoon, post-monsoon and winter seasons, with some models predicting about a 16% increase in  the 
frequency of hot days by the 2060s (relative to the  mean from 1970-1999). 
b) Average precipitation during the post-monsoon an d winter seasons decreased between 1970 and 2012, f urther 
exacerbating the challenges that local farmers and communities must confront during the dry season.15 Recent 
analysis of data from weather stations across Nepal  observed decreasing post-monsoon precipitation at 92% of 
stations from 1981-2010, and decreasing winter prec ipitation at 68% of stations in this same period. T hese trends 
are expected to continue in the coming decades. Som e models predict that (under both RCP 4.5 and 8.5) overall 
                                                                 
13 ILO 2017 
14 World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal, 2018.  
15  Karki et al. 2017.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 117  
 
 C 
average winter precipitation could decline by aroun d 10% for the period 2021-2050 relative to the peri od 1961-
1990. 16  
c) The average number of consecutive dry days has i ncreased across Nepal and in the Churia region over  the past 40 
years, with a recent analysis finding that 80% of a nalyzed stations in Nepal (including in the region targeted by this 
project) exhibit a significant increase in consecut ive dry days over the period 1970-2012. 17 The average number of 
dry days and  consecutive dry days is projected to continue incr easing in the coming decades.18  
d) Although the overall volume of precipitation dur ing monsoon season has varied considerably over the  preceding 
decades (both across regions and from year to year) , models indicate that summer precipitation – parti cularly during 
the monsoon season, which runs from June until Sept ember – is expected to increase considerably in the  future. 
Some models predict that monsoon precipitation coul d increase by around 14-15% (under RCPs 4.5 and 8.5  
respectively) for the period 2021-2050 relative to the period 1961-1990. 19  Over the course of the entire summer 
season, precipitation could increase to an even gre ater degree – between 10-25% – over this same time period. 
e) Extreme precipitation events have become more co mmon over the past 40 years, with some recent obser vations in 
the nearby Koshi river basin (from 1970-2010) sugge sting increases in the number of heavy precipitatio n days at 
62% of weather stations, and increases in extremely  heavy precipitation days at 64% of weather station s. 20 These 
trends are projected to continue in the coming deca des, particularly during monsoon season. The number  of very 
wet days is expected to steadily increase, while th e number of moderate rainfall days and consecutive wet days is 
expected to decrease. In other words, increases in overall monsoon precipitation (as outlined in (d) a bove) will likely 
fall in less frequent but more intense precipitatio n events. 
16. These past and future changes in climatic condi tions pose serious challenges for households and co mmunities in the 
Churia-Terai Madhesh region, the broader Churia eco system, and (by extension) the food security, livel ihoods and well-
being of downstream communities and other inhabitan ts of Nepal. These climate change impacts are brief ly summarized 
here below and in Figure 2, and are explained in de tail in Section 2 of the Feasibility Study. 
a) The dry winter season has become drier, exacerba ting challenges associated with seasonal water stre ss. As 
temperatures continue increasing, and post-monsoon and winter precipitation continue to decline in the  coming 
decades, communities in the Churia region may incre asingly struggle to cope. 
b) Extended dry periods throughout the year will po se increasingly significant challenges for the Chur ia region. As the 
number of consecutive dry days continues to increas e, rainfall becomes more sporadic, and the water th at does fall 
(during intense precipitation events) increasingly exceeds the infiltration capacity of the landscape,  poor agricultural 
communities will have to find new ways to cope with  water deficit. Unsustainable natural resource mana gement 
practices (further described below) are reinforcing  this dynamic. 
c) The incidence of flooding events has increased c onsiderably since the 1970s, albeit with significan t inter-annual 
variation. Due in part to changing precipitation pa tterns, the frequency of floods is projected to fur ther increase in 
the Churia region in the future, as are the severit y, damages and costs per household of these floodin g events. 
Unsustainable management of land and forest resourc es also contribute to this by: (i) further reducing  infiltration 
capacity of the landscapes; and (ii) exacerbating e rosion and sedimentation (described below), which c ontribute to 
riverbed rise, river channel change, and thus flash  floods further downstream. 
d) Rates of soil erosion and sedimentation have ste adily increased, driven in part by the combined eff ects of drying 
soils and increasingly extreme precipitation events  – trends that are projected to intensify in the fu ture. Churia 
landscapes are particularly vulnerable to this due to continued deforestation and forest degradation, as well as the 
widespread use of unsustainable land and forest man agement practices. The impacts on Churia livelihood s, 
communities and ecosystems are considerable, includ ing: (i) the loss of top soil in upstream areas, wh ich is reducing 
cultivable land; and (ii) sedimentation in downstre am areas, which is contributing to river channel ch ange, river bank 
cutting, flash floods and loss of fertile farm land . 
                                                                 
16  ICIMOD 2015. 
17  Karki et al. 2017. 
18  Rajbhandari at al. 2017. 
19  ICIMOD 2015. 
20  Shrestha et al. 2017.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 117  
 
 C 
17. The Churia region and its inhabitants are parti cularly vulnerable to the above-mentioned climate c hange impacts. Key 
vulnerability factors are briefly summarized below,  and elaborated in more detail in Section C.2 of th e Funding Proposal, 
and in Feasibility Study Sections 3 & 4, and Append ices B and E. 
a) The geological features of the Churia region lea ve communities particularly exposed to climate-rela ted hazards.The 
rivers/streams that originate from the Churia are e phemeral with surplus water flow during monsoon sea son, and 
little or no water flow during the rest of the year . In addition, the Churia consists of highly fractu red sedimentary 
rocks with low groundwater retention potential. Dur ing the wet season, rainfall can quickly exceed the  infiltration 
rate. Due to its sloping lands, the Churia is there fore more prone to flash floods, and retains little  water to discharge 
during dry season. The Churia´s fragile slopes are also susceptible to erosion and landslides, particu larly as extreme 
precipitation events become more common. 
b) Unsustainable natural resource management (NRM) has reduced adaptive capacity and reinforced vulner ability to 
climate change. Deforestation and forest degradatio n in upstream areas, as well as the use of inapprop riate 
agricultural practices, have resulted in soil degra dation, reduced vegetative cover, and further reduc ed water 
infiltration capacity of landscapes. This has contr ibuted to accelerated erosion and sedimentation, re sulting in 
riverbed rise downstream that increases the risk of  flash flooding. It has also further exposed the Ch uria’s already 
steep and fragile slopes, increasing risk of erosio n and landslides upstream. 21  
c) Predominant livelihood strategies in the Churia region depend on stable climatic conditions and a h ealthy natural 
resource base, and thus are particularly sensitive to the above-mentioned climate change impacts. Many  
communities depend on (semi-)subsistence rain-fed a griculture, and often use agricultural practices th at are not 
optimal for the local terrain – particularly under the anticipated changing climatic conditions – incl uding cultivation 
on steep slopes. 
18. These climate change impacts pose significant c hallenges for Churia communities and ecosystems, bu t also have a 
significant impact on the management of forest reso urces in the project area. Deforestation and forest  degradation in the 
Churia region are driven in part by poverty and oth er economic factors (see Section C.2, and Feasibili ty Study Appendix 
E). As communities and the predominant (agricultura l) livelihoods on which they depend are undermined by climate 
change, expansionary pressures driving deforestatio n and forest degradation will increase – a feedback  loop that will 
accelerate both vulnerability and GHG emissions. Wh ile Nepal accounts for only 0.027% of global greenh ouse gas (GHG) 
emissions,22  more than two thirds of the country´s emissions co me from agriculture, forestry and other land use (A FOLU), 
with 52% from agriculture and 15% from land use cha nge, especially deforestation and degradation. The country is 
committed to reducing these emissions and pursuing a more low-emissions development pathway – somethin g that can 
only be done by addressing the aforementioned chall enge.   
 
Figure 1. Overview of climate change projections an d resulting primary and secondary impacts  
                                                                 
21  Ibid. 
22 NDC Nepal


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 
 
19. Figure 3 illustrates the complex and interlinke d interactions between climate change and unsustain able NRM in the Churia 
Terai-Madhesh region. A landscape of four distinct physiographic zones is increasingly exposed to clim ate-related 
hazards, causing cascading and interlinked impacts from the hills to the downstream areas. The combina tion of recent 
and projected changes in climatic variables, couple d with unsustainable farming, land management and N RM that are 
exacerbating vulnerability, will significantly unde rmine the viability of predominant livelihood strat egies in the region and 
result in widespread damages and losses, while also  exacerbating existing vulnerabilities in the futur e and increasing 
emissions from the AFOLU sector. In other words, in an already-vulnerable region, cl imate risk and vulnerability 
are both increasing. This is expected to steadily u ndermine local livelihoods, which (in turn) is expe cted to further 
reinforce vulnerability in tandem with steadily inc reasing climate change impacts – a vicious cycle th at must be 
broken.  Failure to do so could have severe medium/long ter m consequences for the Churia region and its inhabi tants, as 
well as for downstream communities and broader food  security in Nepal. 
 
Figure 3. Climate change impacts and a vicious cycl e of vulnerability in the Churia Terai-Madhesh regi on of Nepal Increasing temperatures
-Temperature could increase by 4oC by the 
end of the century
Shifting Precipitation patterns
Higher level of uncertainty/ inconsistency than 
temperature predictions, but available 
evidence indicates: 
- Reduced post-monsoon and winter 
precipitation.
- Number of consecutive dry days 
increasing throughout the country.
- Increased number of extreme 
precipitation events in monsoon season.
- Monsoonal precipitation expected to 
increase.Main Changes in Climatic Variables
Seasonal Water Stress
-Undermines the viability 
of baseline livelihood 
strategies
Extended dry periods
-Undermines the viability 
of baseline livelihood 
strategies
Increasing frequency and/or 
intensity of floods
-Damages household and 
public assets, ecosystems 
and imposes economic 
lossesPrimary Impacts
Increased Soil Erosion
-Driven by combined effects of climate 
change (prolonged dry periods and 
intense precipitation events) coupled 
with human drivers (esp. deforestation 
and degradation) and unsustainable 
agricultural practices.
-Soil erosion undermines the viability 
of baseline livelihood strategies:
oUpstream: Top soil and nutrient 
loss.
oDownstream: sedimentation, 
riverbank cutting (land loss), 
riverbed rise (increased 
vulnerability to floods).Secondary Impacts
By undermining the viability of baseline livelihood  strategies and farming models in the Churia, prima ry and secondary 
impacts will reinforce the expansionary pressures d riving deforestation and forest degradation (creati ng a feedback 
loop that accelerates both vulnerability to climate  change and emissions from deforestation and forest  degradation).


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 
 
 
POLICY AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT 
International and national commitments, policies an d strategies 
20. The Government of Nepal is committed to respond ing to climate change. Nepal ratified the Kyoto Pro tocol (2002) and 
Paris Agreement (2016), and has submitted its 1st  and 2 nd  National Communication Reports (2004 and 2014) and  
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNF CCC. Nepal´s NDC notes that given its status as a l ow-income 
economy  and ongoing recovery from the devastating 2015 Ear thquake, the country requires additional bilateral and 
multilateral grant support to meet its commitments for both climate change mitigation and adaptation.  
21. Nepal has initiated various national strategies , policies and plans to support climate change miti gation and adaptation, 
including the elaboration of its Climate Policy (20 11) and the mainstreaming of climate change in sect or strategies and 
development plans. Nepal´s Climate Change Policy (2011) aims to improv e livelihoods by reducing climate change 
impacts, adopt a low-carbon economic development st rategy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions through clean energy  
and sustainable natural resource management. These  priorities are also highlighted in the Fourteenth Periodic Plan 
(2017), which recognizes t he role of forests and agriculture in contributing to both climate change adaptation and mitigation 
efforts, and calls for the conservation, sustainabl e management and use of forests and watersheds. Thi s is further 
supported by the development of the Country´s REDD+  Strategy, which aims to reduce emissions from defo restation and 
forest degradation within the country. Meanwhile, t he National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) i dentifies a 
number of priority actions, including: i) sustainab le land and forest management; ii) improved agricul tural value chains; iii) 
restoration of degraded areas; iv) climate-related research, information and awareness generation; and  v) disaster 
preparedness. Additional information on relevant po licy commitments is included in Feasibility Study S ection 3.2.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 
Strategies focusing on the Churia Terai Madhesh reg ion of Nepal 
22. Recognizing the scale and extent of environment al degradation in the Churia Terai-Madhesh region i n Nepal and its 
vulnerability to climate-related hazards, the Gover nment of Nepal has enacted various policies, progra ms and strategies 
focusing on the Churia region. This includes the ´P resident’s Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Develop ment Board´ 
(PCTMCDB), which was enacted on July 17, 2014 to su pport integrated and coordinated efforts for conser vation in the 
Churia region. The board supported the elaboration of the ‘President’s Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservatio n and 
Management Master Plan’ (henceforth referred to as the ´Churia Master Plan´), which aims to provide st rategic direction 
for conservation in the Churia. More specifically, it aims to support the integrated management of ups tream and 
downstream land use activities, promoting an integr ated landscape approach. The Churia Master Plan aim s to support 
poverty reduction through conservation and sustaina ble management of the Churia region´s resources and  improvement 
of ecosystem services. It also aims to mitigate cli mate change-related impacts and damages by  ensurin g the sustainable 
management of natural resources favourable to their  bio-geophysical status and distinct ecosystems. 
23. The PCTMCDB prepared the Churia Master Plan wit h an investment budget of NRs 13 billion (c. USD $1 22 million) per 
annum. From domestic resources, Nepal has secured a pprox. USD $16.5 million for the current financial year for the 
implementation of the Plan, which prioritized 64 (o ut of 164) river systems but can only work in 29 of  them due to a budget 
crunch. The Churia Master Plan is led by MoFE, whic h is also the co-Executing Entity for the proposed GCF project. MoFE 
will benefit significantly from and contribute to s ecuring national ownership of the project implement ation.  
24. The proposed project takes an approach focused on the restoration of critical ecosystems, and furt her includes a climate 
change –informed digital extension platform that wi ll benefit PCTMCD to mainstream climate change cons iderations in 
their targeted river systems at national scale. As a result, the project is expected to mainstream cli mate change 
considerations and climate-resilient Sustainable Na tural Resources Management (SNRM) into the implemen tation of the 
Churia Master Plan, which would leverage additional  resources to sustain and scale up the process of t ransforming natural 
resource management in the Churia region beyond pro ject closure. The successful implementation of the project would 
also provide a framework for the Government of Nepa l to secure additional external funds needed to bri dge the financial 
gap towards the full implementation of the Churia M aster Plan. 
Political transition and institutional restructurin g 
25. While Nepal has been successful in mainstreamin g climate change into national development strategi es and sectoral 
plans, there is a need to strengthen institutional capacities and support climate change mainstreaming  at the provincial 
and local level. Nepal is transitioning from a cons titutional monarchy to a federal state, as mandated  in the 2015 
Constitution. This process has shifted responsibili ty for natural resource management from the federal  level to the local 
and provincial levels. As a result, provinces and l ocal governments (municipalities) will become the r elevant authorities to 
oversee forest and agricultural management,23  although their capacities to support climate-resil ient land use planning and 
management are limited. This institutional transiti on offers a significant opportunity to equip these new custodians of the 
Churia region’s natural resources with the capaciti es, policies and plans needed to support the scalin g up of climate 
resilient land use practices.  
26. Provincial governments have their own Ministrie s and technical departments and will be directly re sponsible for the 
majority of public investment and service provision  in all land use sectors. While they are staffed by  experienced 
technicians, mostly seconded from the federal Minis tries, they are yet to develop coherent planning cy cles and 
development strategies. This project will avail the  opportunity to incorporate climate resilient SNRM into these cycles and 
strategies from the outset, serving as an example w hich can be replicated in other provinces and river  systems throughout 
the country.  
27. The proposed project therefore benefits from a strong political commitment and the opportunity to shape the development 
trajectory of the new decentralized institutions. H owever, since Nepal is a Least Developed Country (L DC) with high rural 
poverty and relatively low potential to attract pri vate investment for climate resilience, the propose d project focuses on 
locally-appropriate, low-cost and low-maintenance t echnical approaches that can be adopted/applied by local 
communities largely through existing resources, sus tained by robust institutions and support services.  
28. Furthermore, Nepal is internationally recognize d as a leader in Community-Based Natural Resource M anagement, with 
CBOs having long-term usufruct rights and decision- making over forests and other resources. The projec t will build on the 
                                                                 
23  LGOA 2017


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
experience of CBOs, the system of government extens ion services developed to support them, and the wid espread 
political and social acceptance of decentralized ma nagement. 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
29. The overarching objective of the proposed GCF p roject is to enhance the climate resilience of ecos ystems and vulnerable 
communities in Nepal´s Churia region through integr ated sustainable natural resource management (SNRM)  approaches.  
30. Project activities will focus in the Central an d Eastern Churia-Terai Region, where 26 vulnerable river systems (see Figure 
4)were identified through a multi-criteria risk ana lysis together with the vulnerability assessment co nducted for the project 
(described in Feasibility Study Appendix D). 24 These river systems are located in Provinces 1, 2 a nd 3, and are comprised 
of 121 rural municipalities.  
31. Within these 26 vulnerable river systems there are over 3.2 million people, of which 51% are women  and 77% are 
considered to have experienced inter-generational s ocio-economic exclusion. 25  Around 31% of inhabitants are of 
indigenous nationalities, and 13% Dalits. The proje ct intends to work with 750 community-based organiz ations (CBOs), 
comprised of approximately 200,681 member household s or 963,268 people. Women will make up at least 50 % of 
beneficiaries. At least 31% of beneficiaries will b e indigenous peoples and 13% Dalits. Beneficiary CB Os will be identified 
during the initial stages of implementing Sub-Compo nent 2.1, further described in Section C.3 below. 
 
Figure 4: BRCRN project location in 26 vulnerable r iver systems in Central and Eastern Churia-Terai re gion 
                                                                 
24  A list of each river system and key characteristic s can be found in the Feasibility Study in Annex B 
25 Excluded groups  are defined as “… those who have experienced inter-generational discr imination and have been systematically 
excluded due to economic [situation], caste, ethnic ity, gender, disability, sexual orientation, and ge ographical reasons ” (GESI Working 
Group 2017). This includes groups including women, poor people, Dalits, Adivasi/ Janajati, Madhesis, M uslims, people with disabilities, 
third-gender and people living in remote areas. 25  Socially-excluded groups comprise over 77% of the project population (including 
Indigenous Peoples 31%, Terai-Madhesi 28%, Dalits 1 3% and Muslims 5%, among others; CBS 2014). Additio nal information on 
vulnerable groups and excluded groups can be found in the ESMF (Annex E).


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 
 
BASELINE SCENARIO IN THE INTERVENTION AREA 
32. The 26 BRCRN river systems cover a combined are a of 702,011 ha. 26 Within each of the river systems there are four 
distinct biophysical zones, with shared land use ch aracteristics, land use changes and socio-economic activities:  
a) Churia Hills  (33% of project area): Hilly terrain with steep sl opes, typically located at higher altitudes where 1 3% of 
the land is cultivated, and 76% of the area is cove red by forests. 
b) Bhavar  (18% of project area): Transition zone between the  Churia Hills and Terai consisting of 35% cultivate d land 
and 49% forested land. It is a key zone for groundw ater recharge, given its unique geological characte ristics and soils.  
c) Dun Valleys  (3% of project area): Valleys (also known as the i nner-Terai) surrounded by the Churia Hills, often 
containing human settlements where 40% of the land is cultivated and 37% covered by forests. 
d) Terai  (46% of project area): Fertile plains in the South  of the country. Often called the ´rice basket´ of Nepal, where 
83% of the area is cultivated and only 3% is forest  cover. Given low forest cover and quality in the T erai, many 
households in the Terai are dependent on Churia for ests as distant users. 
33. Table 2 provides an overview of the land use ch aracteristics and trends in each zone, as well as a  description of how 
current land use practices influence vulnerability to the climate change impacts summarized in Figure 2.The ways in which 
climate change challenges (as described in Section C.1) are expected to affect each of these biophysic al zones is 
summarized in Schematic 1 (further below). Addition al information about baseline agricultural producti on systems, 
extension services, and land and forest management patterns is available in Feasibility Study Sections  3 & 4 and 
Appendices B & E. 
                                                                 
26  Excluding water bodies and settlements


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Table 2. Existing land use practices and their impa ct on climate change vulnerability  
 Description of Land Use Trends Land Use Driving Vulnerability to Climate Change Churia Hills  Households use fuelwood for household energy needs . 
Forests also provide fodder, forage, timber and NTF Ps. 
 Majority of terrain unsuitable for agriculture, ho wever 
many households have subsistence farms within the 
hills. Agricultural production is characterized by rain-fed, 
low-yield fallow agriculture with different crops. Erosion 
and soil degradation pose major barriers. 
 Subsistence from agriculture provides livelihoods only for 
6-8 months a year.  
 Many households have small-livestock 27  and/or buffalo 
raised in primarily low-yield free-grazing systems.  
 Churia Hills play a vital function as a watershed for the 
downstream Terai plain - where inhabitants rely on 
delivered water resources for domestic and agricult ural 
purposes (regulating water).  75% of deforestation in BRCRN area occurs in the C huria 
Hills. Deforestation and degradation increase vulne rability to 
erosion and sedimentation that reduce agricultural 
productivity, and increase exposure to flooding and  
landslides. 
 Unsuitable agricultural practices increase vulnera bility to 
erosion through vegetation removal and soil degrada tion 
(e.g. agricultural practices on sloped hills, lack of soil and 
water conservation practices). Bhavar  Terrain is primarily unsuitable for rain-fed agric ulture due 
to the irregular supply of water. Many households h ave 
small-livestock and/or buffalos using primarily fre e-
grazing production systems.  
 Majority of households use fuelwood for household 
energy needs. Forests also provide fodder, forage, 
timber and non-timber forest products.  Deforestation and degradation contribute to increa sed 
sedimentation and erosion that reduce agricultural 
productivity. Such land use trends further increase  the 
vulnerability of downstream communities to flooding  through 
accelerated sedimentation and erosion.  
 Reduced vegetation cover (from deforestation and 
inappropriate agricultural practices) limit ground water 
recharge, increasing the vulnerability of downstrea m 
communities to extreme heat and challenges related to 
water deficit.  
 Gully erosion leads to significant loss of land. Dun Valley  Most households use fuelwood for household energy 
needs. Forests also provide fodder, forage, timber and 
non-timber forest products. 
 Among the most fertile and productive lands in Nep al with 
steady groundwater supply. Major production area fo r 
staple foods including paddy, cereals, pulses and 
oilseeds. Many households have small-livestock and/ or 
buffalo raised in primarily low-yield free-grazing 
production systems.  Deforestation within the Dun Valley, as well as in  the Churia 
Hills, increases the vulnerability of local communi ties and 
ecosystems to extreme flooding events. 
 Inappropriate agricultural practices do not apply soil or water 
conservation practices that leave areas vulnerable to 
flooding, extreme heat, water deficit, and soil ero sion.  
 Upstream deforestation and forest degradation, as well as 
the continued use of practices that fail to address  issues 
related to soil degradation and water deficit exace rbate 
challenges associated with dry-season crop producti on. Terai  Farmers in the Terai produce most of the country´s  grains 
(wheat, maize, rice, among others) and other crops.  The 
Terai is the sole region in agricultural surplus, a nd thus is 
the principal area of production relied upon to sup ply the 
less productive hill and mountain areas. 
 More heavily populated than the other three zones.  
Population growth in the Terai puts increased press ure 
on natural resources. Many communities in the Terai  are 
´distant forest users ´, dependent on forest resources in 
Churia and Bhavar forests. While most households us e 
cow dung for energy needs, forests are still an imp ortant 
source of fodder, forage, timber and NTFPs.  Distant-forest users from the Terai contribute to 
deforestation and forest degradation upstream, with  impacts 
described in the rows above.  
 Inappropriate agricultural practices do not apply soil or water 
conservation practices that leave areas vulnerable to 
flooding, extreme heat, water deficit, and soil ero sion.  
 Combined factors from upstream deforestation and f orest 
degradation, as well as use of practices that fail to address 
issues related to soil degradation and water defici t 
exacerbate challenges associated with dry-season cr op 
production in the Terai. 
 Upstream land management practices (described abov e) 
increase exposure to sedimentation in the Terai. 
 
                                                                 
27 goats, rams, pigs


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Schematic 1. Climate change impact s and their effects on land use in the four biophys ical zones  throughout the 
calendar year 
 
 
Forested Land 
34. Deforestation is a major cause of land use chan ge that further accelerates vulnerability to climat e change in upstream and 
downstream areas of the Churia Terai-Madhesh region . Deforestation and forest degradation not only lea d to increasing 
GHG emissions, but also erosion and sedimentation t hat increase river bank rise downstream, increasing  the risk of 
flooding for many communities. Sedimentation in the  Bhavar region further limits groundwater recharge and impacts water 
security in the Terai. In addition, the removal of vegetation on sloped areas in the Churia and Bhavar  regions can also 
increase the risk of landslides and severe erosion events.  
35. Deforestation in the project area has dramatica lly increased in recent years, increasing by 0.2% a nnually from 2000-
2010,and 1.9% annually  from 2010-2015. Nearly 75% of deforestation in the project area occurred in th e Churia hills. 
The direct drivers of deforestation and forest degr adation can be split into four categories: 28  
e) Unsustainable extraction of forest products:  This can include unsustainable (over-harvesting) o r illegal logging, 
over-harvesting NTFPs, fuelwood collection and unco ntrolled grazing. 29  Cattle and goat grazing is common in the 
Churia hills, and uncontrolled grazing is problemat ic as it leads to the loss of shrubs and felling of  small to medium 
sized trees for fodder, leading to increased soil e rosion and reduced water filtration.  
f) Agricultural expansion and degradation: While the area of agricultural land has remained re latively stable over a 
15-year period, it is still considered a driver of deforestation and forest degradation. This is due t o the use of fallow-
agriculture in the hills, combined with the use of inappropriate agricultural practices that contribut e to soil loss and 
erosion, reducing soil fertility and requiring addi tional clearing. Livestock also contribute to degra dation given the impact 
of free-grazing livestock, and the over-harvesting of fodder for livestock feed. 
g) Development or expansion of infrastructure: Several national roads and transmission line corrid ors are in various 
stages of development in the Churia region, sometim es without adequate planning. 30  Beyond this, roads can further 
act as an indirect driver of deforestation by impro ving accessibility to other previously inaccessible  areas.  
                                                                 
28  UN-REDD 2014 
29 MoFSC 2014; UN-REDD 2014  
30 Bhattarai et al. 2009; Government of Nepal/ FCPF 20 17 Jan. Feb. March April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.Key changes in climatic variables and 
other CC impactsPrecipitation
Wet days
Temperature
Dry daysKey impacts in the four biophysical 
zones in each of the 26 river systemsUp-
stream
Down-
streamChuria hills
Bhavar
Dun Valley
TeraiOverall, increasing temperatures are expected throu ghout the year, as are the number of hot days and e xtremely 
hot days.Particularly large 
increases in winter 
temperatures.Particularly large 
increases in winter 
temperatures.Decrease in average precipitation in the post-
monsoon and winter season  observed (1970-
2012) and projected to continue.Decrease in average precipitation in the 
winter season observed (1970-2012) 
and projected to continue.
The average number of consecutive dry days has incr eased over the past 40 years, while the average num ber of dry days and consecutive dry days is expected to further 
increase in the coming years.The overall average volume of precipitation is expe cted 
to increase in the summer and monsoon season in the  
coming years.
The number of moderate rainfall days and consecutiv e wet days is expected to 
decrease over the coming years, while the number of  very wet days is expected to 
steadily increase.
(a) Increased soil erosion and top soil loss in the  hills, with significant 
downstream impacts (as outlined below).
(b) Increased risk of landslides in the hills.
Increased risk of water deficit due to 
intensifying seasonal (winter) water stress and 
extended dry periods.
Increased risk of water deficit due to 
intensifying seasonal (winter) water stress and 
extended dry periods.Increased sedimentation and riverbank cutting 
(land loss), as well as increased risks of (and 
vulnerability to) flooding.Increased risk of water deficit due to intensifying  seasonal 
(winter) water stress and extended dry periods.
Increased risk of water deficit due to intensifying  seasonal 
(winter) water stress and extended dry periods.(a) Increased soil erosion and top soil loss, with significant downstream 
impacts (as outlined below).
(b) Increased gully erosion (land loss) and vulnera bility to flooding.
Increased sedimentation, and riverbank cutting 
(land loss), as well as increased risks of (and 
vulnerability to) flooding.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
h) Natural land use change and bio -physical conditions: The fourth identified direct driver of land use cha nge is not 
anthropogenic but natural. However, it should be no ted that unsustainable human activity can further e xacerbate 
natural causes of forest degradation. Forest fires are a common occurrence in Churia due to dry weathe r and friction, 
however, human activity or carelessness can increas e the likelihood of these events. As noted above, t he Churia Terai-
Madhesh region of Nepal is increasingly experiencin g extreme precipitation events,31  which exacerbate soil erosion 
and sedimentation in a region that is already highl y fragile given its geological conditions.  
36. Key underlying drivers of deforestation are bri efly described in the following Table: 
 
 
Table 3. Underlying drivers of deforestation and fo rest degradation 
Factors Description  
Economic/ 
financial - Poverty limits local peoples investments into imp roved land use practices 
- High demand for forest products (timber, fodder, fuelwood, NTFPs) 
- Lack of opportunities/ availability of substitute  products or sustainable production systems 
Policy - Insufficient enforcement mechanisms 
- Weak land tenure 
- Lack of sufficient incentives and support for the  adoption of sustainable practices 
Socio-political  - Low level of education in rural areas 
- Limited awareness of impacts and alternative meas ures 
- Inequality 
Demographic  - Population growth 
Technological  - Poor awareness of improved practices and technolo gies 
- Low productivity of existing production systems 
 
ENVISAGED CLIMATE-RESILIENT DEVELOPMENT PATHWAY 
37. The baseline situation demonstrates the vulnera bility of the Churia Terai-Madhesh region, and the need to support 
widespread adoption of climate-resilient land use p ractices. Given the complex interactions among the main biophysical 
zones within the project area, an ecosystem-based a pproach should be applied that promotes integrated management, 
considering upstream and downstream dynamics. 
38. Table 4 provides an overview of key practices t hat are needed within the project area to respond t o the climate change 
impacts and challenges outlined in Section C.1.Spec ific project-promoted practices and structures – an d their role in 
responding to the specific climate change challenge s outlined in Section C.1 – are explained in greate r detail in Feasibility 
Study Appendix A. Figure 5 (further below) illustra tes how widespread adoption of these practices woul d shift the Churia 
region toward a more climate-resilient and sustaina ble development pathway. In addition, Attachment 2 of the Funding 
Proposal summarizes an overview of climate change i mpacts, baseline conditions and project-promoted me asures 
disaggregated by biophysical zone. 
 
Table 4. Key climate-resilient practices and pathwa y in each biophysical zone 
 Relevant Climate -Resilient Land Use Practices  Role in responding to CC  Churia Hills Climate-resilient agricultural practices: implement ing practices that 
stabilize slopes (agroforestry, terracing, grass st rips, alley crops etc.), 
improved livestock practices (stall-feeding, fodder  banks) 
Intensification of agricultural land through integr ated agroforestry-crop-
livestock systems in order to improve soil fertilit y and productivity while 
reducing pressure on forests 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in lands lide susceptible areas, 
forest restoration and sustainable management, bio- engineering/ soil and 
water conservation infrastructure to stabilize rive r banks and reduce flows  Reduced risk of erosion, reduced exposure to 
landslides. 
Reduced exposure to flooding, particularly in 
downstream areas. 
Reduced emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
Improved storage of soil carbon. 
Improved forest quality and quantity. 
                                                                 
31 MoSTE 2015


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 11 7 
 
 C Bhavar Region Climate-resilient agriculture practices to reduce e rosion and improve soil 
moisture and overall soil fertility (tillage manage ment, nutrient 
management, residue management, inter-cropping, all ey crops), improved 
livestock practices to reduce degradation (stall-fe eding, fodder banks) 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in lands lide susceptible areas, 
green belt establishment along vulnerable river ban ks, forest restoration, 
sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soi l and water 
conservation (conservation ponds, check-dams, conto ur bunds) 
Resilient forestry: commercial plantations, wood lo ts and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and oth er forest products, Improved resilience to extreme heat and water defic it 
challenges. 
River bank stabilization limits the impact of flood ing. 
Reduced emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
Improved forest quality and quantity. 
Improved groundwater recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to wat er 
scarcity downstream.  Dun Valley Climate-resilient agriculture practices to reduce e rosion and improve soil 
moisture and overall soil fertility 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in lands lide susceptible areas, 
green belt establishment along vulnerable river ban ks, forest restoration, 
sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soi l and water 
conservation to reduce erosion, improve ecosystem s tability and resilience 
Resilient forestry: commercial plantations, wood lo ts and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and oth er forest products, Improved resilience to extreme heat and water defic it 
challenges. 
River bank stabilization limits the impact of flood ing. 
Reduced emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
Improved forest quality and quantity. 
Improved groundwater recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to wat er 
scarcity downstream. Terai Climate-resilient agriculture practices to reduce e rosion and improve soil 
moisture and overall soil fertility (tillage manage ment, nutrient 
management, residue management, inter-cropping, all ey crops) 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in lands lide susceptible areas, 
green belt establishment along vulnerable river ban ks, forest restoration, 
sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soi l and water 
conservation (conservation ponds, check-dams, conto ur bunds, stone 
walls) 
Resilient forestry: commercial plantations, wood lo ts and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and oth er forest products, Improved resilience to extreme heat and water defic it 
challenges. 
River bank stabilization limits the impact of flood ing. 
Planted forests are able to reduce the reliance on 
upstream forests. 
Improved groundwater recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to wat er 
scarcity downstream. 
 
 
Figure 5. Overview of envisaged climate-resilient l and use in BRCRN biophysical zones


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 
BARRIERS AND CHALLENGES 
39. Despite efforts by the Government of Nepal and the development community, a number of challenges a nd barriers 
continue to inhibit the transition toward a climate -resilient, sustainable and low-emissions developme nt pathway in the 
Churia region. The following Table summarizes these  barriers, as well as how the project will address them. 
 
Table 5. Overview of barriers and the project´s app roach to address them 
Barriers/Challenges Approach to Address Barrier  
Poverty, inappropriate land management practices, t he lack of alternative livelihood activities to imp lement SNRM 
 Up-front costs of investing in climate-resilient l and use 
practices are too high for many CBOs and their memb ers. 
In Nepal, 26.9% of the country´s population is affe cted by 
multidimensional poverty, equivalent to around 7.5 million 
people. 32  Focusing on income-related poverty, 
approximately 15% of the population is considered t o be 
living below the poverty line of $1.99 per day. 
 Insufficient government resources for large-scale 
investments in climate-resilient SNRM, large-scale 
restoration of ecosystems and DRR. 
 Weak government and private sector support on 
marketing and value adding opportunities for CBOs a nd 
producers.33   Provision of technical support and resources to co ver up-front costs of 
adopting climate-resilient land use practices. Alig nment with critical 
ecosystem restoration plans (CERP) will ensure farm er field schools are 
strategically established in the most vulnerable ar eas. Project support 
will enable climate-formed extension and advisory s ervices that access 
men and women in vulnerable river systems. 
 Promoted activities are designed to further addres s sector specific 
barriers which can further limit incomes or limit t he ability of CBOs and 
households to invest in such practices (e.g. poor q uality planting material 
for forestry). Build off of best-practices and less ons learned. CBO 
members participating in FFS will continuously impr ove and consolidate 
their knowledge and skills. Promoted measures are e conomically viable 
(see Economic and Financial Analysis), and will enc ourage reinvestment 
in resilient land use practices from increased reve nue streams.  
                                                                 
32  UNDP 2016 
33 Dhital 2017


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 Close link between support with up-front measures and support with 
strengthening related sustainable value chains (inc luding private sector 
engagement) to support alternative income opportuni ties. 
 Where possible the project builds on existing stru ctures, and a clear exit 
strategy has been developed (c.f. Section D.2). 
Limited awareness of climate change and climate-res ilient land use practices 
 While poverty is a barrier, many CBOs also have li mited 
awareness of future climate change threats and clim ate-
resilient land use approaches.  
 Weak extension services limit awareness (due to li mited 
budgets that limit the reach of services and input support, 
lack of youth engagement, inadequate use of ICT, 
outdated curricula [including limited information o n 
climate-change and value chains/ marketing], low-
education level of participants, limited capacities  of 
trainers, poor cooperation with private sector, amo ng 
others). 34  Climate-change has not been sufficiently 
mainstreamed into extension services/ trainings. 
 Women and marginalized groups experience additiona l 
barriers to access trainings due to various factors  
(economic, socio-cultural, geographic, among others ). 
 Limited awareness leads to the lack of considerati on of 
climate change in land use planning at CBO, rural 
municipality and provincial-government level.   Project activities will strengthen climate-informe d extension and advisory 
services (improved reach of services, improved mate rials and 
approaches, training trainers, improved knowledge m anagement and 
use of climate information in planning and land use  management). 
 Emphasis on trainings to build capacities of CBOs and local and 
provincial government officials. 
 Activities include measures to promote knowledge t o support innovation, 
including compiling guidance on effective local ind igenous practices for 
climate change adaptation and best practices and le ssons learned to 
support scaling-up. 
 Measures include sub-activities to engage youth on  climate change and 
climate-resilient land use, increasing their awaren ess of climate risks 
and interlinked dynamics, risk-reduction strategies , and key knowledge 
and information hubs.  
 Support the development of strategies and critical  ecosystem restoration 
plans that are climate-informed and promote suitabl e climate-resilient 
land use to raise awareness and promote scaling up.  The creation of a 
framework to identify ecosystems and communities th at are vulnerable 
to climate change, especially climate-related hazar ds, combined with 
strengthening government capacities to operationali ze this framework 
and conduct a vulnerability assessment will enable them to consider 
climate-related information in planning and decisio n-making. This is 
particularly relevant given the political context i n Nepal and the 
devolution of decision making power to the local an d provincial levels.  
 Emphasis on improving knowledge, educational mater ials and 
knowledge dissemination pathways to engage diverse stakeholders. 
 GESI approaches mainstreamed. 
 Participatory land use planning at the local level  to raise awareness of 
climate change within local CBOs, and implement sui table land use 
practices to enhance ecosystem and community resili ence. 
Weak inter-sectoral horizontal and vertical coordin ation 
 Weak inter-sectoral coordination inhibits the use of 
integrated ecosystem-based approaches.35  
 Horizontal coordination: Often programs do not ful ly build 
upon synergies and have a sectoral focus. 
 Uncoordinated investments in river system manageme nt 
lead to inefficient and ineffective support for eco system 
resilience. 
 Improved coordination is needed at the local and 
provincial level given the political transition.   Project management structures are designed to prom ote regular 
communication and improved coordination among key s takeholders. 
Multi-stakeholder engagement promoted throughout th e project.  
 Elaboration of Provincial and river-system level s trategies and action 
plans to promote integrated and climate-informed pl anning and 
decision making, considering upstream and downstrea m interactions, 
to improve coordination of investments that will be nefit multiple 
sectors and promote low-carbon and climate resilien t development. 
Based on the demonstration of this process, it can be replicated in 
other regions of the country (due to strengthened c apacities, 
supporting materials, improved knowledge management  and 
institutional trainings), with notable benefits to invest in maintaining 
such processes (e.g. reduced disasters, strengthene d livelihoods and 
ecosystem services).DRR strategies at the provincia l level will 
provide a framework to orient local governments, an d improve 
coordination and planning. 
Weak institutions and limited capacities to plan, i mplement and monitor measures for climate-resilient  land use and SNRM 
                                                                 
34 Dhital 2017 
35  MoFSC 2015


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 Limited capacities on climate change and climate-r esilient 
land use limits coordination and action on climate change, 
especially at the local and provincial level.  
 Weak integration of climate change considerations into 
local CBO-level land use planning and management 
plans. This is due to limited awareness (described above) 
as well as weak institutional capacities.  Nepal´s ongoing political transition is an opportu nity to strengthen local 
and provincial capacities from an early stage. The project places an 
emphasis of engaging local and provincial actors th roughout project 
implementation, building capacities and guiding pla nning to promote 
climate-informed planning and decision making, and support the 
implementation of climate-resilient land use and SN RM based on best 
practices, and aligned with critical ecosystem rest oration plans. 
 Strengthen land use planning by balancing integrat ed spatial planning 
with participatory land use planning, accompanied b y capacity building 
for local and provincial governments and CBOs. 
Limited capacity to monitor assess and address clim ate-induced disasters 
 Limited technical capacity within provincial and l ocal 
institutions to monitor and assess the impacts of c limate 
change and climate-induced disasters. This is 
exacerbated by the absence of systematic approaches  to 
assemble and manage climate data. This results in l imited 
generation of early warnings for climate-induced di sasters 
and implementation of few proactive measures for DR R.  
 The lack of a comprehensive and effective mechanis m for 
sharing knowledge and information, including inform ation 
on monitoring of climate risks, limits the use of c limate 
information in decision making and planning. 
 
 
  Land use planning processes will be strengthened a nd applied by 
balancing integrated spatial planning with particip atory land use 
planning, accompanied by capacity building for loca l and provincial 
governments and CBOs. This will enable provincial g overnments to 
understand climate risks, and implement a holistic approach for 
disaster risk-reduction, as well as low-carbon and climate-resilient 
land use. Such an approach will demonstrate a new f ramework for 
low GHG and climate-resilient planning in Nepal, wh ich will be 
replicable in other river systems in the country.  
 Establishment of Churia Knowledge Centre (CKC) to facilitate 
improved knowledge management, dissemination and mo nitoring. 
Investments in improved technology and tools for mo nitoring and 
knowledge sharing will be promoted, along with trai nings for CSOs 
and local and provincial government staff. CKC will  be embedded in 
existing institutions (within MoITFE Offices) to en sure its long-term 
sustainability, and continued knowledge management,  retention and 
learning after project close. 
 Manuals, protocols and guidelines will be develope d to guide 
provincial staff on CKC knowledge generation, gathe ring and 
management, including after project completion.  
 Project activities on knowledge sharing, generatio n of information and 
capacity building will help increase the generation  and use of climate-
related data and information in decision making and  land use 
planning, and will strengthen the capacities of gov ernment officials at 
the local and provincial level, as well as CBOs, CS Os and other key 
stakeholders to understand and plan for climate cha nge risks. 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
40. Through the ‘Building a Resilient Churia Region  in Nepal’ (BRCRN) project (“Project”), GCF grant f inancing and co-
financing provided by MoFE will strengthen the resi lience of local communities and ecosystems to adapt  to climate change, 
and reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. The Project will address the specific barriers inhibiting 
Churia communities, government entities and other s takeholders from transitioning to a more climate-re silient, sustainable 
and low-emissions development pathway, and will equ ip them to continue pursuing this pathway after pro ject closure. 
This is summarized in the Theory of Change included  in Attachment 1 of this Funding Proposal.  
41. The Project will focus on the Churia Terai-Madh esh region of Nepal, in particular 26 of the most v ulnerable river systems 
within Provinces 1, 2 and 3, where over 3.2 million  people live. The main beneficiaries will include r epresentatives of 
provincial and local (i.e. rural municipalities) go vernments, as well as at least 750 CBO Beneficiarie s (comprised of 
approximately 200,681 households, 963,268 people).  
42. Activity interventions will be targeted for dif ferent biophysical zones and contexts, with a focus  on the Churia, Bhavar and 
upstream 36  Terai areas.  
43. Beneficiary targeting and selection is briefly summarized in Table 1 below. 
 
                                                                 
36  Considered as areas north of the East-West highway .


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Table 6. Selection of geographic locations, sites a nd beneficiaries  
Level Type Criteria / process Stage / timing 
Geographic 
locations Provinces Among the 7 Provinces in Nepal, Provinces 1, 2 and 3 were selected during the 
project design stage as the overall geographic focu s for this project. The 
selection of these three Provinces was based on the  assessment of Collective 
Vulnerability in the Eastern Himalayas (ICIMOD, 200 9), i.e., vulnerability 
integrated across different components of mountain ecosystems and 
dimensions and relative vulnerability of biodiversi ty, water, ecosystems, and 
human wellbeing to climate change impacts. Completed during 
project design. 
River systems Due to the inter-connected (upstream and downstream ) nature of  climate 
change challenges and unsustainable natural resourc e management 
challenges in the Churia region, and the associated  focus on integrated climate-
resilient SNRM within this project, river systems w ithin Provinces 1, 2 and 3 
were selected as the most appropriate geographic un it to guide project planning 
and interventions. In total, 26 river systems withi n Provinces 1, 2, and 3 (the 
“Project Area”) were selected and prioritized for i nterventions and support 
under this Project. These river systems were select ed based on the results of 
a multi-criteria analysis, which included an analys is of the river systems’ 
exposure to climate change impacts and their partic ular vulnerabilities, as well 
as the extent of natural resource (including forest ) degradation. The 
methodology used to select these river systems is d escribed in more detail in 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study –Appendix D . Completed during 
project design. The 
selected river 
systems are: 
Kokaha; Gideri 
Khola; Patnali Khola; 
Thakur Khola; Sun 
Koshi; Chadaha 
Khola; Kamala-North; 
Tawa-North; Tawa-
South; Kankai Nadi; 
Ratuwa Nadi; 
Adherei Khola, 
Baruwa Khola, Duar 
Khola; Lakhandehi 
Khola; Kamala-
South; Biring Khola; 
Balan Khola; 
Charnath; Bataha 
Khola; Budhi Khola; 
Lohandra Nadi; 
Kamala, Belsot, 
Jogiya; Ratu Nadi; 
Mechi Khola; 
Bakraha Khola; Bihul 
Nadi; and Khado 
Khola. 
Sites Sites for 
Farmer Field 
Schools 
(“FFS”) Specific sites for FFS within each of the 26 river systems (which collectively 
comprise the Project Area) will be determined in pa rt through the Critical 
Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) developed under  Activity 2.1.2.These 
CERPs will identify (inter alia) ecosystem restorat ion priorities, as well as 
specific priority farming systems and practices to be promoted in each of the 26 
river systems through FFS. The CERPs will also spec ify the number of FFS (of 
the 120 total) that the Project will establish in e ach river system, with a minimum 
of 3FFS established in each river system. 
Once the scope, focus and number of FFS to be estab lished in each river 
system are defined in the CERPs, FAO, as the Execut ing Entity, will recruit a 
service provider, in accordance with its procuremen t policy and procedure, to 
identify specific sites and establish FFS within ea ch river system. After 
consultation with MoFE, MoITFE, MoACLM and respecti ve municipalities, FAO 
will approve the final selection of sites for FFS b ased on the following criteria: 
 Suitability of each site’s agro-ecological conditi ons to train Farmer 
Beneficiaries, Local Resources Persons and Professi onal 
Beneficiaries on the farming systems and practices prioritized in the 
relevant CERPs (note: this qualitative assessment w ill be made by 
FAO technical experts);  CERPs will be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in Project Year 
(“PY”)2. 
Selection of sites and 
establishment of FFS 
will be completed by 
the end of PY3.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 Proximity of each site to the relevant Community-B ased Organizations 
(CBOs) and CBO-member households to be trained at t he FFS sites 
(note: this qualitative assessment will be made by FAO experts); and  
 The farmer/landowner must consent to the use of th eir land as an FFS 
site for at least PY3-7. 
Sites for 
check dams, 
gully 
stabilisation 
measures and 
other local 
infrastructure Specific sites for check dams, stabilisation measur es and other local 
infrastructure within each of the 26 river systems (which collectively comprise 
the Project Area) will be determined in part throug h the CERPs developed 
under Activity 2.1.2. These plans will identify pri ority locations (based on extent 
of resource degradation and climate change-related risk) and types of 
structures to be built in each river system, with a  minimum of 3 upstream (total 
86) and 4 downstream (total 129) structures built i n each river system. 
Once the priority locations and types of structures  to be built in each river 
system are identified in the CERPs, MoFE will recru it civil engineers to work 
with MoITFE, Koshi River basin conservation office,  respective municipalities, 
relevant CBOs and other actors in each river system  to identify specific sites 
for each structure. After consultation with FAO and  the project-recruited civil 
engineers, MoFE will approve the final selection of  sites based on the following 
criteria: 
 Suitability of each structure and its selected sit e to maximize resilience 
benefits in response to the climate change impacts/ challenges 
identified in the CERP (note: this qualitative asse ssment will be made 
by MoFE experts and FAO experts); and 
 The owner(s) of the selected sites (whether privat ely owned, 
community owned or government owned) consent to the  use of the 
land for the proposed structure(s). CERPs will be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Selection of sites will 
be made each year 
between PY3-6 as 
new structures are 
built every year. 
Sites for tree 
nurseries The Project will support the establishment of a net work of decentralized small-
scale tree nurseries which offer ready access to ne w tree seedlings at a low 
cost for all beneficiaries. A total of 52 nurseries  will be established in the project 
area (2 in each of the 26 targeted river systems), each with capacity to produce 
50,000 tree seedlings per annum.  
Sites for nurseries will be recommended by MoITFE t o MoFE. The Host 
Country, acting through MoFE, will approve the fina l sites for nurseries based 
on the following criteria: 
 Nurseries must: have access to reliable water supp ly; availability of 
good soils; protection from strong wind, livestock and shade from 
direct sunlight; be established on a gentle slope f or water drainage; 
and have adjacent areas available for expansion if necessary (note: 
these qualitative assessments will be made by MoFE and FAO 
experts); and  
 Proximity to CBO Beneficiaries and plantation area s identified in 
CERPs, and to roads or other transport networks (no te: these 
qualitative assessments will be made by MoFE expert s and FAO 
experts). 
Nurseries will preferably be hosted by CFUGs or oth er CBOs, where there is 
presence of individuals trained and/or experienced in nursery management, 
availability of, and willingness to allocate, neces sary space and labour. The 
CBOs must be assessed as possessing the potential c apacity to sustain the 
nursery as a viable enterprise beyond the duration of the project. The 
establishment of the nurseries will be subject to a  consultation process 
according to the principles of FPIC, and in river b asins where no suitable CBOs 
can host, the premises of the Divisional Forest Off ice (DFO) under MoITFE will 
be proposed. 
 CERPs will be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Specific sites for 
nurseries will be 
determined each year 
as new nurseries are 
established in PY3-5.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Sites for 
forest/tree 
planting Specific sites for tree planting within each of the  26 river systems (which 
collectively comprise the Project Area) will be det ermined in part through the 
CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2. These plans w ill identify priority 
locations (based on extent of resource degradation) , the number of locations 
and the types of tree species to be planted at each  location in each river system, 
with a minimum of 100 ha planted in each river syst em. 
Plantation activities will consist of the following  approaches, with different site 
selection processes:  
 Demonstration plantations:  The Project will provide the materials 
necessary to establish 1,300 ha of demonstration pl antations of native 
species suitable for timber production, including t eak, at strategic 
locations within the Bhavar and Terai zones of the 26 target river 
systems. Selected sites will be on government-manag ed land with no 
tenure conflict that is suitable for plantation, wh ile also being identified 
(in the CERPs) as having high potential to address ecosystem 
vulnerability through afforestation.  Additional cr iteria to be taken into 
consideration include: proximity to beneficiary CBO s and to roads or 
other transport networks; availability of land of a t least 10 ha, and 
maximum 100 ha, within each target river system. Si te suitability will 
be assessed by MoITFE and FAO experts.  Sites will be proposed by 
MoITFE, and validated by MoFE and FAO experts, and according to 
the principles of FPIC. 
 Public land forests on river banks: The Project will support the 
establishment of 1,000 ha of riparian plantations i n the project area, 
each of which will be formally registered under the  public land forest 
users’ agreement process.  Site selection will be b ased in part on the 
analysis and consultations during the CERP process.  At least 25 ha 
of riparian plantations will be established in each  river system, taking 
into account proximity to agricultural land vulnera ble to flooding and/or 
siltation, proximity to landholdings of beneficiary  CBOs, and clarity of 
tenure. Site suitability (in accordance with the ab ove criteria) will be 
assessed by local Municipalities, MoITFE and FAO ex perts.  Sites will 
be proposed by MoITFE and validated by MoFE and FAO  experts, 
according to the principles of FPIC. 
 Public land forests on community land:  The Project will support the 
establishment of 5,000 ha of forest plantations in the project area 
through participation of highly vulnerable and marg inalized 
households to plant multipurpose trees in open comm unity land, 
identified in CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2.  At least 50 ha will 
be established in each river system. Site selection  will be based on 
the availability of land in Churia and Bhavar areas , with no tenure-
related conflict, with priority assigned to locatio ns with higher 
proportions of marginalised and poor households. Si te suitability (in 
accordance with the above criteria) will be assesse d by local 
Municipalities, MoITFE and FAO experts.  Sites will  be proposed by 
MoITFE and validated by MoFE and FAO experts, accor ding to the 
principles of FPIC. 
 Establish woodlots in downstream areas:  The Project will support 
establishment of 16,500 ha of tree plantation on pr ivately-owned land 
in the project area. Sites will be focused on downs tream areas of the 
26 river systems, distant from CF, LF and CFM areas . Potential areas 
for such woodlots will be identified in CERPs. With in these areas, the 
identification of specific sites will:(i) focus on households with clarity of 
tenure and no prevailing ownership disputes; (ii) p rioritize lower-
income households (specific thresholds due to be de termined during 
inception, based on baseline survey) to maximize su stainable 
development benefits and ensure project does not cr owd out private 
investment; (iii) provide maximum 1 ha plantation s upport per 
household; and (iv) ensure at least 100 households are supported in 
each river system. Sites will be proposed by MoITFE  after consultation CERPs will be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Specific sites for 
forest/tree planting 
will be determined as 
the relevant Activities 
are implemented in 
PY3-7.


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
with local municipalities and Private Forest Owners  Associations, 
validated by MoFE and FAO experts, and finalised th rough dialogue 
with private land owners, according to the principl es of FPIC. 
 Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR): The project will support 
tools/equipment and logistical costs for extension support in 
implementing ANR measures on 15,990 ha of community -managed 
forest land. Preliminary areas for ANR sites will b e identified through 
the CERP process. Within these areas, the identific ation of specific 
sites will focus on forest areas of any management category (CF, LF, 
CFM), with priority assigned to areas that: were de graded or 
deforested within the past 20 years; were not conve rted to agricultural 
use; and are in close proximity to upstream sites o f high vulnerability 
to flooding and landslides.  Sites will be proposed  by MoITFE, 
validated by MoFE and FAO experts, and confirmed th rough a 
dialogue with CBOs in accordance with the principle s of FPIC. 
 
Beneficiaries Community-
Based 
Organizations 
(“CBO 
Beneficiaries”) Approximately 750 CBO Beneficiaries will be identif ied and selected by MoFE 
(after consulting with MoITFE) under Sub-Component 2.2. This includes all 557 
Community Forest User Groups (CFUGs) and 3 Collabor ative Forest 
Management (CoFM) that fall within the Churia and B habar zones (upstream 
areas) of the 26 river systems (the Project Area), out of total 1531 CFUGs and 
11 CoFMs that are in Project Area. It also includes  all 40 Leasehold Forest 
Groups (LFGs) in the Project Area.  It also include s at least 1 Indigenous 
Peoples’ Organisation (IPO) in each of the three pr ovinces; a comprehensive 
list of IPOs will be developed in consultation with  the Nepal Federation of 
Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN). The remaining CBO  Beneficiaries out of the 
750 will be Farmers Groups (FGs), Soil Conservation  Users Groups (SCUGs) 
and Public Land Forest Users Groups (PLFUGs). The t otal number of FGs and 
SCUGs is not certain, because they are not formally  registered, but estimated 
to be at least 50 in the total Project Area.  The t otal number will be determined 
during the development of the CERPs, and will focus  on those which are 
located in the upstream areas of the 26 river basin s. PLFUGs are not yet 
formalised, and Activity 2.2.1 will facilitate the formation and registration of at 
least 100 PLFUGs, based on the identification of si tes for public land plantations 
(according to CERPs and site selection process desc ribed above) which will 
thus become part of the 750 CBO Beneficiaries of th e Project. 
All 750 CBO Beneficiaries will benefit from activit ies under Component 1 of the 
Project.  The degree to which each CBO benefits wil l be based on the initiatives 
and priorities determined through the CERPs. CBO Be neficiaries based in or 
near more vulnerable and degraded landscapes may be  involved in multiple 
activities. When identifying sites for field-level interventions under Component 
1, the CERPs will also identify the relevant CBO Be neficiaries to be involved in 
such activities based on their proximity to the sel ected areas and relevance of 
their livelihood strategies to the planned activiti es in the relevant area. 
All CFUGs, CoFMs and LFGs will benefit from technic al support to improve 
existing forest management operational plans and im prove sustainable forest 
management (SFM) practices under Sub-Component1.2. 
Approximately 250 CBO Beneficiaries (out of the tot al 750) will receive in-depth 
support to revise and adjust CBO management plans u nder Activity 2.2.2. The 
CBO Beneficiaries to be selected for this support w ill be those that are identified 
as being most vulnerable based on the analysis done for CERP plan ning (under 
Activity 2.1.2), and will also include the three (3 ) CoFM groups. A list of 
prioritized CBOs will be prepared by FAO experts. F inal selection will be made 
by the Host Country, acting through MoFE, after con sultation with MoITFE.  
Local Resource Persons (LRPs) will be identified fr om among the members of 
these CBOs. CERPs will be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Formalisation of 
PLFUGs will take 
place in PY1. 
Support for forest 
management plans 
and improvement of 
SFM practice will take 
place from PY3-7. 
Support for 
mainstreaming 
climate resilience into 
SNRM plans will take 
place in PY3-7.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Professional 
Beneficiaries Professional staff (from MoFE, MoITFE, MoACLM and o ther ministries) who will 
benefit from training and capacity building support  under this Project (i.e. under 
Activities 1.1.1, 1.3.3, 2.1.1, 2.1.3, 3.2.1, 3.2.2  and 3.2.3) will be selected by 
the Executing Entities according to the following c riteria (“Professional 
Beneficiaries”): 
 Organizations have been and/or will be identified based on alignment 
between the proposed activities and the organizatio ns’ mandates, 
expertise and/or services delivered (note that thes e determinations have 
been/will be made by MoFE, in consultation with MoI TFE and MoACLM); 
 Identified organizations will be invited to nomina te staff to participate in the 
activities based on the alignment between the conte nts of the proposed 
activity (e.g. technical focus of the training) and  the respective individuals’ 
responsibilities and expertise within their organiz ation; and  
 MoFE and FAO will review the lists of nominated pa rticipants, and either 
confirm or reject their nomination, in consultation  with MoITFE, based on 
an assessment of the alignment between the activity  and the participants’ 
responsibilities and expertise. This will be 
conducted during the 
early stages of 
executing each of the 
relevant Activities. 
Farmer 
Beneficiaries 
(Activity 1.1.2) CERPs will identify critically vulnerable locations  within the 26 river systems, 
and the communities most directly at risk from redu ced agricultural productivity 
or loss of productive land. The technical advisory team of MoFE and FAO 
experts will identify the appropriate climate-resil ient farming practices (CRFPs) 
for these vulnerable areas.   
The introduction of CRFPs to these areas will be ac hieved through a total of 
260 training events in the Project Area (approx. 10  per river system), provided 
through the FFSs established under Activity 1.1.1. Each CBO active in these 
areas will be asked to propose training participant s (“Farmer Beneficiaries”) 
based on the following criteria. Final selection wi ll be made by the Executing 
Entities: 
 Relevance of the individuals’ current livelihood s trategies and farming 
practices to the project-promoted practices; 
 The individuals’ access to land on which to apply the CRFPs; and 
 The individuals’ ability to train additional house holds within their community 
on the project-promoted CRFPs. 
For each training event, the pool of nominated part icipants will include at least 
30% women, and at least one nominee per training wi ll be a committee member 
from a relevant CBO. 
MoITFE and MoACLM extension agents (in PY3-4) and L RPs (in PY5-7) will 
review nominees for each training to confirm their nominations are consistent 
with the aforementioned selection criteria. MoFE an d FAO will approve final 
selection of Farmer Beneficiaries based on MoITFE a nd MoACLM reviews. This selection 
process will be 
applied as the 
trainings are 
gradually delivered 
from PY3-7. 
Agro-forestry 
and Livestock 
Beneficiaries 
(Activity 1.1.3) 
 CERPs will identify: (i) locations within 26 river systems where slope 
stabilisation and degradation of agricultural and f orest land are critical; (ii) the 
communities and associated CBOs most directly affec ted by these issues; and 
(iii) the agroforestry and livestock management pra ctices appropriate for 
addressing them. 
Each CBO active in these areas will be asked to pro pose training participants 
(“Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiaries”) based  on the following criteria. 
Final selection will be made by the Executing Entit ies: 
 Relevance of the individuals’ current livelihood s trategies and practices to 
the project-promoted practices; 
 The individuals’ access to land on which to apply the CRFPs; and 
 The individuals’ ability to train additional house holds within their community 
on the project-promoted CRFPs. Agroforestry and 
Livestock activities 
will be implemented 
from PY 3-7


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
For the establishment of household-level fodder tre e and grass nurseries, for 
on-farm agroforestry plantation, and for training a nd establishment of stall-
feeding practices, female participants will be prio ritised to reflect the 
disproportionate amount of time that women spend on  fodder collection 
compared to men. MoITFE and MoACLM extension agents  (in PY3-4) and 
LRPs (in PY5-7) will review nominees for each train ing to confirm their 
nominations are consistent with the aforementioned selection criteria. MoFE 
and FAO will approve final selection of Agro-forest ry and Livestock 
Beneficiaries based on MoITFE and MoACLM reviews. 
For the establishment of biogas plants, relevant CB O Beneficiaries will 
nominate households within their communities (among  the Agro-forestry and 
Livestock Beneficiaries) to receive biogas-related assistance (“Agro-forestry 
and Livestock + Biogas Beneficiaries”). The Agro-fo restry and Livestock + 
Biogas Beneficiary households will be selected by t he Executing Entities, based 
on the following criteria: 
 They own at least two livestock units (i.e. oxen, cattle, buffalo) that can be 
used to produce manure to feed the biogas digesters ;  
 They have sufficient income to cover the operation s and maintenance 
costs of the biogas digesters during and after the project period (note: this 
assessment will be made by FAO and MoFE experts);  
 Higher dependence on fuelwood from forest areas; a nd  
 Current lack of access to alternative forms of ene rgy or electricity. 
Nominated beneficiary households will be proposed b y targeted CBO 
Beneficiaries, in consultation with MoITFE and MoAC LM, and confirmed by 
MoFE and FAO experts in accordance with the above c riteria and the principles 
of FPIC. 
 
Forest 
Training 
Beneficiaries The Project will deliver 180 trainings on Forest La ndscape Restoration (“FLR”) 
for members from forestry-related CBO Beneficiaries  and other forest sector 
stakeholders in the 26 targeted river systems (“For est Training Beneficiaries“). 
Trainings will include representatives from all for estry-related CBO 
Beneficiaries, with trainees nominated by the parti cipating CBOs. CBO 
Beneficiaries will be instructed to nominate equal numbers of male and female 
participants, and ensure that at least one trainee from each CBO is a member 
of the CBO committee. MoFE and FAO will review nomi nees from each CBO 
Beneficiary and approve the final selection of Fore st Training Beneficiaries. 
The Project will also deliver 122 trainings on sust ainable management of forest 
ecosystems. As above, trainings will include repres entatives from all forestry-
related CBO Beneficiaries, with trainees nominated by the participating CBOs. 
CBO Beneficiaries will be instructed to nominate eq ual numbers of male and 
female participants, and ensure that at least one t rainee from each CBO is a 
member of the CBO committee. MoFE and FAO will revi ew nominees from 
each CBO Beneficiary and approve the final selectio n of Forest Training 
Beneficiaries. 
 FLR and other forests 
trainings will be 
conducted in PY3-7. 
The aforementioned 
beneficiary selection 
criteria and process 
will be applied before 
the start of each 
relevant training. 
 Local 
Labourers   
 Forest restoration and plantation Activities, as we ll as other tree planting 
Activities, often involve the recruitment and payme nt of local labourers to 
support tree planting. To recruit labourers for suc h Activities (under Sub-
Component 1.3), participating CBO Beneficiaries wil l be asked to nominate 
members as labourers to be involved in (and benefit  from) these Activities. CBO 
Beneficiaries will be asked to nominate members bas ed on the following 
criteria. Final selection will be made by the Host Country, acting through MoFE, 
and FAO:


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
 Labourers must be from poor households (based on t hresholds to be 
defined by FAO and MoFE during project inception); and 
 Labourers must be at least 17 years of age. 
FAO and MoFE experts will review nominated particip ants from each CBO 
Beneficiary and validate the final selection of Loc al Labourers. When selecting, 
FAO and MoFE will strive to ensure equal representa tion of women, indigenous 
peoples and Dalits. 
 
 
44. The project objective will be achieved through the following Components. Figure 6 presents the seq uencing of the 
Components and Activities, how the Components are c omplementary and collectively contribute to achievi ng tangible 
impacts on the ground, and how the Activities are e xpected to continue enabling CBO members to apply ( and support 
more widespread adoption) of project-promoted farmi ng, land use and forestry practices after project c losure. 
a) Component 1: Scaling up climate-resilient Sustai nable Natural Resource Management (SNRM). 
b) Component 2: Strengthening institutions and plan ning for climate-resilient SNRM. 
c) Component 3: Improving knowledge, awareness and local capacity for climate-resilient SNRM. 
 
Figure 6: Project components, impact streams and po st-project sustainability  
 
45. Under Component 1, the project will support act ivities focused on scaling up proven climate-resili ent SNRM approaches 
to strengthen ecosystem stability and resilience in  vulnerable river systems. Such interventions will focus on climate-
resilient agricultural practices on agricultural la nd, ecosystem restoration and sustainable managemen t in degraded and 
critical ecosystems, and tree planting on non-fores ted land to build resilience and reduce pressure on  natural forests for 
fodder, fuelwood and forage, targeting especially d istant forest users in the upstream Terai. This sup port will be delivered 
in each of the 26 targeted river systems, with the specific constellation of support (capturing upstre am and downstream 
dynamics) to be defined in consultation with govern ment and community stakeholders during the process of developing Beneficiary CBO members will continue to apply (and  
support other members of their communities to adopt ) 
project-promoted practices, drawing on support from  
government, other partners and local extension serv ices.
PY 1 PY 2 PY 3 PY 4 PY 5 PY 6 PY 7
Post-project period Project implementation periodCOMPONENT 2
Supporting planning & 
strengthening institutional 
capacity to:
COMPONENT 1
Providing CBOs with training, expert guidance and i nputs/materials to enable:             
(i) adoption of climate-resilient land use practice s; (ii) construction of local structures 
and nature-based solutions to enhance resilience; ( iii) application of sustainable forest 
management practices; and (iv) restoration & mainte nance of forests and tree cover.
COMPONENT 3
Strengthening local extension services and 
awareness to enable widespread adoption and 
continued use of project-promoted farming, land 
use and forestry practices.A) Define and 
guide the 
constellation 
of support to 
be provided by 
the project 
(under Comp. 
1) in each of 
the 26 river 
systems.B) Enable government and other partners to continue  monitoring 
natural resources and climate change impacts, and u se this information 
to inform future planning and investment decisions.Public sector policy, regulatory and investment 
decisions continue to promote sustained use (and mo re 
widespread adoption) of project-promoted practices.
Local extension and advisory services continue to 
support CBO members (incl. those who directly 
benefited from the project and others) to utilize pr oject-
promoted farming, land use and forestry practices.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Critical Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) under Activity 2.1.2 – an Activity that will precede (and  guide) field-level 
interventions under Component 1. 
46. To support the implementation and scaling up of  climate-resilient SNRM, activities within Componen t 2 will focus on 
strengthening local and provincial capacities, supp orting operational planning at the local level with in each of the project´s 
26 target river systems and mainstreaming climate-r esilient land use planning at the provincial, local  (i.e. rural municipality) 
and community-level. This Component will balance to p-down integrated spatial planning with participato ry land use 
planning for climate-resilience at the CBO level. I mportantly, this Component will support the develop ment of CERPs in 
each of the 26 targeted river systems. These plans (and the priorities and interventions identified th erein) will be consulted 
and validated with the relevant CBOs within each ri ver system, thereby ensuring full community buy-in for interventions to 
be delivered under Component 1. 
47. Project activities will further enhance awarene ss, knowledge and communication on climate risks, c limate-resilient SNRM. 
Component 3 includes measures to strengthen extensi on materials for farmer-field schools, operational costs to scale-up 
the reach of extension services, and trainings for trainers to implement climate-resilient SNRM approa ches. This will 
ensure such approaches are mainstreamed into traini ng materials and that government extension staff an d service 
providers understand climate change threats, low-ca rbon and climate-resilient land use practices. The establishment of 
an innovative knowledge center will further enhance  climate monitoring, knowledge management and disse mination, and 
improve climate-informed decision making and planni ng.  
48. Together, these complementary measures will hel p to overcome barriers to adaptation and mitigation , and will support 
the desired paradigm shift with a strong enabling e nvironment and the scaling up of interventions that  will increase the 
resilience of both communities and critical ecosyst ems to climate change.   
 
COMPONENT1. SCALING UP CLIMATE-RESILIENT SUSTAINABL E NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
(SNRM) 
49. Component 1 focuses on implementing and scaling  up of climate-resilient SNRM practices to increase  the resilience of 
ecosystems and local households within 26 river sys tems that are vulnerable to climate change. CBO Ben eficiaries and 
their members, as well as local governments will be  provided with technical and financial support to s cale up sustainable 
practices including climate-resilient agricultural practices on 60,965 ha, restoration of 202,237 ha o f critical forest, wetland 
and grassland ecosystems (including areas that are highly susceptible to landslides and flooding), and  tree planting on 
23,800 ha as new forest systems (including enrichme nt planting on shrub land, conservation and commerc ial plantations 
and horticulture). Such measures will not only incr ease the adaptive capacities and resilience of comm unities, but also 
enhance the resilience of ecosystems and the provis ion of key ecosystem services.  
50. Promoted measures have been selected based on t heir relevance given the key climate risks faced by  the region, and 
considering differentiated vulnerabilities within e ach river system. Implementation of these measures will be supported 
through river system-based spatial and operational plans developed under Component 2. Investments in c limate-resilient 
land use practices and technologies will further be  supported by knowledge products and resources deve loped within 
Component 3, including guidelines and educational m aterials for field schools and extension trainings.  The monitoring of 
such measures will be integrated with the Churia Kn owledge Centre (developed under Component 3). 
51. Scaling up climate-resilient land use practices  will help address the proximate and underlying dri vers of deforestation and 
land degradation in the project area, leading to fu rther emission reductions through reduced deforesta tion and forest 
degradation as well as improved carbon sequestratio n in areas under forest and tree cover. Measures wi ll have numerous 
positive socio-economic and environmental impacts, including improved water security, food security, s oil nutrition, 
biodiversity conservation and agricultural producti vity. Since poverty is a major barrier to the adopt ion of climate-resilient 
land use practices in the BRCRN project area, inves tments in climate-resilient land uses will be provi ded to local CBOs, 
although communities are expected to provide in-kin d labour in exchange for participating in farmer fi eld schools and/or 
trainings and receiving ongoing extension / technic al support.  
52. Sub-Component 1.1 – Climate-resilient land use prac tices are adopted.  This Sub-component will work with farmers 
and other land users in the 26 targeted river syste ms (the “Project Area”) to scale up the adoption of  farming and other 
land use practices that enhance the resilience of a gricultural production in the Project Area. This Su b-component will 
directly train and support farmers from relevant CB Os, and equip them to return to their communities t o teach and train 
other farming households on project-promoted practi ces. This Sub-component will also establish crucial  local


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
infrastructure in each river system to enhance resi lience against climate change-induced erosion, sedi mentation and 
flooding risks.  
a) Activity 1.1.1 – Establish Farmer Field Schools (FF Ss) in the Project Area to promote climate-resilien t 
land use. This Activity will establish 120 FFSs in the Projec t Area to encourage the use of climate-resilient 
farming practices, with at least 3 FFS to be establ ished in each of the 26 targeted river systems. The se FFSs 
will be used to deliver trainings on climate-resili ent farming practices to Farmer Beneficiaries under  Activity 
1.1.2, as well as to continue promoting climate-res ilient land use in the Project Area after project c losure. A 
FFS technical expert recruited by FAO will design t he overall approach to this Activity, including the  
development and supervision of agreements with nati onal service providers to identify sites, establish  FFSs 
and orient local communities regarding their functi on. A second agreement will be developed, under the  
supervision of the FFS technical expert, to deliver  Training of Trainers (ToT) for MoITFE and MoACLM f ield 
staff, extension workers, based on the modules deve loped under Activity 3.2.1. The FFS technical exper t will 
identify the equipment needs for all 120 FFSs and o rganise the procurement and delivery of this equipm ent, 
including agricultural and forestry technical suppl ies for training purposes. FAO will sign and manage  these 
agreements. The Provincial Project Management Units  (PPMUs) will cover the travel and logistical costs  for 
MoITFE and MoACLM field staff to establish capacity  of all 120 FFSs to deliver capacity building activ ities 
based on the FFS training modules.  This is anticip ated to require a total of 120 visits, by teams of 3 field staff, 
to FFS over the project period in provinces 2 and 3 , and 240 in province 1, to ensure the long-term ab ility of 
all FFS to deliver all modules to local farmers and  communities as required. 
b) Activity 1.1.2 – Train farmers to adopt and apply c limate-resilient land use practices. This Activity will 
train Farmer Beneficiaries in each of the 26 target ed river systems to understand and apply climate-re silient 
farming practices (CRFPs) that are most relevant to  the challenges and conditions within their communi ties 
(see Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendices A1.2-A1.5  for more information on promoted practices). Farme r 
Beneficiaries will not only be equipped to apply re levant CRFPs on their own land, but will also be ab le to teach 
and train other members of the communities on such practices. Widespread adoption of such practices wi ll 
build resilience of farming households against many  of the climate change impacts outlined in Section C.1 
(above), while also reducing soil runoff and erosio n that have significant negative impacts in downstr eam 
communities. Based on the results of the Critical E cosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) developed under 
Activity 2.1.2, project staff will identify the CRF Ps most appropriate for vulnerable areas of the 26 river systems, 
and identify the CBO Beneficiaries to be targeted f or capacity building efforts and the training appro aches to 
be employed, both on-site and in FFSs.  Based on th is analysis, carried out on an annual basis, the eq uipment 
needs for support to the CRFP training programme wi ll be identified, and the procurement and delivery of this 
equipment will be organized through FAO (as co-EE).  Under Activity 1.1.2, the project will organize 26 0 training 
events (approximately 10 per river system), each of  which will be supported by 3 government field staf f and 
train approximately 30 Farmer Beneficiaries. In tot al, Activity 1.1.2 is expected to train about 7,800  Farmer 
Beneficiaries.  
c) Activity 1.1.3 – Train farmers to adopt agroforestr y and livestock management practices. This Activity 
will support Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiar ies to apply agroforestry and livestock management 
practices in their fields in each of the 26 targete d river systems, and equip them to promote more wid espread 
adoption of such practices within their communities  (practices are described in more detail in Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study – Appendices A1.6-A1.7 ). Such practices will not only enhance resilience of agricultural 
production among Agro-Forestry and Livestock Benefi ciaries, but will also contribute to easing the 
expansionary pressures that are driving deforestati on and forest degradation in the Project Area. Impo rtantly, 
such practices will also contribute to increasing i ncomes for the predominantly poor and vulnerable sm all-scale 
farming and livestock-owning households with which this Activity will work. Building on the identifica tion of 
priority areas and appropriate practices from the C ERPs under Activity 2.1.2, Activity 1.1.3 will trai n 
approximately 120 Agro-Forestry and Livestock Benef iciaries from relevant CBO Beneficiaries to underst and 
project-promoted practices, and procure the materia ls needed for them to establish small on-farm tree 
nurseries to continue supporting agroforestry withi n their communities and beyond project closure. Onc e these 
small on-farm nurseries are established, three full -time government field staff in each province will conduct 
regular visits (from PY3-7) to communities in which  on-farm nurseries have been established to train a dditional 
Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiaries to adopt project-promoted agroforestry and livestock managem ent 
practices, drawing in part on the seedlings produce d at the on-farm nurseries established in PY3. Duri ng the 
training/extension visits, government field staff w ill also identify about 500 livestock-owning househ olds within 
the relevant communities (in line with the selectio n process and eligibility criteria outlined in Tabl e 6 above)


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
who are eligible to access the government’s biogas subsidy, and provide them with the technical assist ance 
and guidance needed to access this subsidy and ulti mately purchase and install a biogas digester on th eir 
respective farms.  
d) Activity 1.1.4 – Construct check dams, gully stabil ization measures and other local infrastructure to 
enhance resilience against climate change-induced e rosion, sedimentation and flooding risks. This 
Activity will construct local structures (described  in more detailed in Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix 
A2.2 ) that will play a crucial role in reducing communi ty vulnerability to climate change impacts, account ing for 
both upstream and downstream dynamics in each of th e 26 river systems that collectively comprise the P roject 
Area. In particular, these structures will reduce e rosion risk and sedimentation in upstream areas, an d reduce 
flooding risk and water stress in downstream areas.  Building on the key risks and priority areas for s pecific 
structures identified in the CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2, MoFE will recruit 3 civil engineers  to work 
with provincial technical support officers in MoACL M, rural municipalities, watershed management centr es and 
relevant CBO Beneficiaries to identify specific sit es and approaches for local structures. The enginee rs will 
develop detailed project reports and technical stan dard guidelines to be followed in construction, whi ch will be 
carried out by service providers contracted by MoFE  (with technical supervision and backstopping from MoFE 
and FAO project staff). In particular, Activity 1.1 .4 will: (i) establish relevant structures and prac tices to stabilize 
86 gullies, mostly in the Churia hills; and (ii) es tablish and maintain check dams and/or community-ma naged 
water harvesting ponds in 129 sites, mostly in the Bhavar zone.  
53. Sub-Component 1.2 – Natural forest ecosystems are b etter maintained and protected. This Sub-Component will 
work with communities to support more sustainable m anagement and preservation of existing, natural for est ecosystems 
in the Project Area. In so doing, the project aims to reduce the rate of deforestation and forest degr adation, which will 
produce important climate change mitigation benefit s while also preserving (and enhancing) crucial eco system functions 
that are essential to the resilience of communities  (both upstream and downstream) throughout each of the 26 targeted 
river systems that collectively comprise the Projec t Area.  
a) Activity 1.2.1 – Guide and assist all forestry-rela ted CBOs to develop/strengthen and deliver forest 
management operational plans. This Activity will focus on the improvement of sust ainable forest 
management (SFM) in all forest land managed by fore stry-related CBO Beneficiaries in the Project Area,  to 
ensure silvicultural practices are implemented to m aximise ecosystem service provision, both in terms of 
climate resilience and in terms of enhancement of f orest carbon stocks (see Annex 2: Feasibility Study – 
Appendix A2.4  for more information on promoted practices). Build ing on the priorities and relevant CBOs 
identified in the CERPs developed under Activity 2. 1.2, the Project will recruit qualified service pro viders in 
each province to work with relevant CBO Beneficiari es to develop and/or strengthen forest management 
operational plans to enable coordinated and sustain able management of their local forest ecosystems. P roject 
staff will then procure relevant equipment for each  of these CBO Beneficiaries (including for inventor y, 
plantation, cultivation and harvesting operations) to be distributed to the relevant CBOs in accordanc e with the 
specific needs identified in their forest managemen t operational plans. Under Activity 1.2.1, project staff will 
subsequently work with these CBO Beneficiaries thro ughout PY3-7 to provide ongoing advice and guidance  
to enable implementation of their forest management  operational plans. In so doing, Activity 1.2.1 exp ects to 
support sustainable management of 186,247 ha of for est land within the Project Area.  
b) Activity 1.2.2 – Train CBO Beneficiaries and land o wners to enable more sustainable management of 
forest ecosystems. This Activity will build the capacity of government  staff and all forestry-related CBO 
Beneficiaries to better understand the principles a nd practices that underpin sustainable management o f forest 
ecosystems, and continue applying such principles a nd practices after project closure. Such trainings will go 
beyond simply supporting delivery of forest managem ent operational plans developed under Activity 1.2. 1, 
and aims to build broader capacity among key actors  within the Project Area to continue promoting and scaling 
up relevant knowledge and practices after project c losure. To do so, Activity 1.2.2 will support the d evelopment 
of a regular, locally-relevant and demand-driven ex tension service on forest planning and management f or 
CBOs and other land owners. Project staff will star t by delivering 26 Training of Trainers (ToT) event s for 
MoITFE field staff at local level (“Professional Be neficiaries”) during PY3-5. These field staff will in turn deliver 
122 local training events to CBOs and other land ow ners (“Forest Training Beneficiaries”) to build the ir capacity 
on sustainable management of forest ecosystems. Rep resentatives from forestry-related CBO Beneficiarie s 
to be trained under Activity 1.2.2 will be nominate d by the executive committee of their respective CB Os.  
54. Sub-Component 1.3 – Forests and tree cover are rest ored and maintained in the river system landscape. This 
Sub-Component will work with CBO Beneficiaries and other forest stakeholders to expand tree cover and restore forest


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
ecosystems in the Project Area. In so doing, this S ub-Component will contribute to enhancing resilienc e in critical areas 
(e.g. along riverbanks) and restoring other ecosyst em services that enhance resilience for downstream communities. 
Forest restoration and expanded tree cover will als o deliver important mitigation benefits by increasi ng biomass and 
carbon sequestration, as well as providing alternat ive fuelwood and timber sources that enable local c ommunities to meet 
their needs without encroaching on natural forest e cosystems. 
a) Activity 1.3.1 – Establish and support the operatio n of 52 multi-purpose tree nurseries to serve the 
plantation and restoration needs of CBOs and other forest sector stakeholders. This Activity will 
establish tree nurseries that are needed to support  tree planting and forest restoration under this pr oject, as 
well as by communities throughout the Project Area (specifications for project-supported nurseries are  
available in Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix A3.3 ). Nurseries are expected to continue providing 
seedlings to support continued planting and restora tion activities beyond project closure, in line wit h CERPs 
and other local plans supported under the project. Without such services, CBOs and other actors in the  Project 
Area would struggle to procure the necessary seedli ngs in the future, which would risk undermining loc al buy-
in and support for the broader process of sector tr ansformation that this project aims to set in motio n. To 
accomplish this, project staff will procure the equ ipment and materials needed to establish two nurser ies in 
each of the 26 targeted river systems, for which si tes will be selected in accordance with the criteri a and 
process outlined in Table 6 (above). Project staff will also procure material inputs (e.g. poly bags, soil, sand) 
and labour inputs needed for production of seedling s from PY3-7, ensuring that each nursery has the ca pacity 
to produce at least 50,000 seedlings per year. Nurs eries will be operated by local forest offices, and  project 
staff will work with MoITFE to ensure operations an d maintenance costs for these nurseries are integra ted into 
their annual budgets by project closure. Nurseries will be developed in line with GESI principles, pro moting 
equitable employment opportunities for women, as we ll as indigenous peoples, Dalits and marginalized 
groups. 
b) Activity 1.3.2 – Establish and maintain 7,300 ha of  forest plantations to enhance resilience.  This Activity 
will establish and support maintenance of several d ifferent forest plantations in the Project Area tha t will 
contribute to building resilience and mitigating cl imate change, while also equipping local stakeholde rs to 
promote and support more sustainable forestry activ ities beyond project closure. These are described b elow, 
while technical specifications are provided in more  detail in Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix A3.2 ). 
i. Demonstration plantations:  Project staff will establish demonstration plantat ions to expand tree cover 
and build capacity of local MoITFE staff (those who  train and support CBOs, land owners and other 
forest users in the Project Area) to promote sustai nable plantation management beyond project 
closure. This in turn will deliver important long-t erm adaptation and mitigation benefits. To do so, 
project staff will train 20 MoITFE staff in each of  the three provinces (60 total “Professional 
Beneficiaries”) on how to promote/support sustainab le plantation management. Project staff will in tur n 
procure materials and seed stock needed to establis h 1,300 ha of demonstration plantations of native 
species (including teak) in the Bhavar and Terai zo nes of the 26 targeted river systems. These 
demonstration plantations will contribute to enabli ng trained MoITFE staff to promote and support 
sustainable plantation management after project clo sure. 
ii. Public land forests on river bank sites:  Building on the priorities identified in the CERPs  developed 
under Activity 2.1.2, project staff will work with vulnerable and marginalized communities to plant 
grasses, bamboo and trees along key river banks, pr imarily in the Bhavar zone in each of the 26 river 
systems. This will contribute to stabilizing these river banks, which in turn will build resilience fo r within 
the Bhavar zone but also for downstream communities  whose vulnerability to sedimentation and 
flooding will be reduced. The CBO Beneficiaries wit h whom project staff will work to establish these 
plantations will also be supported to take over man agement responsibility for these forests by signing  
formal agreements with their respective Municipalit y offices. Project staff will further support these  
CBOs to develop management plans that will guide po st-project management of these forest 
resources. In total, this Activity is expected to r esult in the establishment of 1,000 ha of riparian 
plantations (with at least 25 ha being established in each river system), and equip local CBO 
Beneficiaries to sustainably manage these forest re sources after project closure. 
iii. Public land forests on community land:  Building on the priorities identified in the CERPs  developed 
under Activity 2.1.2, project staff will work with vulnerable and marginalized communities to plant 
multipurpose trees in open community land, primaril y in the (upstream) Churia hills and Bhavar zone 
in each of the 26 river systems. This expanded fore st cover will enhance resilience against climate-


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
change induced soil erosion (thus reducing downstre am risks related to sedimentation and flooding) 
and enhance crucial ecosystem functions that underp in the resilience of upstream communities, while 
also providing important mitigation benefits. The C BO Beneficiaries with whom project staff will work 
to establish these plantations will also be support ed to take over management responsibility for these  
forests by signing formal agreements with their res pective Municipality offices. Project staff will fu rther 
support these CBO Beneficiaries to develop manageme nt plans that will guide post-project 
management of these forest resources. In total, thi s Activity is expected to result in the establishme nt 
of 5,000 ha of plantations (with at least 50 ha bei ng established in each river system), and equip loc al 
CBO Beneficiaries to sustainably manage these resou rces after project closure. 
c) Activity 1.3.3 – Train government field staff and C BOs on Forest Landscape Restoration, and support 
CBOs to implement Assisted Natural Regeneration on 15,990 ha. This Activity will assist CBO 
Beneficiaries to expand forest cover and restore fo rest landscapes in critical locations in each of th e 26 
targeted river systems, in line with the priorities  identified in the CERPs developed under Activity 2 .1.2. This 
will enable CBOs to restore crucial ecosystem funct ions and ecosystems resilience in each river system , while 
also generating significant mitigation benefits. Un der Activity 1.3.3, the project will not only suppo rt CBO 
Beneficiaries to expand and restore forests in the Project Area, but will also build their capacity (a nd that of 
government) to continue scaling up such approaches after project closure, in line with their CERPs and  drawing 
on the network of services and resources (e.g. nurs eries) established under this project. In particula r, the 
project will support the approaches outlined below,  technical specifications for which are included in  Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study – Appendix A2.3 ). 
i. Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR): Project staff will prepare training materials on FL R, which they 
will then use to train 240 provincial forestry fiel d staff (“Professional Beneficiaries”) through 12 t raining 
events (20 Professional Beneficiaries per training)  organized in PY3-5. These provincial forestry fiel d 
staff will in turn organize 180 training events for  members from relevant CBO Beneficiaries (“Forest 
Training Beneficiaries”) to enhance their understan ding and ability to apply FLR approaches in their 
respective communities. Approximately 30 Forest Tra ining Beneficiaries will be trained at each 
training, reaching a total of about 5,400 Forest Tr aining Beneficiaries. 
ii. Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR):  Building on the priorities and areas identified in  the CERPs 
developed under Activity 2.1.2, project staff will work with relevant CBO Beneficiaries (557 CFUGs 
and 3 CoFMs) to implement ANR on at least 15,990 ha  of community-managed forest land, focusing 
in particular on the Churia hills and Bhavar zones in the 26 targeted river systems. Project staff wil l 
start by identifying specific sites (in line with t he selection criteria and process outlined in Table  6) and 
developing ANR methodologies and implementation pla ns that are suited to the local contexts. Project 
staff will then procure tools, equipment, inputs an d local labour needed to implement ANR in 
collaboration with relevant CBO Beneficiaries, whic h may include (depending on the needs of specific 
sites): 
1. Plantation for protection and stabilization: To reduce degradation and promote the 
ecosystem services and sustainable use of forests, communities will be supported to establish 
fodder banks, fire breaks and other locally-appropr iate measures, while ensuring that 
measures to control grazing or forest product extra ction do not disproportionately affect 
marginalized or poor households within CBOs.   
2. Measures to accelerate natural forest recovery  (e.g. direct seeding, planting seedlings) in 
degraded primary or secondary forests. Promoted mea sures will include the establishment of 
enrichment planting to restore over-exploited fores t-dominated ecosystems, especially along 
upstream riversides. 37  
3. Measures to support natural regeneration  will involve promoting tree seedlings and 
favorable species within a forest landscape, suppor ting multiple-use forest management 
plans, with equal consideration of social, ecologic al and economic functions of forest 
                                                                 
37  Native species will be promoted to the greatest ex tent possible, however in highly degraded areas loc ally-adapted exotic species 
with no risk of invasion may be required to facilit ate soil restoration (as a nurse crop for the event ual recovery of natural forest). 
Measures to avoid and mitigate adverse impacts are further described in the ESMF in Section F.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
ecosystems. Planning concepts and components such a s multi-functional zoning and control 
forest inventories will be supported where necessar y. 
d)  Activity 1.3.4 – Provide technical guidance and see dlings to establish tree cover on 16,500 ha of 
woodlots to enhance ecosystem resilience, and impro ve fuelwood and timber availability in 
downstream communities. This Activity will work with small-scale land owner s to establish woodlots on their 
lands (see Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix A3.2  for more detailed technical specifications). In so  doing, 
the project will further enhance resilience of soil s (against erosion upstream, and the associated sed imentation 
downstream) and broader ecosystem services that are  essential to the overall resilience of the river s ystems. 
This Activity will also provide additional sources of fuelwood and timber for downstream communities, thereby 
reducing expansionary pressures on natural forest e cosystems. To do so, project staff will draw on the  
prioritized areas in the CERPs to guide the identif ication of landowners with whom to collaborate (in line with 
the selection process outlined in Table 6). Project  staff will then organize exchange visits between t hese small-
scale landowners and other successful forest owners  in neighbouring districts to enhance their interes t in 
engaging with the project. Interested landowners wi ll then provide the necessary labour for establishi ng 
woodlots on their land, while project staff will pr ocure the necessary seedlings and government field staff will 
provide the necessary extension and advisory servic es. Under this Activity, the project will support a t least 100 
households in each of the 26 river systems (to be s elected according to the criteria and process outli ned in 
Table 6). Each household will receive support to es tablish woodlots on a maximum of 1 ha of their land . The 
government remains committed to continue providing extension support for such planting, further contri buting 
to the potential to scale up tree planting on woodl ots beyond project closure.  
 
COMPONENT2. STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS AND PLANNING  FOR CLIMATE-RESILIENT SNRM 
55. Component 2 is designed as a precursor for the investments in Component1, and will support the nec essary planning for 
interventions within each of the 26 targeted river systems while equipping government officials and CB O members with 
the capacities to understand and apply climate-resi lient land use. Given Nepal´s ongoing political tra nsition, Provincial 
and Local governments have new responsibilities ove r natural resource management and there is a need t o build 
awareness on climate threats and low carbon and cli mate-resilient land use practices, providing suppor t to mainstream 
climate-resilient land use planning into local stra tegies and processes. Local CBOs also play an impor tant role in managing 
local resources, however there is limited awareness  about the long-term risks that climate change pose s as well as 
sustainable natural resource management approaches that can strengthen their adaptive capacities and o verall resilience 
to climate change.  
56. Ultimately, this Component will address climate  change risks by improving awareness of threats and  building capacities 
to continuously monitor climate change and vulnerab ility at the provincial, local (rural municipality)  and CBO level. It will 
further raise awareness of suitable low carbon and climate-resilient practices that are adapted to loc al conditions and 
differentiated vulnerabilities and contexts. It is closely linked with Component 3, which focuses on i mproving knowledge, 
strengthening extension services and trainings and improving knowledge dissemination to support awaren ess raising and 
the enhancement of adaptive capacities.  
57. Sub-Component 2.1 – Planning for climate-resilient SNRM is enhanced.  This Sub-Component will support 
government stakeholders and CBO Beneficiaries to id entify and assess climate change risks and resource  degradation 
within the Project Area, and develop corresponding plans that will enable relevant actors to respond t o such challenges. 
This Sub-Component will also build the capacity of these actors to further monitor local risks and res ources in the future. 
In so doing, Sub-Component 2.1 not will only provid e an evidence-based foundation to guide interventio ns under 
Component 1, but will also equip government stakeho lders and CBOs to continue investing in climate-res ilient SNRM – 
in a manner that coordinates upstream and downstrea m interventions to maximize adaptation and mitigati on benefits – 
beyond project closure. 
a) Activity 2.1.1 – Strengthen institutions on climate  change impacts and ecosystem mapping.  Under this 
Activity, the Project will build the capacity of ke y entities (line ministries such as MoFE, MoITFE, M oACLM and 
other provincial and municipal authorities, as well  as other relevant stakeholders) that intend to col laborate 
with and/or benefit from the project – including th ose whose mandates are linked to promoting climate- resilient 
SNRM in the Project Area, and who will play an impo rtant role in sustaining and scaling up support for  such 
practices after project closure – on climate change  and climate resilient land use planning and manage ment 
practices. To do so, project staff will organize fo ur national-level trainings, three provincial-level  trainings and


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
64 local-level trainings for Professional Beneficia ries on such topics. Trainings will further include  a component 
on Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI), dis cussing how differentiated vulnerabilities to clima te change 
affect the overall vulnerability of communities, as  well as key considerations to enhance and strength en GESI 
within the context of the BRCRN project (building o n measures identified in the Gender Action Plan, In digenous 
Peoples Planning Framework and cross-cutting measur es to support social inclusion). 
Project staff will organize one national-level trai ning and 6 provincial-level trainings for staff fro m MoFE, 
MoITFE and other relevant provincial and municipal authorities (“Professional Beneficiaries”) on the p roduction 
and use of GIS tools used in the multi-criteria ana lysis that informed the development of CERPs under Activity 
2.1.2. In so doing, the project will equip key prov incial and local stakeholders with the knowledge an d tools 
needed to continue monitoring climate change impact s and natural resources in the Project Area after p roject 
closure – knowledge that is essential to enable gov ernment to continue refining the support it provide s for 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
b) Activity 2.1.2– Develop and validate Critical Ecosy stem Restoration Plans (CERPs) for each of the 26 
targeted river systems. Under this Activity, project staff will work with a  range of provincial and local 
stakeholders to develop and validate CERPs, which w ill enable evidence-based planning for intervention s 
under Component 1, while also providing governments  and CBOs with common plans and priorities to guide  
coordinated investments in climate-resilient SNRM i n the future. The CERP planning process will also d raw 
on insights and information from relevant national entities, including the Department of Hydrology and  
Meteorology (DHM). Project staff will start by recr uiting a qualified firm to perform a multi-criteria  spatial 
analysis for each of the 26 targeted river systems to help identify: climate change risks within each river system; 
critical ecosystems within each river system; prior ity climate-resilient SNRM practices and approaches  for each 
biophysical zone in each river system; priority int erventions to be delivered (under Component 1) to e nable 
short-term action on the aforementioned priorities,  including priority areas for such interventions; a nd CBOs 
for inclusion/involvement in prioritized interventi ons in each river system.Building on this analysis,  project staff 
will organize a series of 26 river system-level con sultations (one per targeted river system) to discu ss the 
identified priorities with key stakeholders and dev elop this into a Critical Ecosystem Restoration Pla n (CERP).  
Once the CERPs are validated, project staff will or ganize a series of field consultations (following F PIC 
principles) to ensure: (i) interventions identified  in the CERPs are locally-relevant and appropriate;  (ii) relevant 
CBOs and other local stakeholders in each river sys tem are supportive of the priorities and plans outl ined in 
their respective CERPs; and (iii) the implementatio n methodologies are adapted to local circumstances as 
appropriate, including to address locally-specific social and environmental risks and capacity gaps. I n so doing, 
project staff will ensure that prioritized interven tions reflect the relevant management regimes, such  as 
community forestry, leasehold forestry, collaborati ve forestry, public land forests, and private fores try, among 
others. While promoting collective action through l ocal CBOs/ user groups, the project will take into account 
the priorities and needs of vulnerable groups (e.g.  women, Dalits and indigenous peoples). In total, p roject 
staff will organize 52 local-level consultations (2  per river system) to secure community buy-in and s upport for 
the CERPs and the specific interventions prioritize d therein. Project staff will then discuss the comm unity-
endorsed CERPs with stakeholders at the national an d provincial levels (through two national workshops  and 
six provincial-level workshops) to secure feedback on the planning processes and government validation  of 
the plans, and discuss opportunities for mainstream ing CERP priorities into regular planning cycles. 
c) Activity 2.1.3 – Support provincial governments in Provinces 1, 2 and 3to plan and increase resilience  
to projected climate change-related extreme events.  Due to an increasing risk of climate change-induce d 
extreme events (e.g. flooding) in the Project Area,  it is essential that government stakeholders under stand 
these risks and how best to support enhanced prepar edness – both within the government and at communit y 
level. Under this Activity, project staff will rais e awareness of such risks among provincial and loca l government 
staff (“Professional Beneficiaries”) and support th em to develop corresponding risk management plans. Project 
staff will begin by organizing 26 awareness-raising  workshops (one in each targeted river system) for provincial 
and local government staff, during which participan ts will learn about river system-specific risks (dr awing on 
analysis done under Activity 2.1.2) and train them on relevant guidelines and tools for further assess ing such 
risks in the future. These trainings are also expec ted to draw on insights from DHM staff (among other s), both 
to inform the planning processes and strengthen the  linkages between entities such as DHM and the prov incial-
level authorities responsible for planning and deli vering support in this area. Participants will also  be trained 
on how to access information from the Churia Knowle dge Centre in their respective provinces (establish ed 
under Activity 3.2.3), and how this important resou rce can facilitate future analysis of climate chang e risks in


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
each of the targeted river systems. Following the a wareness-raising workshops, project staff will work  with 
provincial governments (“Professional Beneficiaries ”) to develop provincial-level risk management plan s for 
climate change-related extreme events, building on detailed hazard mapping, vulnerability assessments and 
risk mapping from the CERP planning process under A ctivity 2.1.2. Once these plans are developed, proj ect 
staff will subsequently work with provincial govern ments organize 26 multi-stakeholder validation work shops 
to secure endorsement and community buy-in for such  plans. 
58. Sub-Component 2.2 – Community-based organizations ( CBOs) are equipped to scale up climate-resilient SN RM.  
This sub-component will work with local stakeholder s and CBOs to improve local-level planning, build t heir capacity to 
provide support for climate-resilient SNRM in their  river systems, and address other legal and institu tional barriers that 
otherwise inhibit local actors from taking a leader ship role in shifting the management of land, fores ts and other natural 
resources toward more climate-resilient and low-emi ssion pathways. 
a) Activity 2.2.1 – Establish, formalize and register CBOs to enable climate-resilient SNRM. Community 
organizations play a key role in managing natural r esources within the Project Area, and are essential  to 
shifting the management of forests and other resour ces toward more climate-resilient and sustainable 
approaches. Such organizations also play an importa nt role in supporting individual households to adop t and 
sustain climate-resilient practices in their own fi elds. In order to empower such organizations to pro vide support 
at scale, project staff will support them to overco me key institutional hurdles under Activity 2.2.1. Project staff 
will begin by working with all 750 CBO Beneficiarie s to ensure they are registered with the relevant a uthorities, 
in line with Provincial and Federal Law. This will include CFUGs, collaborative forestry user groups, pro-poor 
leasehold forestry groups, soil conservation user g roups, farmer groups, agriculture cooperative group s, public 
land forest user group. While existing CFUGs, colla borative forestry user groups, leasehold forestry a nd private 
forest users are registered with the Department of Forestry, with the ongoing political transition the y will be 
required to register at either the provincial or lo cal level (Article 11, LGOA 2017). Meanwhile, proje ct staff will 
also support local governments to formalize recogni tion of public land forest user groups, comprised o f 
primarily marginalized and highly vulnerable househ olds, to benefit from the sustainable management of  public 
land forests. Many of these groups already exist (p articularly where pilot projects have successfully engaged 
them in the sustainable management of public forest s) but are not yet formally recognised. Based on th e local 
government operation act (2017), local government w ill have the authority to formalize such groups, ha ving 
positive impacts on highly vulnerable households. F inally, project staff will help establish 26 networ ks of 
CFUGs and private forest owner networks. This will include organizing initial workshops for such group s in 
each river system, as well as supporting the organi zation of annual meetings of such groups from PY3-7 . This 
will encourage information exchange among similar g roups within each of the targeted river systems. It  will 
also provide important platforms to exchange experi ences and lessons learned, and support long-term 
capacity development of these local institutions. 
b) Activity 2.2.2 – Train CBO Beneficiaries on climate -resilient land use planning, and assist them to 
mainstream climate-resilient SNRM into their CBO ma nagement plans.  Under this Activity, project staff 
will strengthen the technical capacities of CBO Ben eficiaries to better understand climate change risk s and 
how best to respond through climate-resilient SNRM approaches that are catered to their local needs (d rawing 
on insights gained through the CERP process under A ctivity 2.1.2). Trainings will also include session s on 
GESI principles to promote (inter alia) greater inv olvement of women in climate-resilient SNRM, as wel l as to 
promote greater understanding among males CBO membe rs of women’s roles. In so doing, CBOs throughout 
the Project Area will be better equipped to sustain  and scale up climate-resilient SNRM practices beyo nd 
project closure. To accomplish this, project staff will start by recruiting a service provider to orga nize a training 
of trainers (ToT) for Local Resource Persons (LRPs)  (on behalf of “CBO Beneficiaries”) on climate-resi lient 
land use. LRPs will include women, indigenous peopl es and marginalized minority groups (including Dali ts), 
and all trainers will be given additional training on GESI to ensure women and marginalized groups are  
effectively engaged. Once LRPs have been trained, p roject staff will organize at least 250 community-l evel 
workshops for the 750 CBO Beneficiaries (with 3-5 C BOs per workshop), at which LRPs will train CBO 
members to improve their awareness on climate chang e and associated risks, and support them to map out  
adaptation needs and strategies to build resilience  at the local level. Such an approach is based on m ulti-
stakeholder participation, and will promote the emp owerment and inclusion of women as well as indigeno us 
peoples, Dalits and members from other marginalized  groups. After the initial workshops and trainings,  project 
staff will select the 250 most vulnerable CBO Benef iciaries (in line with the selection criteria and p rocess 
outlined in Table 6), and recruit a qualified servi ce provider, trained on gender quality and social i nclusion, to 
support these CBOs to develop CBO management plans that effectively mainstream support for climate-


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
resilient SNRM. These plans are expected guide memb ers/households of these 250 CBO Beneficiaries to 
scale up climate-resilient SNRM within their commun ities in a coordinated manner. 
During the planning and mainstreaming of climate-re silient SLM into CBO management plans, planned 
interventions will be screened for risks following FAO´s environmental and social screening checklist and 
process (described in Chapter 6.1 in greater detail ). Sub-components where possible environmental and social 
risks have been identified will be considered in en vironmental and social management plans (ESMP) that  
include information on the mitigation measures, ind icators, responsibilities and timeframe where the 
completion of such measures are expected. See the p roject´s ESMF (Annex 4.1) for more detailed informa tion.  
 
COMPONENT3. IMPROVING KNOWLEDGE, AWARENESS AND LOCA L CAPACITY FOR CLIMATE-
RESILIENT SNRM 
59. Component 3 will improve awareness of climate c hange threats and build capacities to continuously monitor climate 
change and vulnerability at the provincial, local ( rural municipality) and CBO level. It will further raise awareness of suitable 
low carbon and climate-resilient practices that are  adapted to local conditions and differentiated vul nerabilities and 
contexts. It is closely linked with Component 2, wi th a stronger focus on improving knowledge, strengt hening extension 
services and improving the dissemination of informa tion to support awareness raising and the enhanceme nt of adaptive 
capacities. This is crucial to the broader process of transforming the way communities manage natural resources within 
the Project Area.  
60. The project places a strong emphasis on strengt hening local extension services to support widespre ad adoption of project-
promoted practices during and beyond the project im plementation period. Among other support, the proje ct will equip 
government extension staff with the skills and mate rials needed to promote climate-resilient SNRM. The  Provincial 
Ministries that (as a result of the ongoing decentr alization process) are taking over responsibility f or such services have 
indicated their intention to continue financing rur al extension capacity and the provision of climate- informed extension 
services, both during the project (as evidenced by the government’s co-financing commitment outlined i n Annex 3.2) and 
after project closure. As part of the proposed proj ect, FAO also commits to work with these government  actors to mobilize 
the funds needed to sustain such services (includin g through the Churia Master Plan) – a key element o f the process of 
transforming land use and natural resource manageme nt in the Churia region. 
61. While the project aims to strengthen coordinati on and the use of networks for vertical and horizon tal information and 
knowledge dissemination, there is also a need to es tablish a formal mechanism to monitor climate chang e and natural 
resource management in the Project Area, and to sha re knowledge and information, such as templates for  operational 
guidelines, success stories/lessons learned, action  plans and strategies, among other documents. Compo nent 3 therefore 
aims to establish a systematic knowledge and inform ation sharing and monitoring mechanism concerning c limate-resilient 
SNRM: The Churia Knowledge Centre (CKC). CKC will s erve as a comprehensive resource including a databa se of 
natural resources – including soil, water, ecosyste ms and forests – to support informed policy-/decisi on-making and 
planning, and knowledge-sharing mechanisms. The CKC  will include an online digital platform and will f urther have 
regional representation within MoITFE´s Science Env ironment and Climate Change Division in each provin ce, serving as 
a provincial knowledge hub, where IT and computer e xperts are employed. The CKC will play a crucial ro le in enabling 
local stakeholders to continue delivering (and even  scale up) climate-informed extension services to f armers and other 
land users after project closure, and in areas in P rovinces 1, 2 and 3 that are beyond the Project Are a.The MoITFEs in 
each province have expressed strong support for the  establishment of the CKC, and a willingness to ope rate and maintain 
them during and after the project. 
62. Sub-Component 3.1 – Local knowledge on climate-resi lient SNRM is enhanced.  This Sub-Component will collect 
and analyse existing local and indigenous knowledge  about climate-resilient SNRM in the Project Area, and support the 
effective dissemination of this knowledge. In so do ing, this Sub-Component will catalyse broader inter est in climate-
resilient SNRM among communities in the Project Are a, thereby reinforcing interest in engaging in Comp onent 1 Activities 
(the implementation of which will coincide with awa reness-raising Activities under this Sub-Component)  as well as in 
scaling up climate-resilient SNRM beyond the scope of the direct support provided by the Project. 
a) Activity 3.1.1 – Equip LRPs with best practices on climate-resilient SNRM from local experience, 
including indigenous knowledge. Under this Activity, project staff will gather loca l and indigenous knowledge 
on climate-resilient SNRM, and distil this informat ion into user-friendly guidelines for LRPs and othe r local 
stakeholders to train and support CBO members to ad opt such practices during and beyond the project. T o


---
*Page 42*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
do so, project staff will start by recruiting quali fied service providers to organize 105 local/commun ity 
consultations 38  (about 4 consultations in each of the 26 targeted river systems) to better understand and 
consolidate traditional knowledge on climate resili ence and SNRM. Project staff will then develop a 
compendium of local and indigenous knowledge based on these local-level consultations, and subsequentl y 
organize five provincial-level workshops to review and validate this compendium, drawing on additional  
information from civil society organizations (CSOs) , development cooperation partners and government 
officials. Once the compendium of local and indigen ous knowledge is validated at the provincial-level 
workshops, project staff will recruit a qualified s ervice provider to develop best practice guidelines  for LRPs to 
assist them in promoting and training CBO members o n climate-resilient SNRM. These guidelines will dra w in 
part on the compendium of local and indigenous know ledge, as well as additional information about less ons 
learnt and best practices from other projects and p rogrammes that have been implemented in the Project  Area.  
b) Activity 3.1.2 – Raise awareness on climate-resilie nt SNRM through local schools, media and intra-
regional exchange. Under this Activity, project staff will organize aw areness raising campaigns to promote 
climate-resilient SNRM, and increase interest in su ch practices among communities and households livin g 
throughout the Project Area. Project staff will sta rt by recruiting a qualified service provider to de velop a 
knowledge dissemination and communication plan. Wor king with local and provincial governments, NGOs, 
indigenous people’s federations, Dalit organization s, women’s organizations and others, the service pr ovider 
will establish methods for widespread dissemination  of project-generated information (including that w hich is 
developed under Sub-Component 3.1, as well as the i nformation contained in the CKC established under S ub-
Component 3.3) via these entities’ respective netwo rks. Project staff will subsequently recruit a serv ice 
provider to develop curricula on climate-resilient SNRM for local high school students. Project staff will then 
work with schools in the Project Area to establish student-run eco-clubs and organize 260 awareness-ra ising 
sessions for the eco-club members. To further raise  awareness within the Project Area, project staff w ill recruit 
service providers to develop and broadcast 119 loca l-level radio programmes on climate change risks an d 
climate-resilient SNRM. These radio programmes will  be adapted to the local contexts in which they wil l be 
broadcast, drawing on the insights gained from the CERP process (under Activity 2.1.2) and the local a nd 
indigenous knowledge gathered under Activity 3.1.1) . Finally, to enhance awareness of climate-resilien t SNRM 
among local governments – whose buy-in and support are essential to the longer-term process of transfo rming 
land-use practices and natural resource management in the Project Area – project staff will organize 2 8 
exchange visits within Nepal for local government a uthorities (“Professional Beneficiaries”) to demons trate 
good practices related to technical implementation of climate-resilient SNRM and extension processes t hrough 
which to promote such practices. 
63. Sub-Component 3.2 – The extension system is equippe d to promote climate-resilient SNRM.  This Sub-Component 
will ensure that recent projections on climate chan ge impacts and appropriate response measures (inclu ding local and 
indigenous knowledge) are integrated into the exten sion system in the Project Area. It will ensure tha t extension workers 
and trainers are equipped to promote climate-resili ent SNRM, and can scale up the provision of climate  change-informed 
extension services to ensure local communities, far mers and other land users are able to benefit from such services during 
and after the project. 
a) Activity 3.2.1 – Develop 10 modules on climate-resi lient SNRM to be used by extension workers, 
including in the farmer field schools. This Activity will ensure that government extension  workers have 
locally-adapted training modules to be used when tr aining farmers and other land users to adopt projec t-
promoted climate-resilient SNRM practices. Project staff will develop 10 training modules to be used b y 
government personnel and extension workers during a nd beyond the project, including for trainings on f armer 
field schools. Project staff will also recruit a qu alified service provider to translate these modules  in local 
languages to ensure they cater to local needs. Proj ect staff will ensure these modules draw on the fea sibility 
work done for this project, as well as the insights  gained from the CERP process (under Activity 2.1.2 ) and the 
collection of local and indigenous knowledge (under  Activity 3.1.1). The modules will cover sensitisat ion and 
extension processes for rural communities and benef iciaries including implementation planning, self-le arning, 
quality assurance and incentive structures, and wil l support the facilitation of all key interventions  under 
Component 1. 
                                                                 
38  Adapted based on an approach piloted for the Gover nment of Nepal´s study on ´Indigenous and Local Kno wledge and Practices 
for Climate Resilience in Nepal´ (2015).


---
*Page 43*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
b) Activity 3.2.2 – Enhance and deliver quality extension services on c limate -resilient SNRM to 
households. The extension system plays a crucial role in shapin g how farmers, forest users and communities 
use land and other natural resources in the Project  Area. To promote lasting and sustainable behavouri al 
change, it is therefore essential to scale up the d elivery of high-quality, climate-informed extension  services in 
all 26 targeted river systems. Under Activity 3.2.2 , project staff will therefore organize 78 training  events during 
which they will train government extension workers and LRPs (“Professional Beneficiaries”) to understa nd and 
apply the 10 training modules developed under Activ ity 3.2.1. In total, these trainings are expected t o benefit 
approximately 2,340 extension workers and LRPs (abo ut 30 at each of the 78 training events). Under thi s 
Activity, the project will also cover the financing  of improved and climate-informed extension service s within 
the Project Area. MoFE co-financing will be used to  engage the services of provincial-level extension workers 
(on secondment with MoITFE and MoALMC) to specifica lly support the delivery of climate-informed extens ion 
modules and support under the BRCRN project. These extension workers will directly support delivery of  
project-financed trainings and extension & advisory  services under Component 1. They will also provide  
ongoing advice, guidance and support to CBOs throug hout the project implementation period to enable th e 
continued adoption and use of climate-resilient SNR M practices promoted by the project, including amon g 
households who were not selected by their CBOs to d irectly participate in formal trainings organized b y the 
project. By building the capacity of local extensio n workers and drawing on their existing insights an d networks, 
the project expects to generate high adoption rates  among CBOs. This approach will also ensure that th e 
provincial governments are well equipped to continu e providing climate-informed extension services in the 
Project Area after project closure – thereby increa sing the prospects for scaling up and out that are so 
important to the broader process of sector transfor mation that this project aims to set in motion. 
Activity 3.2.3 – Establish and operate the Churia K nowledge Centre (CKC) in each province to enable 
continuous delivery of climate-informed extension s ervices and planning, and to monitor 
implementation and results of CERPs and CBO managem ent plans. To effectively provide climate 
change-informed extension and advisory services bey ond project closure, the government requires a user -
friendly platform to store relevant knowledge and t raining materials, as well as the latest data and t ools to track 
evolving climate change impacts and the state of na tural resources within the Project Area. Project st aff will 
therefore recruit qualified service providers to de sign and establish the CKC. This online platform wi ll include 
a database of natural resources within the Project Area (including soils and forests), as well as prov ide a 
centralized and easily-accessible repository for pr oject-generated information, knowledge, guidelines and 
materials. This is also expected to include relevan t hydro-meteorological data and information from DH M, with 
which the project will actively consult during the delivery of this Activity (and others). In addition , the CKC will 
be used to facilitate participatory monitoring of t he impact of project Activities (as described in Se ction H.2). 
The service providers will also establish regional CKC hubs in the MoITFE offices in provinces 1, 2 an d 3, 
specifically within the Science, Environment and Cl imate Change Division. This platform will not only underpin 
the delivery of climate-informed extension services , but will also enable government and other stakeho lders to 
continuously monitor the evolving impacts and needs  in the 26 targeted river systems, and update relev ant 
plans and support programmes/services accordingly. 
Once the CKC is established, project staff will org anize one national training and three provincial tr ainings to 
build the capacity of Professional Beneficiaries on  the CKC online platform and regional hubs. The thr ee 
provincial trainings will focus in particular on bu ilding the capacity of MoITFE staff in each of the provincial 
CKC hubs to operate the CKC. To complement this sup port, project staff will develop manuals, protocols  and 
guidelines will be developed to guide provincial st aff on CKC knowledge generation, gathering and 
management, including after project completion. Thi s will include the development of Standard Operatin g 
Procedures (SOPs), which will be agreed with MoITFE  to ensure the provincial CKC hubs are well operate d 
and maintained beyond project closure. Project staf f will also train relevant MoITFE staff on these pr otocols, 
guidelines and SOPs in PY7 to build their capacity to continue operating the CKC, and ensure it fulfil s its role 
as a repository to support climate-informed extensi on services and planning into the future.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor(Executing Entity)  
64. The Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) 39  will be an Executing Entity for the BRCRN project (legally one of 
two “co-EEs” for this project along with the FAO TA  Team). MoFE is responsible for the conservation, d evelopment, use, 
and sustainable management of forests (which is the  predominant land use in the Churia). The Ministry is also in charge 
of REDD+ in Nepal, and hosts the REDD+ Implementati on Centre (RIC). In addition, MoFE has experience a nd expertise 
in successfully implementing projects related to th e main thematic areas of intervention under this pr oject, for example, 
SNRM and ecosystem restoration in the Churia region . MoFE is thus well placed to play a central role i n the delivery of 
the proposed project. As co-Executing Entity, MoFE will manage a large proportion of the GCF grant res ources, as well 
as the co-financing that it is mobilizing for the B RCRN project. MoFE has considerable experience mana ging projects of 
this size and nature, including: the Multi-Partner Forestry Project (MFSP); Hariyo Ban project; Buildi ng Climate Resilience 
of Watersheds in Mountain Eco-Regions; Adaptation f or Smallholder in Hilly Areas (ASHA); Sustainable L and 
Management in Churia region; and the Terai Arc Land scape Program. In addition, MoFE is the lead EE for  the 
implementation of the USD 24 million World Bank For est Investment Programme (FIP) in Nepal. In line wi th its internal 
procedures, FAO commissioned a capacity assessment of MoFE during the preparation of the BRCRN project . This 
assessment found MoFE to be a low-risk partner, and  thus very well placed to serve as the Executing En tity for the project. 
Through the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the m inistry will coordinate with other relevant sector Ministries to ensure 
synergies for transformational change. MoFE’s Gende r Focal Point will also play an important role in c oordinating with the 
project management unit, and participating in PSC e nsuring that gender concerns are adequately address ed, and closely 
monitored. Additional information on MoFE´s role an d capacity to deliver is provided in Sections C.7 a nd E.4.2, and in 
Feasibility Study Section 8. 
65. A FAO Technical Capacity Development Team  will also support execution of the project as a co -Executing Entity. The 
Technical Capacity Development Team will deliver ta rgeted technical assistance to support delivery of project activities 
by MoFE (as co-EE), and maintain responsibility and /or controls over international tenders and procure ment requiring 
expert/requiring technical oversight. Under this ar rangement, project execution will benefit from FAO’ s considerable 
technical expertise while ensuring that most projec t management responsibility remains with MoFE, thus  ensuring efficient 
project delivery. In addition, this arrangement wil l reinforce efforts to build the technical capacity  of MoFE and other entities 
involved in project delivery, improving their abili ty to sustain benefit streams and scale up support after project closure. 
The team will further include gender and safeguard specialists, who will oversee that gender, indigeno us peoples and 
Dalits concerns are adequately addressed, and close ly monitored. The work of the FAO Technical Capacit y Development 
Team will be kept separate from FAO’s Accredited En tity functions. This is further described in Sectio n C.7 below. These 
co-Executing Entity functions will be anchored in t he FAO office in Nepal. FAO has been working in Nep al since 1951 and 
has extensive expertise in delivering projects of l arge scale on agricultural development, climate cha nge and disaster risk 
management.  The FAO country office in Nepal addres ses four priority areas of food and nutrition secur ity and safety, 
institutional and policy support, market orientatio n and competitiveness, and natural resources conser vation and 
utilization. Since its inception in Nepal, FAO has completed over 400 projects in Nepal and has made m ajor achievements 
related to policy dialogue and formulation support,  technical assistance and capacity building, nation al data and 
information management, and innovative technology t ransfer.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Not applicable. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applica ble)  
66. For activities relating to procurement of goods  and services through FAO, according to the Standar d Basic Assistance 
Agreement signed with the Government of Nepal, Sect ion 7 of the Convention on the Privileges and Immun ities of the 
United Nations provide that the United Nations and its subsidiary organs are exempt from all direct ta xes, except for 
utilities services, and is exempt from customs duti es and charged of a similar nature in respect of it ems imported or 
exported for its official use. If the services are procured directly by the Government of Nepal, then national procedures 
apply.  
 
                                                                 
39  Formerly the Ministry of Forests and Soil Conserva tion


---
*Page 45*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s 
67. The institutional framework for this project wi ll engage a wide range of stakeholders, ensuring th eir sustained engagement 
from project design to implementation, to monitorin g and evaluation (M&E).  
68. Nepal´s new governance structure envisions thre e tiers of Government structure (i.e. local, provin cial, national), with fully 
devolved authority to local government to conserve,  monitor, regulate and use natural resources within  its jurisdiction. 
However, to ensure that the BRCRN project is implem ented in accordance with established operational an d financial 
modalities, and in the context of building institut ional capacity of the new provincial government Min istries (particularly 
MoITFEs), the MoFE will function as the Executing E ntity for the project, and the sole government enti ty responsible for 
management of all activities implemented through go vernment institutions. MoFE will not sub-delegate o r transfer GCF 
grant resources to any other government entity. 
 
Figure 7: BRCRN project governance and reporting ar rangements 
 
69. FAO will serve as the Accredited Entity for the  BRCRN project.As such, FAO will be resposible for the overall management 
of this project, including: (i) all aspects of proj ect appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and t echnical oversight and 
supervision throughout project implementation; (iii ) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver  results and achieve 
objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project mo nitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and 
(v) project closure and evaluation. FAO will assume  these responsibilities in accordance with the deta iled provisions 
outlined in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA ) between FAO and GCF. Accountability on the use of  financial 
resources will be facilitated through the review of  annual and bi-annual project reports, as well as t hrough audit and 
monitoring reports. 
70. To perform these Accredited Entity functions, F AO will set up a dedicated FAO-GCF project supervis ion team comprising 
relevant staff from the FAO Country Office in Nepal , the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific,  and FAO 
Headquarters. Members of this project supervision t eam will perform the necessary supervision and over sight functions, 
including supervision and backstopping missions dur ing the entire implementation period, as required. The project 
supervision team will remain independent of the Exe cuting Entity functions also performed by FAO (see below). In line Green Climate Fund
(GCF)
ACCREDITED 
ENTITY
FAO-GCF Project 
Supervision Team
Financial Flow
Financial Reporting
Progress Reporting
AdvisingCO-EXECUTING ENTITY
Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE)
Project Management Unit (PMU)
Based in MoFE
Ministry of Finance 
(MoF) Co-Executing 
Entity
FAO Technical 
Capacity 
Development Team
Provincial 
Project 
Management 
Unit (PPMU)
Based in 
MoITFE 1Provincial 
Project 
Management 
Unit (PPMU)
Based in 
MoITFE 2Provincial 
Project 
Management 
Unit (PPMU)
Based in 
MoITFE 3Project Steering Committee (PSC)
Host: MoFE
Chair: Secretary of MoFE
PCU 
Province 1PCU 
Province 2PCU 
Province 3


---
*Page 46*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
with the GCF policy on fees adopted through GCF Boa rd Decision B.19/09, the above-mentioned segregatio n of 
responsibilities within FAO will ensure that the Or ganization can independently and effectively perfor m the types of 
Accredited Entity functions listed in the GCF General principles and indicative list of eligible costs covered under GCF 
fees and project management costs . 
71. FAO as AE will transfer GCF funds to MOFE throu gh the Ministry of Finance (MOF) that, as per Gover nment of Nepal’s 
procedures, is the only ministry with the authority  to accept funds from interantional partners and ch annel them to line 
ministries. A tripartite Operational Partner Agreem ent (OPA) between FAO, MOF and MOFE will be signed to govern this 
arrangement. 
72. Both MOFE and the FAO Technical Capacity Develo pment Team (as co-EEs) can enter into contrats and/ or Letters of 
Agreement (LoAs) with qualified service providers t o support delivery of some activities. The Governme nt of Nepal 
procurement rules as per the Public Procurement Act  2007 and Public Procurement Regulation 2007 will g overn MOFE’s 
contractual arrangements with the Service Providers . FAO procurement procedures will govern the FAO Te chnical 
Capacity Development Team’s contractual arrangement s with the Service Providers. 
 
Figure 8: Project management, financial flow and co ntractual arrangements 
 
Project Coordination and Management 
73. MoFE will establish a national Project Steering Committee (PSC)  chaired by the Secretary of MoFE. This committee w ill 
be comprised of joint-secretary level representativ e members from relevant federal ministries, provinc ial ministries, FAO 
(in its role as Accredited Entity), as well as a me mber secretary of PCTMCDB. PSC will also invite rep resentatives from 
relevant CSOs, the private sector and academia as n ecessary to discuss thematic issues as well as part nership 
opportunities.  PSC´s main responsibility will be to provide strat egic guidance and support coordination among govern ment 
institutions, and will provide general oversight fo r the implementation of the project. The committee will further be 
responsible for revising and approving annual worki ng plans and budgets, and mobilizing relevant techn ical expertise BeneficiariesGreen Climate Fund 
(GCF)FAO-GCF Project Supervision Team
(AE role)
Flow of fuds
Delivery of SupportMinistry of Forests and Environment (co-EE)
Project Management Unit (PMU)
Based in MoFEMinistry of FinanceFAO Technical 
Capacity 
Development Team
(co-EE)
PPMU – Province 1
Based in MoITFE 1
Provincial government 
authoritiesLocal government 
authoritiesCommunity-based 
organizations (CBOs)PPMU – Province 2
Based in MoITFE 2PPMU – Province 3
Based in MoITFE 3Service providersGoverned by AMA 
and FAA.
Internal to 
FAO. Legal 
agreement 
notrequired.Governed by a tripartite Operational Partners 
Agreement (‘Subsidiary Agreement’) between 
FAO, MOF and MOFE. MOF involvement is due to 
the fact that it is the only ministry with the 
authority to accept funds from international 
partners and channel them to line ministries via 
Nepal’s ‘Red Book’ account.
Both co-EEs will enter into 
contracts and/or Letters of 
Agreement with qualified 
service providers to 
support delivery of some 
Activities.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
where necessary. They will approve the Project Impl ementation Manual (PIM) and Project Reporting Guide lines (PRG) 
during the inception phase.PSC meetings will be hel d twice a year: prior to annual budget planning and  after the closure 
of fiscal year. 
74. MoFE will serve as an Executing Entity for the BRCRN project (legally one of the two co-EEs for th is project along with 
the FAO TA Team, as described below). In this capac ity, MoFE will also establish and host a Project Management Unit 
(PMU)  at the federal level. It will be headed by a full- time National Project Director (NPD), appointed by MoFE in 
consultation with the PSC, and will include three p rovincial-level support teams, termed Provincial Project Management 
Units (PPMUs) – one in each of Provinces 1, 2 and 3. The PMU will  be responsible for implementation of project activ ities 
according to annual work plans and budgets submitte d to, and approved by, the PSC. Once approved by th e PSC, these 
works plans and budgets will be submitted to the FA O project supervision team (FAO’s Accredited Entity  role) for final 
review and endorsement before proceeding with execu tion of activities for that particular year. The PM U will also prepare 
and submit to the PSC annual progress reports to tr ack performance against project targets, and agains t the targets of 
the Gender Action Plan, Indigenous Peoples Planning  Framework and ESMF. These reports will also be sub mitted to the 
FAO project supervision team for review and endorse ment. In the inception phase, the PMU will develop a detailed work 
plan and monitoring framework for the full project duration, and the PIM and PRG, for submission and a pproval by the 
PSC before they are submitted to the FAO project su pervision team for final review/endorsement. These will govern the 
roles of all responsible institutions and project s takeholders, including in terms of procurement, mon itoring, reporting and 
auditing. 
75. The PPMUs will be hosted in the provincial Mini stries of Industry, Tourism, Forests and Environmen t (MoITFE), but will 
remain directly accountable to the PMU under MoFE a t the federal level, and operate according to the r egulations and 
guidance set out in the PIM and PRG. These teams wi ll be responsible for coordinating the development of provincial 
work plans, in consultation with the Provincial Coo rdination Units (PCUs, see below), for delivery and  oversight of project 
activities at the province and local level, for dev elopment of quarterly progress reports and their su bmission to the PMU. 
76. In addition to the above project coordination a nd management structures, FAO will establish a Tech nical Capacity 
Development Team to support effective and technical ly sound delivery of the BRCRN project. The FAO Technical 
Capacity Development Team  will serve as a co-Executing Entity that will:(i) deliver targeted technical assistance to 
complement and support Activities executed primaril y by MoFE (i.e. by executing specific technically s pecialized 
actions/budget lines under Activities that are othe rwise executed by MoFE); (ii) lead the execution of  highly technically 
specialized activities (e.g. Activities 3.2.1 and 3 .2.3); and (iii) maintain responsibility and/or con trols over international 
tenders and procurement requiring expert/requiring technical oversight. In addition, the FAO Technical  Capacity 
Development team will recruit a qualified procureme nt advisory/support service to assist MoFE with the ir procurement 
actions to ensure adherence with international stan dards. This team will operate under the supervision  of the FAO-GCF 
project supervision team (described above) to ensur e FAO’s Accredited Entity and co-Executing Entity f unctions are kept 
separate from one another. Detailed information on the specific activities and budget items for which the FAO Technical 
Capacity Development Team will be responsible is in cluded in the detailed budget in Annex 3 – Integrat ed Financial 
Model. 
 
Multi-stakeholder Coordination Units 
77. Provincial Coordination Units (PCUs)  will be established in each of the three provinces , and will be chaired by the 
Secretary of the provincial MoITFE . Each PCU will include representative members (Under  Secretary level) from other 
relevant provincial ministries, departments, CSOs ( including women´s organizations, indigenous people’ s federations and 
representatives, and Dalit organizations, among oth ers) and private sector representatives, with the c oordinator of the 
PPMU acting as PCU Secretary. PCUs will serve as mu lti-sectoral and multi-stakeholder committees to de velop proposals 
for provincial work plans, with guidance from the P MU and PPMU and according to the PIM and PRG. Each PCU will 
convene on a quarterly basis to review project prog ress against provincial targets, ensure coordinatio n of project activities 
with those of provincial institutions and provincia l policy and legislative priorities, and communicat e provincial-level 
concerns and issues to the PMU. The PCUs are a key part of the project’s exit strategy. During the sec ond half of the 
project timeframe, and based on the recommendations  of the independent mid-term evaluation, the PPMUs will work with 
provincial stakeholders towards handover of project  technical and operational support structures to th e PCUs.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Other key actors and entities involved in the project  
78. The Ministry of Finance (MoF)  is the National Designated Authority (NDA) for the  GCF in Nepal. In line with government 
regulations and procedures, MoF will channel projec t finance from FAO (as Accredited Entity) to MoFE ( as the Executing 
Entity) for project execution, and will contribute to reviewing financial reporting. As part of the PS C, MoF will also contribute 
to oversight of project management in its capacity as the NDA. The Ministry as long-standing experienc e managing project 
finance from international development projects. 
79. The Ministry of Agriculture, Land Management and Cooper atives (MoALMC)  will play an important role supporting 
and guiding interventions targeting the agricultura l sector. MoALMC currently oversees agricultural la nd management, the 
establishment of cooperatives and agricultural exte nsion, which will have an important role in plannin g processes for 
climate-resilient SNRM, the implementation of clima te resilient land use practices in the agricultural  sector, and in 
supporting the activities underComponent1. 
80. The Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI) 40  will support interventions related to sustainable 
water resource management and alternative renewable  energy (biogas) through the provision of technical  support. 
81. The Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Administrat ion  (MoFAGA)will contribute to improving coordination 
between national ministries and local and provincia l governments, especially ensuring alignment with t he BRCRN and 
provincial level policies and decision-making. 
82. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) will support interventions related to disaster risk  reduction planning under 
Component3 through the provision of technical suppo rt by the Disaster Management Section of the Minist ry.  
83. Provincial Ministries of Industry, Tourism, Forests  and Environment (MoITFE) in Provinces 1, 2 and 3will act as 
hosts of the PPMUs and chairs of the PCUs (as descr ibed above), and will be the recipients of institut ional capacity 
building efforts at the provincial level along with  other provincial stakeholders, contributing to the  sustainability of project 
outcomes and impact. MoFE will also use a portion o f its co-financing to enlist the services of MoITFE  extension workers 
to support a selection of trainings under the proje ct.  
84. Local governments  (i.e. rural municipalities) will benefit from BRCR N capacity building interventions, including to dev elop 
their competence in planning and implementation of climate-resilient SNRM and DRR. Local governments w ill also support 
PPMUs to coordinate project activities at the local  level, and facilitate alignment of project activit ies with local development 
plans and budgets.  
85. Community-based organizations (CBOs)  such as Community Forest Users Groups (CFUGs), Col laborative Forest User 
Groups, Pro-Poor Leasehold Forest User Groups, Publ ic Land Forest User Groups, Indigenous Peoples’ Org anisations, 
Soil Conservation User Groups and Farmer Groups pla y important roles in managing natural resources in the Churia 
region. CBOs and their members are the main benefic iaries of the project. A detailed overview of these  groups is included 
in Feasibility Study Section 4. 
86. Private forest owners:  Private forest owners will be engaged in Component  1, with a focus on trainings and capacity 
building on climate-resilient forestry practices.  
87. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) will support activities that strengthen and empower  communities and CBOs on 
topics related to SNRM and climate change, providin g extension services to local communities, supporti ng institutional 
strengthening and acting as key actors to support k nowledge dissemination. Examples of CSOs to engage include NEFIN, 
forest user group federations (e.g. FECOFUN, ACOFUN ), pro-poor leasehold forest user groups, women’s o rganizations 
(e.g. HIMAWANTI, NIWF) and organizations representi ng ethnic minorities and marginalized groups (e.g. DANAR, 
FEDO), among others.  Some CSOs may also be engaged  as service providers through Letters of Agreement (LoAs), as 
appropriate.  
88. PrivateSector Actors: BRCRN project aims to further strengthen cooperatio n with the private sector in the promotion of 
sustainable value chains and capacity building, amo ng other activities.  
89. Research and Academic Entities:  To be engaged in various project activities as app ropriate, through LoAs, to help 
generate and disseminate relevant knowledge and res earch outcomes on climate change, climate-resilient  land use and 
DRR in the Churia Region.  
 
                                                                 
40  Formerly the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry o f Water Supply & Sanitation


---
*Page 49*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 11 7 
 
 C 
Fund mobilization procedure  
90. Every year the PMU will prepare the annual work  plan and budget, including a procurement plan, whi ch will be approved 
by the PSC. The work plan and budget will draw on t he discussions at provincial level and proposals of  the PCUs, as 
communicated to the PMU by the PPMUs.  Based on the  approval of this plan, FAO will transfer funds acc ording to its 
covenants, rules and standards, to MoF. MoF will co nfirm these funds in the ‘Red Book’ system of budge t management 
and transfer to MoFE accordingly. 
91. According to FAO internal procedures and the Op erational Partners Agreement (OPA) negotiated with MoFE, FAO will 
maintain controls over any funds related to interna tional tenders, provision of expert advisory servic es, and goods or 
equipment for which technical specifications or qua lity assurance is required.  Such procurement will be conducted or 
technically overseen by the FAO Technical Capacity Development team directly as part of the TA service s to the project.  
92. GCF grant finance allocated to the PMU within M oFE according to annual ‘Red Book’ Government accou nts, will be the 
responsibility of the NPD and PMU staff.  As part o f MoFE and the PMU structure, PPMUs will have acces s to funds for 
implementation of provincial and local-level interv entions according to provincial work plans. These f unds will be mobilized 
directly by PPMUs, in their capacity as out-posted units of MoFE, and will not be transferred for any purposes to other 
government or non-government entities at provincial  or local levels.  
 
 
C.8. TIMETABLE OF PROJECT/PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
93. Project components and activities rely on seque ntial implementation of activities and measures, wh ere 
activities under Components 2 and 3 will form the b asis for the implementation of investments in clima te-
resilient land use under Component 1. Such measures  are important to address the barriers described 
above, and to establish capacities, tools and mater ials to facilitate the effective and efficient impl ementation 
and scaling up of climate-resilient SNRM practices.  The detailed timetable for project implementation is 
presented in Annex6.


---
*Page 50*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
D.1.Value Added for GCF Involvement    
94. GCF support will be instrumental for enhancing the climate resilience of ecosystems and vulnerable  communities 
in Nepal’s Churia region through integrated climate -resilient SNRM approaches. Nepal´s NDC discusses t he 
country´s strategy and commitments to climate chang e, yet notes the need for additional technical and financial 
support to fully implement its NDC. This project is  fully aligned with the NDC.   
95. Nepal´s adaptation needs cannot be addressed throug h government expenditure alone . The country is still 
recovering from a devastating earthquake in 2015 th at led to substantial loss of life and damage to pr oductive 
assets. Budget constraints due to post-earthquake r ecovery continue to limit the ability of the govern ment to finance 
interventions to address climate change in the Chur ia region. 41  The country´s economy is also still recovering fro m 
a fuel crisis and extreme flooding in 2017.Thus, Ne pal will need considerable grant financing to fund development 
priorities in the medium term.  
96. Nepal’s social and economic development challenges further exacerbate the vulnerability of its populat ion . 
The Gross National Income per capita (purchasing po wer parity) is $2,500, and 25% of the country’s pop ulation 
lives below the poverty line 42 .  Over 70% of its population lives in rural areas and approximately 46% are 
unemployed 43 . While about 1/6 of its population are food insecu re, the situation is particularly acute in hilly re gions, 
including the Churia. Vulnerability situation is fu rther compounded by the dependence of rural communi ties on a 
fragile/deteriorating natural resource base which w ill worsen with climate change. 
97. GCF financial support would allow Nepal to invest i n climate action at an opportune time , and avoid predicted 
higher costs associated with delayed responses to c limate change. As much of the population is depende nt on 
natural resources, the proposed project will suppor t local people and governments to adopt climate-res ilient land 
use practices, strengthening their resilience to cl imate change through improved adaptive capacities. 
98. GCF support will be instrumental for establishing c limate-resilient land use planning and management a s 
the central paradigm for promoting climate resilien ce in broader national, provincial and local policy making 
and planning .  By providing an opportunity to incentivize and s cale up Nepal’s flagship, broad-based, 
transformational community-based natural resource m anagement models across the Churia, the project wil l add 
further momentum to Nepal’s current efforts to tran sition towards resilient, inclusive, low-carbon dev elopment. 
Given Nepal’s political transition, the project fur ther represents an opportune moment to establish ca pacities on 
climate-resilient land use planning and management and DRR, as well as mainstream climate change mitig ation 
and adaptation into provincial and local strategies  and plans.  
99. The GCF support is also noteworthy in terms of the catalytic impact it will have in bringing together cross-
sectoral landscape-level climate-resilient planning  across a region comprising more than 720,620 ha an d a 
population of over 3.2 million people  (of which 51% of inhabitants are women, 31% indige nous peoples and 13% 
Dalits). 44 Successful demonstration of this landscape-scale, ecosystem-based approach  in the Churia region will 
provide a model for integrated, cross-sectoral  climate change adaptation for adoption in the othe r regions as well. 
Improved planning at the provincial and local level  will promote improved coordination between upstream and 
downstream communities , ensuring that a holistic management approach is p romoted that takes into 
consideration the inter-connectedness of ecosystems  and land use systems.  
100. BRCRN project activities will crowd-in public finan cing and mobilize community-level investments for 
climate-resilient land use . Government co-financing demonstrates the governme nt’s commitment to invest in 
climate-resilient land use. Improved extension modu les and support, knowledge dissemination and demons trable 
activities will encourage CBOs and farmers to inves t in improved practices. Public-private-CSO platfor m will support 
opportunities for the private sector to become enga ged in climate-resilient value chains, and strength en 
coordination with the public sector, CSOs and CBOs.   It is highly complementary to the Forest Investme nt Program 
(FIP), as well as the proposed REDD+ Emissions Redu ction Program, among others. 
101. The BRCRN project will have a trans-boundary impact , providing positive environmental, social and econ omic 
benefits to downstream communities, including in No rthern India where many of the Churia´s rivers flow . Particularly 
in the monsoon season, the degree of runoff and sed imentation from the Churia hills and swells in rive r flows can 
be controlled by SNRM – ultimately reducing the imp act of floods.


---
*Page 51*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
                                                                 
41  IMF 2017 
42 ADB 2017 
43 World Factbook - https://www.cia.gov/library/public ations/the-world-factbook/geos/np.html  
44 Note: Excluding water bodies and settlements, the p roject area covers 702,011 ha. D.2. Exit Strategy  
102. The proposed project has been developed throug h ongoing consultations with government representativ es  
from relevant ministries and departments to ensure ownership over the project and ensure that it is cl osely aligned 
with government policies and plans, and that projec t activities support medium- and long-term planning  to ensure 
the project´s sustainability and continued progress  towards mainstreaming climate-resilience in Nepal.  
103. By aligning the project with key national climate poli cies, priorities, and commitments , including Nepal´s 
NDC and the 20-year Churia Master Plan, the chances  of its continuity after GCF investment are very hi gh. 
Improving natural resource management, adapting to and mitigation climate change, and enhancing liveli hoods of 
local communities are explicit goals of Nepal’s pol itical leadership. As such, the Government of Nepal  is a strong 
proponent of the project’s interventions and contin uity. The proposed project is expected to contribut e to 
mainstreaming climate change considerations and sup port for climate-resilient SNRM into the implementa tion of 
the Churia Master Plan, which would leverage additi onal resources to sustain and scale up the process of 
transforming natural resource management in the Chu ria region beyond project closure. The successful 
implementation of the proposed project would also p rovide a framework for the Government of Nepal to s ecure the 
additional external funds needed to bridge the fina ncial gap towards the full implementation of the Ch uria Master 
Plan.  
104. The long-term sustainability of project interv entions is further enhanced by the project’s focus on individual and 
institutional capacity building  with key stakeholders at all levels. Measures focu sed on institutional 
strengthening at the provincial and local level are essential given the political transition, and t he increasing role 
and influence of such organizations over land use p lanning and management. It represents an opportune time to 
establish required capacities and expertise early o n to enable broad awareness on climate change and c limate 
risks, facilitate the use of climate-information in  planning and decision making, and mainstream clima te-resilience 
into local policies and plans as they are being est ablished. The project’s emphasis on capacity develo pment will 
further enhance the sense of ownership of provincia l and local governments during the project life-cyc le as well as 
the ongoing implementation of such activities after  project closure.  
105. Economic sustainability is achieved through th e project’s support for viable, cost-effective and climate-resi lient 
measures that provide tangible benefits.  It is particularly important that the project cove r such up-front adoption 
costs to provide an initial impetus for CBOs and me mber households in vulnerable river systems – who a re often 
averse to risk and change – to adopt project promot ed practices during the project implementation peri od. As 
shown in the financial analysis, all of the propose d investments related to the land-based interventio ns and bio-
engineering structures are financially attractive f rom a land user perspective. The recurrent costs as sociated with 
continued use of project-promoted farming and fores try models are modest and can be covered by benefic iary 
households through increased cashflows due to the p roject interventions. The demonstration plantation and 
protection forest will be maintained by the CBOs an d will require limited labor inputs until the reven ues occur and 
recover the investment costs. FAO and MoFE expect t hat additional CBOs and member households intereste d in 
adopting such practices beyond the scope of the pro ject could cover such costs through a combination o f own 
resources and those made available through governme nt initiatives such as the Churia Master Plan. The 
institutionalization of trainings, and improved kno wledge management will also support sustained adopt ion of 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
106. The water and soil conservation infrastructure  investments will be operated and maintained by CBOs when they 
are built on community-managed land. The project-su pported bio-engineering measures and structures are  mostly 
made from locally available materials, and thus ope rations and maintenance (O&M) costs are expected to  be 
modest. In addition, the structures are all conside red to be durable, thus further contributing to ens uring that O&M 
costs to be borne by CBOs remain sufficiently modes t that they can cover such costs beyond project clo sure – 
particularly given the anticipated increases in rev enue among CBO members due to project-supported pra ctices, 
as well as the anticipated reductions in climate ch ange-related losses and damages due to the below bi o-


---
*Page 52*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
 engineering structures, as well as other resilience -building practices, measures and structures promot ed through 
the BRCRN project.  Selected measures are often com bined with revenue generating activities  to contribute to 
the financial sustainability of such investments (e .g. river bank stabilization with grasses and bambo o/ tree 
planting), as evidenced in the financial and econom ic analysis. 
107. Investments on public land will be maintained by the government institutions responsible for the infrastructure. 
Investments such as farmer field schools and nurser ies will be operated under the responsibility of th e CBOs after 
the project ends and will be supported by the gover nment extension system. 
108. Improvements in extension services (e.g. through strengthening extension materials/ mo dules, training trainers 
and improving access to extension and demonstration  activities) will improve access to knowledge on cl imate 
change and climate resilient land use, both among e xtension services providers and land users. The pro ject 
anticipates that in so doing, it will increase the demand and supply for such services and information  in the broader 
project area, thus increasingly the likelihood that  such knowledge exchange, advisory support and othe r benefit 
streams are sustained (and even scaled up) beyond p roject closure. By building the capacity of local e xtension 
workers and drawing on their existing insights and networks, the project expects to also generate high  adoption 
rates among CBOs. This will be further aided by ens uring the alignment of FFS with CERPs, ensuring tha t FFS 
are strategically established in the most vulnerabl e areas, and provide climate-informed advisory and extension 
services based on priority interventions and local conditions.   
109. In addition, the Government of Nepal is provid ing considerable co-financing to improve the extension system 
throughout project implementation – demonstrating t heir recognition of this pressing need and commitme nt to 
address it – and will be encouraged and actively su pported to mobilize the funds needed to continue th is enhanced 
support beyond project closure.   Provincial Ministries will mobilize their extensi on staff to support FFS  from 
year 3 to the end of the project period. Knowledge management systems (CKC), institutionalization of t rainings, 
development of high-quality training modules on low -GHG and climate-resilient SNRM, and capacity devel opment 
of government staff will facilitate Provincial and Central Government to mobilize the funds needed and  continue 
investment beyond project closure.  This approach w ill also ensure that the provincial governments are  well 
equipped to continue providing climate-informed ext ension services in the Project Area after project c losure – 
thereby increasing the prospects for scaling up and  out that are so important to the broader process o f sector 
transformation that this project aims to set in mot ion.  
110. Ultimately, investments in FFS will address th e main barriers faced by the current system (highli ghted in the FS in 
Table 9 and Box 1) by improving the reach of services in highly vulnerable areas, and i ncreasing the quality 
of trainings  (trained Local Resource Persons, promoted good cli mate-resilient land use practices), and providing 
targeted support for women and excluded/ marginalized groups  (see GAP and IPPF/SIPF for specific 
measures). Farmers participating in FFS will continuously impr ove and consolidate their knowledge and 
skills , including through testing and validating on their  own farmland. The FFS and the practices promoted b y the 
project are economically sustainable . Participation in FFS is voluntary and will employ  locally available resources 
(materials and labour), so economic means will not limit farmers to undertake the improved practices. Moreover, 
the practices promoted improve farmers’ income thro ugh increased productivity, cost savings, or other means. 
FAO experience in the region including in Nepal sho ws a positive rate of farmers adopting new 
technologies/practices through FFS , including among non-participant who observe the b enefits of such 
practices.


---
*Page 53*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
E.1 . Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to  the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and resul t areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
111. The project has been designed to generate posi tive adaptation and mitigation impacts, in line wit h Nepal´s 
National Climate Policy and NDC. 
a) Adaptation:  The BRCRN project will significantly improve the r esilience of ecosystems and 
communities in the Churia region. Through support f or the adoption of climate-resilient land use 
practices, at least 200,681 households (963,268 peo ple, equivalent to about 30% of the inhabitants in 
the project area) in the 26 targeted river systems will become more resilient to short- and medium-ter m 
climate change risks. The project will support enha nced resilience of ecosystems on 270,502 ha of 
land, which will also indirectly reduce vulnerabili ty to climate change-related risks for countless ot her 
inhabitants of the Churia region. In addition, the project will: mainstream gender-sensitive and clima te-
resilient land-use planning and management practice s into key plans at the sub-national level; 
strengthen the capacities of government and other a ctors to provide extension and other advisory 
services that are more responsive to climate change  risks; and significantly improve knowledge and 
awareness of climate change risks and appropriate r esponse measures. In so doing, the BRCRN 
project will indirectly benefit all inhabitants of the project area, which is equivalent to about 3.2 million 
people. 
b) Mitigation:  The BRCRN project will have an impact on GHG emiss ions from the AFOLU sector in 
Nepal. Importantly, the project is expected to sign ificantly reduce deforestation and forest degradati on 
and improve forest management in the project area. The project will also: support the restoration and 
sustainable management of degraded forests, wetland s and grassland ecosystems; support tree 
planting on degraded or non-forested land; and scal e up the adoption of climate-resilient agriculture 
and land management practices that (inter alia) enh ance carbon sequestration in soils. Assuming an 
80 percent adoption rate, the project will therefor e deliver average annual emissions reductions of 
574,180tCO 2eq, which is equivalent to about 11.48 million tCO 2eq over the 20-year lifetime of the 
project. 
112. The project Components and Activities are comp lementary and collectively will achieve impacts on the ground and 
beyond project timeframe. In the first two years of  the project, activities within Component 2 will fo cus on 
strengthening local and provincial institutions and  supporting operational planning at the local level  within each of 
the project´s 26 target river systems and mainstrea ming climate-resilient land use planning at the pro vincial, local 
(i.e. rural municipality) and community-level. Comp lementing the government decentralization process, this 
Component will balance top-down integrated spatial planning with participatory land use planning for c limate-
resilience at the CBO level, culminating in the dev elopment of CERPs in each of the 26 targeted river systems. 
These plans (and the priorities and interventions i dentified therein) will be consulted and validated with the relevant 
CBOs within each vulnerable river system, thereby e nsuring full community buy-in for interventions to be delivered 
under Component 1. 
113. The delivery of support under Component 1 gene rally involves a combination of: (i) training for m ember households 
from partner CBOs; (ii) the procurement and provisi on of inputs, tools and materials that the trained CBO member 
households need to adopt the specific project-promo ted practices (note: the specific inputs, tools and  equipment 
vary by activity, as outlined in Annex 3.2); and (i ii) the provision of expert guidance and assistance  (i.e. extension) 
throughout the project implementation period to sup port beneficiaries to sustain the project-promoted practices. 
As a result of the combination of these types of su pport, FAO assumes a relatively high adoption rate under 
Component 1 activities. Households and CBOs are gen erally expected to incur minimal additional costs w hen 
adopting and applying project-promoted practices, a nd where costs are involved (e.g. basic equipment a nd tools 
for farming activities; seedlings, tools/equipment and local labour for reforestation/planting activit ies), the project 
will cover these costs. 
114. As a result, the project allocates approximate ly 55% of GCF grant finance to cover the costs of i nputs (e.g. 
seedlings), materials (e.g. for community structure s), tools and equipment that would otherwise serve as barriers 
to adoption. In the case of community structures (e .g. check dams), plantation establishment and fores t restoration


---
*Page 54*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
activities, establishment costs are the key barrier s to adoption and the project’s demonstration of co st-effective, 
needs-based and locally-supported investment in suc h activities, guided by the CERPs, will serve as th e template 
for allocation of domestic finance under the Churia  Master Plan beyond the project timeframe. Furtherm ore, the 
project will invest in the establishment of, and lo cal management capacity for, tree nurseries managed  by 
beneficiary CBOs. This will ensure a sustainable so urce of local material beyond the project timeframe , reducing 
the costs to the beneficiaries of continued applica tion of climate-resilient practices. 
115. It is particularly important that the project cover such up-front adoption costs to provide an in itial impetus for CBOs 
and member households in vulnerable river systems –  who are often averse to risk and change – to adopt  project 
promoted practices during the project implementatio n period. FAO and MoFE expect that additional CBOs and 
member households interested in adopting such pract ices beyond the scope of the project could cover su ch costs 
through a combination of own resources and those ma de available through government initiatives such as  the 
Churia Master Plan. The economic rationale for this  is provided in Annex 3.1 – Financial and Economic Analysis, 
which presents comparisons of agriculture and fores try practices to be promoted through this project w ith current 
baseline practices. 
116. Component 1, implemented in a manner that draw s on and benefits from Components 2 and 3, expects to achieve 
important tangible impacts in the Churia region, as  summarized in Section H.1 of the Funding Proposal.  Key project 
impacts and associated cost at sub-component level are summarized below. Attachment 3 of this Funding proposal 
provides more details on impacts of project activit ies and their sustainability. 
 
Sub-
component Budget breakdown 
(see Annex 3.2 for more 
detail)  Impact rationale Physical impact to 
be achieved Direct 
beneficiaries 
1.1: 
Climate-
resilient 
land use 
practices 
are adopted Inputs, 
equipment, 
materials 
and 
associated 
contracts Approx. 
USD 
7.6 
million The project will train CBO members and 
provide them with the necessary equipment 
& inputs needed to adopt the relevant 
practices, as well as directly engage service 
providers to build/establish community-level 
structures to enhance resilience – thereby 
increasing FAO’s and MoFE”s confidence 
that a high adoption rate will be achieved.  In 
particular, the project will: 
 
a) train at least 7,800 farmers, and provide 
them with minor tools/equipment to enable 
adoption of project-promoted practices; 
 
b) cover the costs of stabilizing at least 86 
gullies and establishing and maintaining 
check dams and/or community-managed 
ponds in at least 129 sites; 
 
c) train at least 120 farmers on agro-forestry, 
and provide them with equipment needed to 
establish small on-farm tree nurseries; and 
d) assist approx. 500 households to access 
the government biogas subsidy. Assuming an 80% 
adoption rate, the 
project expects to 
stimulate 
adoption/application 
of climate-resilient 
land use measures 
on at least 48,772 
ha of land. Over the 
course of 
implementing 
the activities 
that will deliver 
the impacts 
outlined in the 
preceding 
columns, the 
project expects 
to cumulatively 
benefit at least 
200,681 
households, 
which are 
expected to 
include about 
963,268 
members. Training, 
capacity 
development 
and 
associated 
travel USD 
1.04 
million 
Personnel 
costs Approx. 
USD 2 
million 
Other costs  
1.2 Natural 
forest 
ecosystems Inputs, 
equipment, 
materials 
and Approx. 
USD 
3.75 
million The project will work with the approx. 600 
forestry-related CBOs in the project area to 
develop/strengthen their forest management 
operational plans to ensure silvicultural Assuming an 80% 
adoption rate, the 
project expects that 
the support


---
*Page 55*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
are better 
maintained 
and 
protected associated 
contracts practices are promoted and ecosystem 
service provision and resilience are 
maximized; and subsequently directly 
support the implementation of these plans for 
the remainder of the project period by 
procuring and providing these CBOs with: (a) 
the necessary tools and equipment; and (b) 
expert advisory services. 
 provided under 
Sub-Component 
1.2 will result in at 
least 148,998 ha of 
forest ecosystems 
being managed 
sustainably. Training, 
capacity 
development 
and 
associated 
travel Approx. 
USD 
0.25 
million 
Personnel 
costs Approx. 
USD 
0.27 
million 
Other costs  
1.3 Forests 
and tree 
cover are 
restored 
and 
maintained 
in the river 
system 
landscapes Inputs, 
equipment, 
materials 
and 
associated 
contracts Approx. 
USD 7 
million The project will provide trainings and inputs 
(materials, tools and labour), to enable 
relevant CBOs to engage in planting 
activities, while also directly guiding and 
overseeing these planting activities – thereby 
increasing FAO’s and MoFE’s confidence 
that a high adoption rate will be achieved.  In 
particular, the project will: 
 
a) provide relevant CBOs with the 
equipment, inputs and materials needed to 
establish tree nurseries in currently under-
served locations – nurseries that will provide 
seedlings (inputs) for other planting activities 
under the project, as well as provide 
seedlings for post-project planting activities; 
 
b) procure materials, seed stock/seedlings, 
tools/equipment and local labour needed to 
plant: (i) demonstration plantations on 1300 
ha; (ii) riparian plantations on 1000 ha; and 
(iii) plantations on 5000 ha of community land 
– and directly oversee/guide the process of 
establishing these plantations. 
 
c) train relevant CBOs on Forest Landscape 
Restoration, and procure and provide them 
with the tools, equipment, inputs and local 
labour needed to implement Assisted Natural 
Regeneration on at least 15990 ha of 
community-managed forest land – and 
directly oversee/guide this planting process. Assuming an 80% 
adoption rate, the 
project expects that 
the support 
provided under 
Sub-Component 
1.3 will result in at 
least 5,840 ha of 
new planted forests 
being established, 
and 12,792 ha of 
community-
managed natural 
forests being 
restored by 
assisted 
regeneration. Training, 
capacity 
development 
and 
associated 
travel Approx. 
USD 
0.19 
million 
Personnel 
costs Approx. 
USD 
0.53 
million 
Other costs Approx. 
USD 
11.4 
million 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
GCF core 
indicators Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) Annual 574,180tCO 2eq 
Lifetime 11,48million tCO 2eq over 20 years


---
*Page 56*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
 Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) Total Direct: Improved resilience of at least 
200,681 households, comprised of 
~963,268 people, where 50% of the 
beneficiaries are women with 
proportional representation of 
indigenous peoples and marginalized 
groups. 
Indirect and Direct: Improved resilience 
of over 3.2 million people living within 26 
vulnerable river systems. 
Percentage 
(%) Direct beneficiaries are equivalent to 
about 3% of the population of Nepal, 
and about 30% of the population of the 
project area. 
 
Methodology for Calculating the Mitigation Impact: 
117. The methodology for calculating the mitigation  impact indicators follows IPCC GPG (2006) principl es for land based 
accounting. The main logic is that for each BRCRN a ctivity which impacts the mitigation indicator a sp ecific impact 
factor is derived which will be applied to calculat e the overall impacts. This impact factor, measured  in tCO 2/ha/year 
consists of several Baseline-to-Project change fact ors if a specific intervention is involved more tha n one land use 
practice. The figure below illustrates this approac h. More detailed information on the applied approac h is described 
in Feasibility Study Section 5.5. 
 
Methodology for Calculating Beneficiaries: 
118. The number of direct beneficiaries  were calculated as follows: 
 Within the project districts, the average househol d contains 4.8 people (slightly higher than the nat ional average 
of 4.5). 45  The project aims to reach 750 CBOs. On average thi s will imply ~28-29 user groups per river system, 
while in practice some river systems may have more groups than others based on their size. The followi ng 
assumptions were made in terms of the composition o f groups and number of beneficiaries: 
Table 7. Overview of beneficiary calculations. 
Type of Community -based 
Organization (CBO) Average membership ( # of 
households per CBO) Number of 
CBOs to Target No. of Households 
engaged in BRCRN project 
CFUG 180 557 100260 
CoFM 32,227 3 96681 
Farmer Groups and Soil 
Conservation User Groups 40 50 2000 
Public Land Forest User Groups 15 100 1500 
Pro-Poor Leasehold Forest Groups 6 40 240 
Total  N/A   750  200,681  
 
 In total, the 750 CBOs are expected to include at least 200,681 households within the project. Based on average 
household size in the project area, the total numbe r of beneficiaries would be around963,268people. 
 At least 1 Indigenous Peoples Organisation (IPO) i n each province will also be among the beneficiary CBOs.  It 
is expected that this will not add to the total num ber of beneficiary households; the members of these  IPOs will 
also be members of other CBOs (CFUGs etc).The IPOs will be targeted as beneficiary CBOs for particular  
project activities, in consultation with IP represe ntative bodies e.g. NEFIN. 
                                                                 
45 CBS 2014, District Level Data


---
*Page 57*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
 The number of women within communities is based on  ward level population information from CBS (2011) that 
identified 51% of project-area inhabitants as femal e. Meanwhile, population statistics on indigenous p eoples, 
Dalits and other ethnicities and/or castes are base d on averaged district-level data from CBS (2014). 
119. Indirect beneficiaries include all individuals residing in the 26 prioriti zed river systems that comprise the BRCRN 
project area. Information from the Central Bureau o f Statistics was used from 2011 at the ward level, 46  which 
identified 3.2 million people residing within the p roject area, of which 51% are women, 31% indigenous  peoples 
and 13% Dalits. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investmen t 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication  
120. The project will be the first ecosystem-wide i nitiative in the Churia region to move beyond pilot s and institutionalize 
climate change mitigation and adaptation objectives  into multi-sectoral local development planning pro cesses. It 
will ensure large-scale sustainable impacts by focu sing on the implementation of nationally-endorsed a nd locally-
validated policies and measures, without the need f or substantial investment in intensive small-scale piloting 
activities. The proposed GCF project is thus an inn ovative programme that will integrate a range of as pects of 
climate vulnerability and adaptive capacity, rural livelihoods and national/sub-national governance fo r enhancing 
climate resilience at the watershed (i.e. landscape ) level. 
121. The project will support investment in climate -resilient SNRM at scale to address critical climat e change challenges 
and demonstrate (for communities, governments and o ther stakeholders) the substantial benefits to be a ccrued 
from adopting such practices, while also laying a f oundation for key actors to scale up such practices  beyond 
project closure and drive a transformation process.  
122. At the policy and institutional level , the project will ensure that climate-resilient SN RM becomes a central feature 
of future planning and investment for natural resou rces management and rural development. This will be nefit from 
a strong political commitment and the opportunity t o shape the development trajectory of the new decen tralized 
institutions and to implement the Churia Master Pla n. However, since Nepal is a Least Developed Countr y (LDC) 
with high rural poverty and relatively low potentia l to attract private investment for climate resilie nce, the proposed 
project focuses on locally-appropriate, low-cost an d low-maintenance technical approaches that can be 
adopted/applied by local communities largely throug h existing resources, sustained by robust instituti ons and 
support services. The development of CERPs and nume rous trainings for Professional Beneficiaries on th e use of 
tools to measure and monitor climate change impacts  and natural resources, and apply this knowledge to  refine 
planning over time, will enable government at all l evels to scale up their support for climate-resilie nt SNRM within 
and beyond the 26 river systems targeted by this pr oject, and beyond project closure. 
123. At field level, the project will work directly with 750 CBOs to sup port their member households to adopt and invest 
in climate-resilient SNRM approaches that are suite d to their local conditions and needs. The project will do so by 
strengthening CBO management plans, trainings for C BOs on climate-resilient SNRM and strengthening for est 
management operational plans (among other measures) . The project will also deliver targeted technical trainings 
(e.g. on climate-resilient farming practices, fores t management and other approaches) for nominated CB O 
members and provide crucial tools and equipment tha t complement trainings, which will not only enable adoption 
of such practices by direct beneficiaries but also equip these individuals to train other households w ithin their CBOs 
to adopt and apply project-promoted practices. Reco gnizing the financial and capacity constraints of h ouseholds 
in the project area, the participatory planning pro cess (in Component 2) will enable partner CBOs to w ork with 
project staff to identify and prioritize practices that are best suited to their local conditions and needs, and which 
can be adopted and maintained at minimal cost to lo cal beneficiaries. Where up-front adoption costs ar e involved 
and would otherwise impede adoption – as is the cas e with community structures and reforestation activ ities – the 
project will cover such costs to enable high adopti on rates among beneficiaries. In addition, it is im portant to note 
that the preliminary practices that have been ident ified for promotion through the project (which are described in 
Appendix A of the Feasibility Study) provide notewo rthy financial benefits to households (relative to baseline 
models) among other sustainable development benefit s (e.g. improved soil nutrition, enhanced biodivers ity, 
                                                                 
46 Ward level statistics were only available for 2011.


---
*Page 58*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
reduced time for women and girls to collect fuelwoo d and water, etc.), which is expected to incentiviz e beneficiary 
households to continue using project-promoted pract ices, as well as incentivize other households to re plicate and 
scale up such approaches. These assumptions are sub stantiated by the financial analysis of project-pro moted 
practices included in Annex 3.1. 
124. The project will actively promote further trai ning and capacity building within CBOs in part thro ugh its approach to 
beneficiary selection (see Section C.3). It also co mmits to monitor the extent to which this spread of  knowledge 
and capacity is happening through the project monit oring system (see project performance indicators in  Section 
H). Project support for the establishment of nurser ies and strengthening of extension and advisory ser vices, as 
well as information dissemination and awareness-rai sing efforts, will also contribute to strengthening  the enabling 
environment that is needed to support further scali ng up by CBOs during and beyond the project impleme ntation 
period. 
125. As a result of field-level support, the projec t expects to achieve a critical mass of tangible an d visible benefits within 
the project area – impacts that are described in Se ction E.1 above and more details in Section H1. Thi s in turn is 
expected to further incentivize CBOs and additional  member households to adopt, apply and sustain clim ate-
resilient SNRM practices. It will also have the add ed benefit of reinforcing demand for extension and advisory 
services that support such practices. To further fa cilitate widespread adoption of project-promoted pr actices within 
partner CBOs during and after the project, FAO, MoF E and Provincial Ministries will support Local Reso urce 
Persons, within the CBOs, in the development of man agement plans, and to facilitate internal knowledge  sharing 
and exchange among their members with a view to ens uring skills accrued by households involved in proj ect 
trainings are transferred to other member household s (Activity 2.2.2).  
126. With regards to the broader enabling environme nt, the project also places a strong emphasis on st rengthening 
local extension services to ensure land users have continued access to the latest knowledge, informati on and 
guidance needed to continue applying climate-resili ent SNRM approaches – even as climate change impact s and 
the state of natural resources within the project a rea continue to evolve over time. Improved extensio n modules, 
methods and farmer field schools, combined with imp roved knowledge and capacity of local extension wor kers on 
climate change and climate resilient SNRM, will imp rove awareness and capacities on such measures amon g 
CBO members throughout the project area, including those not directly reached by the BRCRN project dur ing its 
7-year implementation period. There is a large pote ntial to replicate and scale up the projects activi ties in CBOs 
around Nepal. For example, the project will work wi th 557 CFUGs, whereas in all of Nepal there are ove r 18,000 
CFUGs comprised of over 2.2 million households mana ging over 1.7 million ha of forest. In addition to field level 
support, the integration of training materials into  the CKC, and the institutionalization of training (training trainer 
materials and handbooks, training materials) will e nable such an approach to be replicated in other ar eas of the 
river system, and within the country. 
127. The Provincial Ministries that (as a result of  the ongoing decentralization process) are taking o ver responsibility for 
such advisory services have indicated their intenti on to continue financing rural extension capacity a nd the 
provision of climate-informed extension services, b oth during the project (as evidenced by the governm ent’s co-
financing commitment outlined in Annex 3.2) and aft er project closure. Increased cooperation with the private 
sector will be promoted, potentially leveraging pri vate resources for extension. As part of the propos ed project, 
FAO also commits to work with these government acto rs to mobilize the funds needed to sustain such ser vices 
(including through the Churia Master Plan) – a key element of the process of transforming land use and  natural 
resource management in the Churia region. 
128. To further reinforce the capacity of the exten sion system, the project plans to establish a Churi a Knowledge Centre 
(CKC), with a knowledge hub in each of the three Pr ovinces, that will serve as a repository for extens ion materials 
and information, while also facilitating exchange o f crucial information and data on natural resources  and climate 
change among relevant stakeholders – exchange that is expected to contribute to post-project planning and 
investment decisions as outlined above. While the C KC will reinforce the government’s capacity to make  climate-
informed decisions and provide climate-informed ext ension services after project closure, it will be h osted and 
managed by the Provincial Ministries of Industry, T ourism, Forests and Environment (MoITFEs). These mi nistries 
have expressed strong support for the establishment  of the CKC, and a willingness to operate and maint ain them 
during and after the project.


---
*Page 59*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
129. The project will also organize awareness raisi ng campaigns to stimulate broader interest in clima te-resilient SNRM 
practices. Coupled with the demonstrable benefits a ccrued by communities and households who adopt such  
practices during the project (as outlined above), t his is expected to reinforce demand for climate-inf ormed 
extension and advisory services and other support, including that which would be provided through the Churia 
Master Plan. This in turn will strengthen the incen tives for MoFE and Provincial MoITFEs to provide su ch services 
beyond project closure. 
130. Close coordination and collaboration with nati onal and sub-national (e.g. local and provincial) e ntities further 
ensures local ownership and sustainability, and thu s the potential for scaling up and replication afte r project 
closure. The project is well aligned with existing planning and administrative processes, and builds c apacities of 
partners to deliver these processes. For example, t he project has significant elements that respond to  the latest 
developments in national forest policy; national cl imate policy; national REDD+ strategy draft and rec ent 
amendments to the Forest Act of 1993. 
131. The planning approaches mainstreamed in the Ch uria (e.g. CERPs, provincial and CBO planning) can be 
replicated and scaled up to other regions of Nepal in a cost-effective and efficient manner, and, inde ed may result 
in net savings through targeted, efficient, results -oriented investment of national resources. This wi ll be aided by 
the establishment of a national database on water, soil, forest, and grassland resources that will gui de planning 
and implementation of measures for increasing clima te resilience. Scaling-up efforts will be facilitat ed by the 
establishment of knowledge-sharing mechanisms (e.g.  CKC) and platforms for dialogue to inform national  and 
sub-national institutions on best practices for cli mate-resilient SNRM. The project will thus promote the active 
exchange of information, lessons learned and best p ractices to guide implementation of climate-resilie nt SNRM 
and DRR measures across Nepal.  
132. As the Churia region extends to India to Pakis tan, the experiences, knowledge generated and lesso ns learnt from 
this GCF project will be useful for these countries  as well. There is substantial potential to scale u p and replicate 
measures within these countries. The project will h ave substantial impacts downstream, not only in the  
downstream-Terai in Nepal, but also in India, a cou ntry that also experiences high exposure to floodin g and that is 
greatly impacted by upstream land use in the Churia  hills of Nepal. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
133. The project will encourage innovative knowledg e management to improve awareness, build capacities , and 
support the integration of climate and land use inf ormation into decision making processes at the nati onal, 
provincial and local level. Within Components2 and 3, activities focus on institutional capacity build ing and learning. 
Provincial and local government authorities will be  trained on climate-resilient land use planning and  practices, 
including on the job support to identify critical h otspots and conduct a mapping activity within each river system. 
Such knowledge and learning is critical given the p olitical transition and the important new roles tha t provincial and 
local governments will have with regards to natural  resource management. The development of CERPs will  
contribute to the provision of climate-informed ext ension and advisory services, and will ensure clima te change 
and disaster risk reduction are integrated into pla nning and decision making processes. This will ulti mately guide 
the adoption of prioritized low-carbon and climate- resilient SNRM.  
134. At least 750 local CBOs will participate in wo rkshops to raise awareness of climate change risks and climate-
resilient land use practices that are adapted and a ppropriate to their local contexts and priorities. A participatory 
approach will be utilized that allows such communit ies to access information and technical support, pr omoting 
participatory land use planning and allowing commun ities to develop ownership and apply their knowledg e based 
on their own priorities. By participating in projec t workshops, communities will become increasingly a ware of 
climate change risks in their locality/ region, ris k-reduction measures, as well as how/ where they ca n access 
relevant information and support (e.g. CKC, local e xtension agents, radio programs, among other source s). 
135. Activity 3.1.1 will support the consolidation of local and indigenous knowledge on adaptation rel ated to water, 
agriculture and forests, where innovative and local ly adapted approaches will be identified, dissemina ted and 
integrated into supporting materials (e.g. extensio n modules). Many local communities, including indig enous 
communities, have noted the importance of existing traditional and indigenous knowledge for climate ch ange 
adaptation. Thus, the project aims to consolidate s uch information and integrate it into extension sup port materials


---
*Page 60*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
and farmer field schools. This represents a major i nnovation for supporting the mainstreaming of this knowledge 
into extension modules, combined with other good pr actices that build on key lessons and experiences. 
136. Activity3.2.2 focuses specifically on strength ening extension services in the project area, with a focus on 
knowledge and information. The project will finance  the elaboration of 10 extension modules for climat e-resilient 
land use that will be used within farmer field scho ols. Training modules draw on best practices identi fied in the 
feasibility work done for this project, as well as the insights gained from the CERP process (under Ac tivity 2.1.2) 
and the collection of local and indigenous knowledg e (under Activity 3.1.1). Modules will be adapted to t he context 
of the project area and the different bio-geographi cal zones and aim to support the transfer of knowle dge on climate 
change risks and improved climate-resilient practic es to diverse groups of people including people fro m diverse 
socio-cultural backgrounds, poor households, women,  and people who are illiterate, among others. Diver se 
communication methods will be used including manual s, videos and radio programs/ audio materials. Trai ners 
(including women, indigenous peoples, Dalits, and M adheshi people, among others) will be trained on th e modules 
and equipped to apply this knowledge in the field. Where necessary, translations will also be provided  (either 
through official translators or through local resou rce persons) to support extension services and know ledge 
dissemination. Training module development and the implementation of trainings will enable improved in stitutional 
and individual learning, improved knowledge managem ent (through the CKC), and will support the replica tion of 
training and adoption of climate-resilient land use  in other parts of the country. 
137. As discussed in E.2.1, the knowledge generated  by this project is relevant for the entire Churia region, as well as 
the Churia landscape that extends from India to Ban gladesh and Bhutan, passing through Nepal. Thus, th e 
dissemination of the project´s approach and lessons  learned, including through the innovative online C KC 
knowledge hub, would support learning processes and  the potential scaling up and replication of projec t activities.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
138. The BRCRN project contributes to the creation of an enabling environment through a step-wise appr oach. Through 
Component2, it establishes an institutional and pla nning framework conducive to implement the project activities. 
Ultimately, the capacity of government stakeholders  and local CBOs will be built by the project to und erstand and 
assess climate risks, utilize climate information a nd vulnerability assessments to plan, and monitor c limate resilient 
land use, and further monitor local risks and resou rces in the future. This will equip them to continu e investing in 
climate-resilient SNRM – in a manner that coordinat es upstream and downstream interventions to maximiz e 
adaptation and mitigation benefits – beyond project  closure. 
139. Given the government´s ongoing political trans ition, and the associated devolution of power to th e local and 
provincial levels, it is an opportune moment to mai nstream and build capacities on climate-resilient p lanning, DRR 
and SNRM at the local and provincial level. Buildin g institutional capacities at an early phase will f acilitate 
institutional learning, mainstream climate change, and ensure that climate-resilient planning becomes a cross-
cutting consideration for government institutions a fter project closure.  
140. Provincial strategies and CERPs will further c reate an enabling environment for climate-resilient  land use, ensuring 
a strong provincial and local framework is in place  to demonstrate commitment and actively promote cli mate-
resilient land use planning, ensuring an integrated  approach considering upstream and downstream manag ement. 
Such strategies and CERPs will highlight key target s and goals for climate-resilient land use, and sup port the 
longevity and scaling up of such practices. Specifi cally, they will enable provincial governments to u nderstand 
climate risks, and implement a holistic approach fo r disaster risk-reduction, as well as low-carbon an d climate-
resilient land use. Such an approach will demonstra te a new framework for low GHG and climate-resilien t planning 
in Nepal, which will be replicable in other river s ystems in the country. This is necessary to support  the country’s 
needs, given the high vulnerability of the region a nd the political context of the country, where ther e is a need to 
quickly invest in the capacities of provincial and local policy makers to enable the adoption of neces sary adaptation 
measures. 
141. Capacities of CSOs, CBOs and other stakeholder s will be strengthened as well, ensuring that there  is a clear 
foundation to support the adoption and scaling up o f climate-resilient practices at household level. P articipatory 
planning approaches through workshops will help com munities become aware of climate risks and improved  
practices to reduce risks and vulnerability, yet pr ovide them with the flexibility to decide what meas ures they want 
to implement based on their local context and prior ities. Such an approach will increase awareness of climate


---
*Page 61*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
change, climate-risks and risk-reduction strategies , and create ownership that will generate local int erest and 
support for climate-resilient land use after projec t closure. In addition, the adoption of climate-res ilient technologies 
and land use practices in the 26 vulnerable river s ystems will demonstrate the effectiveness of such m easures at 
scale, which is likely to shape future investment d ecisions by CBOs – groups that are otherwise risk-a verse and 
thus averse to change given their limited financial  resources. 
142. Targeted support will further be provided to p ublic land forest users, containing primarily membe rs from poor 
households and marginalized groups, to help them st rengthen their capacities and plan for climate-resi lient land 
use practices. Such user groups often contain margi nalized households, and the project can support the m to 
strengthen their institutional capacity to support inclusive development. 
143. Knowledge generation activities (e.g. Activity  3.1.1) and improved extension support (e.g. Activi ties 3.2.2 and 3.2.3) 
will ensure that innovative and locally adapted pra ctices are promoted. Such materials and services wi ll create a 
strong foundation to raise awareness on climate cha nge risks, promote climate-resilient land use, and have a 
lasting on the decisions of land users. The use of these materials and implementation of these climate -sensitive 
farmer field schools will continue after project co mpletion, ensuring the strengthened enabling enviro nment 
continues to shape land-use decisions – by the proj ect’s beneficiaries and others – well into the futu re. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and pol icies 
144. Promoted measures will contribute to the imple mentation of Nepal´s NDC as well as various nationa l policies and 
plans, including the Churia Master Plan, Forest Sec tor Strategy and the Agriculture Sector Strategy (d escribed in 
Section E.5 below).Promoted measures will further c ontribute to various SDGs (described in Section E.3 .1), as 
well as various Aichi Targets for the Convention on  Biological Diversity, especially Targets 5, 7, 14 and 15. 
145. Climate-resilient SNRM will be integrated into  provincial strategies and CERPs through the BRCRN project. This 
will support governments to orient investments and priorities towards climate-resilient land use pract ices, and 
encourage local governments to implement climate-re silient land use planning at the local level, align ed with 
provincial and river system level planning to promo te integrated management and improve the efficiency  and 
effectiveness of investments. Given the political t ransition, capacity building on climate change risk s, SNRM and 
DRR will support mainstreaming of such practices at  the provincial and local level, encouraging newly formed 
governments to integrate such principles into polic ies and planning processes. 
146. Capacity building for CBOs will contribute to local level management plans, and guide the impleme ntation of 
informed management plans that take into account cl imate risks and suitable climate-resilient practice s. Capacity 
building, combined with improved knowledge material s and dissemination processes and support to implem ent 
investments, will help to leverage future investmen ts in climate-resilient land use practices by CBOs.   
147. Public land forest user groups will also be fo rmalized and engaged throughout the implementation of this project, 
which will have an important impact to allow (often ) marginalized public land forest users to legally benefit from 
the sustainable management of natural resources. Th e current political transition represents an opport une moment 
to formalize such user groups at the local level. 
  
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefi ts, including gender-sensitive development impact  
Environmental Co-benefits 
148. The project will support the following Sustain able Development Goals (SDGs) related to the enviro nment: 
 
Table 8. Link between project activities and enviro nment-related SDGs 
SDG  Link with Project Activities  
SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food 
security and improved nutrition Improved food security will be achieved through the  adoption of climate-resilient and 
sustainable agricultural practices, as well as thro ugh the adoption of water conservation


---
*Page 62*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
and promote sustainable 
agriculture measures (including retention ponds) that can help improve water retention in soils and 
water-access, especially in the dry season.  
SDG 6: Ensure availability and 
sustainable management of water 
and sanitation for all Project activities will support target 6.6 that aim s to protect and restore water-related 
ecosystems, including forests, wetlands, rivers, aq uifers and lakes. 202,747ha of forests, 
wetlands and grasslands will be restored and sustai nably managed by the project, and 
measures will help stabilize ecosystems, and reduce  degradation and sedimentation.  
SDG 7: Ensure access to 
affordable, reliable, sustainable 
and modern energy for all Project activities will support 500 households to a ccess government subsidies and adopt 
biogas technologies, increasing the adoption of ren ewable energy in the project area. 
Project activities will also help reduce pressure o n natural forests for fuelwood. 
SDG 12 : Ensure sustainable 
consumption and production 
patterns The project´s objective is closely aligned with the  target 12.2 to  achieve the sustainable 
management and efficient use of natural resourc es. Project activities focused on 
awareness raising and capacity building will streng then awareness for SNRM.  
SDG 13: Take urgent action to 
combat climate change and its 
impacts The project will strengthen resilience to climate-r elated hazards and natural disasters 
within Nepal and northern India through investments  in climate-resilient land use, 
supported by strengthened capacities and approaches . Capacity-building and awareness 
raising are measures that are cross-cutting through  all project components and activities 
that contribute to Target 13.3 (i.e. improved aware ness and capacities) 
SDG 15: Protect, restore and 
promote sustainable use of 
terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably 
manage forests, combat 
desertification, and halt and 
reverse land degradation and half 
biodiversity loss The adoption of climate-resilient land use practice s will reduce environmental degradation 
in comparison to business-as-usual practices, slowi ng down soil degradation, erosion and 
sedimentation processes, and deforestation and fore st degradation. These measures will 
further support biodiversity conservation through i mproving habitat and ecosystem quality.  
 
Social Co-benefits 
149. The project will deliver numerous health-relat ed co-benefits. For example, appropriately managed water 
conservation ponds can reduce water-borne illnesses  in communities. In addition, project-related impro vements in 
resource quality and production can reduce collecti on distances for fuelwood, water and fodder (where women 
previously had to walk several hours carrying heavy  loads – activities that were increasing due to cli mate change 
and unsustainable resource use). Reduced collection  times may have the added benefit of indirectly ena bling girls 
(who play an important role in collecting water) to  allocate more time to their education. 47  
150. The project aims for proportional representati on of indigenous peoples, where at least 31% of dir ect beneficiaries 
should be indigenous peoples. An indigenous peoples  planning framework has been developed, based on di verse 
consultations with indigenous peoples, to ensure th at indigenous people’s rights are safeguarded, prom ote 
targeted measures to empower indigenous peoples and  ensure that a responsive M&E framework can be appl ied 
to the project to continuously monitor the project´ s impact on indigenous peoples.  
151. The project will support SDG 10 to reduce ineq uality within and among countries, as social-inclus ion is 
mainstreamed as a cross-cutting consideration withi n the project with the aim to enhance social inclus ion and 
empower marginalized households. Many marginalized groups tend to live in highly vulnerable areas, alo ng river 
banks or in areas that are susceptible to landslide s, and the project will further help reduce their v ulnerability to 
climate change and strengthen their adaptive capaci ties by targeting the most vulnerable communities.  
 
Economic Co-benefits 
152. The BRCRN project will deliver crucial economi c co-benefits through its support for agricultural development. 
Investments in climate-resilient agriculture will i mprove soil quality, water availability and reduce land degradation, 
which can help to strengthen agricultural productio n and productivity that can allow households to gen erate more 
                                                                 
47  Some consulted communities that girls miss more sc hool in the dry season, where due to seasonal water  scarcity girls had to walk 
up to 2.5 hours one-way in the dry season to access  water resources. Some communities who adopted cons ervation ponds with 
government support noted that there was a positive impact on girls´ education within their community.


---
*Page 63*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
income from agricultural activities. In other words , project-supported practices will strengthen the n atural resource 
base on which productive agriculture depends. This is essential given that agricultural development is  the 
backbone of economic activity in the Churia region,  particularly among the poor and vulnerable househo lds and 
communities targeted by the BRCRN project. The proj ect will also open up new economic opportunities fo r some 
of these households and communities, including fish  and duck farming on conservation ponds, ecotourism  in 
restored ecosystems, and the diversification of hou sehold income streams through agroforestry. 
153. Measures to strengthen sustainable forestry ac tivities will also help farmers overcome barriers t o access markets 
(e.g. quality, poor private sector linkages), and i mprove coordination and dialogue with the private s ector. This will 
benefit not only local producers and CBOs, but also  the private sector. 
154. The BRCRN project will also help avoid losses and damages that can have severe impacts on economi c 
development in the Churia region. The adoption of c limate-resilient land use practices, as well as mea sures for 
ecosystem restoration, water conservation, gully st abilization and riverbank stabilization, among othe rs, will reduce 
the risk and impact of climate-induced hazards, the reby avoiding lost economic activity (including the  loss of arable 
farmland) and the costs of recovering from damages to productive assets and infrastructure. This const itutes 
important economic savings for governments, communi ties and households that can instead be invested in  local 
economic development. 
 
Gender-Sensitive Development Impact 
155. Gender-equality is a cross-cutting theme withi n the project, which aims to ensure women´s full an d effective 
participation. At least 50% of direct beneficiaries  will be women, of which proportional representatio n of indigenous 
women, Dalit women and other marginalized groups wi ll be ensured. All members of project management 
committees, trainers and local resource persons wil l be trained on GESI measures, increasing awareness  and 
capacities of government officials and other key st akeholders. 
156. The project aims to empower women and promote their equality through targeted measures (e.g. trai nings on 
business literacy for women’s groups, ensuring repr esentation of women trainers, among other measures) . It will 
further have substantial positive socio-economic im pacts for women, who are often particularly affecte d by climate 
change due to the trend towards the feminization of  agricultural work in the project area, as well as women’s 
traditional role in collecting fodder, water and fu elwood (see Gender Assessment in Annex 5).  
157. A gender-sensitive M&E framework has been desi gned to ensure the project actively monitors the im pact of the 
project on women as well as progress in achieving p roject targets and the goals set out in the GAP.The  project 
will thus support SDG 5 and its goal to achieve gen der equality and empower all girls. 
 
E.4.  Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiar y country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary gro ups (Adaptation only)  
158. As described in the previous Sections, Nepal i s highly vulnerable to climate change. The vulnerab ility of already 
fragile ecosystems in the Churia-Terai Madhesh regi on is further aggravated by numerous anthropogenic 
interventions such as settlement through the cleari ng of forests for cultivation, over exploitation of  timber and other 
forest products through illegal logging and unsusta inable harvesting of timber and NTFPs, uncontrolled  grazing 
of livestock - thereby rapidly altering ecosystem f unction and the overall resilience of the region. L ocal people´s 
resilience is negatively impacted through the loss of key ecosystem services and resilience that incre ase their 
exposure to climate change.  
159. Based on historical trends and future climate change predictions, Nepal will likely become increa singly exposed 
to climate related hazards including flooding and d roughts, among others. Current costs associated wit h the 
impacts of climate variability and extreme events a re estimated at US$ 270-360 million/year, represent ing 1.5 to


---
*Page 64*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
2% of the country’s GDP.48  If no action is taken the economic cost of climate  change in the primary sector alone 
could exceed to 2-3% of the current GDP per year by  mid-century. 
160. Poor and vulnerable households and communities  suffer most from climate change, because of their higher 
exposure and sensitivity (of assets and livelihoods ) to hazards, and their low capacity to manage risk s and avoid/ 
mitigate negative impacts. 49  To cope with these pressures, and for their surviv al and subsistence, poor people 
rely on their surrounding natural resources, result ing in their further degradation and, ultimately pu shing them into 
a perpetual cycle of poverty and environmental degr adation. Thus the impending impacts of climate chan ge will 
have significant negative impacts on their basic su rvival and subsistence needs, for example quality a nd 
availability of water resources, agricultural produ ctivity, animal husbandry and ecosystem integrity. 50  This will in 
turn have an adverse impact on the overall social d evelopment of Nepal. 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutiona l needs  
Financial and Economic Needs 
161. Nepal’s daunting social, financial and economi c development challenges exacerbate the vulnerabili ty risks of its 
population, as described in Section D.1 above. Give n these challenges, Nepal requires considerable gra nt 
financing to fund development priorities, including  those described in its NDC, in the medium term. If  such support 
does not materialize and adaptation measures are no t implemented in a timely manner, the financial cos t of 
adaptation will increase, as will the costs for loc al households and communities as climate change imp acts 
increase in intensity and frequency.  
 
Social and Institutional Needs 
162. The government is undergoing a transition towa rd a federal state. Nepal´s political transition is  a landmark event 
accompanied by the devolution of power over forest and agricultural resources to the provincial and lo cal level. 
Capacities on climate change and climate-resilient development remain limited at the provincial and lo cal levels, 
and additional technical and financial support is r equired to support these institutions to build indi vidual and 
institutional capacities. At the same time, this tr ansition represents an opportune moment to strength en capacities 
and mainstream climate-resilient land use into prov incial and local plans and strategies as these inst itutions are 
initiated. Trainings are needed on various topics, especially climate change risks and climate-resilie nt land use 
practices, mainstreaming climate-resilient land use  planning into local and provincial plans and proce sses, and 
tools and approaches for disaster risk reduction pl anning.  
163. Many CSOs are also undergoing restructuring du e to the changing political structure. Before the t ransition, CSOs 
often had national representation with district-lev el chapters. Many CSOs will now have to adapt to pr ovincial level 
chapters, as well as increasing local level represe ntation to match the new roles that local and provi ncial level 
governments have adopted. The project can support l ocal and provincial CSOs to build capacities and im prove 
coordination with local and provincial government a uthorities and other stakeholders.  
164. While many CBOs have demonstrated their abilit y to responsibly manage natural resources, many are  not aware 
of climate change threats and local-level vulnerabi lity (critical ecosystems, differentiated vulnerabi lities, risks). 
Capacity building and technical support is needed f or CBOs to understand climate risks at the local le vel, as well 
as low carbon and climate-resilient land use manage ment practices and DRR measures.  
165. As mentioned in Section C.2, a range of barrie rs have limited the effectiveness of extension serv ices in Nepal, 
and ultimately knowledge dissemination. The project  will help overcome such barriers, and support enha nced 
capacity building to strengthen adaptive capacities  and overall resilience.  
                                                                 
48 IDS-Nepal, PAC and GCAP. 2014. Economic Impact Asse ssment of Climate Change in Key Sectors in Nepal. K athmandu, Nepal: 
Integrated Development Society (IDS). 
49  Mearns and Norton 2010 
50  WB FIP Inception Workshop 2016


---
*Page 65*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
166. As identified in the Gender Assessment and GAP  (Annex 5), targeted measures are needed to encoura ge the full 
engagement of women in knowledge platforms, especia lly at the local and provincial levels, and strengt hen the 
capacities of women on SNRM, climate change and dis aster risk reduction.  
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacit y to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and  coherence with existing plans and policies, includ ing NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
167. The project is closely aligned  with Nepal´s NDC, and is congruent with existing p lans and policies. 
a. The Fourteenth Development Plan (2017)  of Nepal recognizes the role of forests in contrib uting to both 
climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts, a nd calls for the conservation, sustainable manageme nt and 
use of forests. It further notes the challenges fac ed by the Churia region and the risks posed to down stream 
communities due to unsustainable land use and the f ragility of the ecosystem. It promotes the implemen tation 
of integrated conservation activities within river systems, with an emphasis on planning considering t he 
interconnectedness of upstream and downstream natur al resource management. 
b. President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Mana gement Master Plan (2017)  provides strategic 
direction for conservation of the Churia area. It p romotes the integrated management of upstream and 
downstream land use activities using an integrated landscape approach. It supports poverty reduction t hrough 
the conservation and sustainable management of natu ral resources and ecosystem services.  
c. The Climate Change Policy (2011) 51  aims to improve livelihoods by mitigating climate change impacts, 
adopting a low-carbon development path and endeavou rs to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through clean  
energy and sustainable natural resource management.   
d. Nepal’s NDC(2016) describes the impacts of climate change on a number  of sectors to which the proposed 
GCF project is aligned, including: i) water resourc e management, particularly concerning reduced water  
availability as well as increased frequency of drou ghts and floods; ii) agriculture, both crops and li vestock; iii) 
food security; and iv) renewable energy. The NDC al so describes adaptation priorities with which the p roposed 
project is closely aligned, including: i) climate-r esilient sustainable land and forest management; ii ) ecosystem 
rehabilitation and restoration; iii) strengthened c ommunity-based natural resources management; and iv ) 
improved agricultural techniques.  
e. The National Adaptation Programme of Action and dra ft National Adaptation Plan (2015)  identifies a 
number of priority actions for adaptation, includin g: i) sustainable land and forest management; ii) i mproved 
agricultural value chains; iii) restoration of degr aded areas; iv)climate-related research, informatio n and 
awareness generation; and v) disaster preparedness at provincial and local levels.  Nepal will receive  support 
from UN Environment to further advance the NAP proc ess.  This project will seek alignment with this pr ocess 
to the extent possible. 
f. Forest Sector policy (2015) replaces the former forest policy (2000) and envisi ons contributing to local and 
national development through sustainable management  of forests, biodiversity and watersheds. It aims t o 
improve the livelihoods of poor communities by incr easing employment and income opportunities through 
conservation, management and utilization of forests  and forestry resources. 
g. Nepal’s Forestry Sector Strategy (2016-2025)  aims to: support adaptive capacity of communities and forest 
ecosystems; develop and strengthen PES mechanisms; and promote biomass-based renewable energy. 
BRCRN contributes to the Strategy’s goal of enhanci ng Nepal’s forest carbon stock by at least 5% compa red 
to 2015 level, and decrease mean annual deforestati on rate from 0.18% to 0.05% in the Churia hills.  
h. Nepal´s Agriculture Development Strategy (2015-2035 ) sets forth priorities to move towards a self-relian t, 
sustainable, competitive and inclusive agriculture sector that drives economic growth and contributes to 
improving livelihoods, food and nutrition security.  
                                                                 
51  MoE 2011b


---
*Page 66*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
i. The Nepal Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NB SAP) 2014 -2020  aims to provide a strategic 
framework for the conservation of Nepal’s biodivers ity, contributing to sound and resilient ecosystems  and 
national prosperity. Component1 directly contribute s to NBSAP goals by supporting sustainable manageme nt 
and restoration of forest landscapes in the Churia region.  
j. National REDD+ Strategy  (draft currently under the process of adoption) ca lls for the formulation of Policies 
and Measures (PAMs) that would achieve emission red uctions in various sectors such as the energy, 
infrastructure and agriculture sectors. It supports  the elaboration of action plans for REDD+ at the l ocal level, 
and supports institutional strengthening to mainstr eam REDD+ into planning processes. The country has set 
a target to reduce GHG emissions from deforestation  and forest degradation (including a sub-national p roject 
on REDD+ to reduce about 14 million tCO 2-eq by 2020) 52 . 
168. Additional information on the congruence the B RCRN project and existing policies, strategies and plans in Nepal 
is provided in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, Section  4.2 and Appendix C . 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executin g entities to deliver  
169. FAO will serve as the project´s Accredited Entity . FAO is a specialized technical agency of the Unit ed Nations 
whose main goals are the eradication of hunger, foo d insecurity and malnutrition; the elimination of p overty and 
the driving forward of economic and social progress  for all; and the sustainable management and utiliz ation of 
natural resources, including forest, land, water, a ir, climate and genetic resources for the benefit o f present and 
future generations. FAO has supported projects for climate adaptation and mitigation worldwide. A list  of notable 
projects can be found in Annex 2 – Feasibility Stud y, Section 4. 
170. FAO has a strong track record of providing tec hnical assistance to the agriculture and forestry s ector since its 
inception in Nepal in 1951. FAO is in the process o f negotiating the country programming framework (CP F) with 
the Government of Nepal for the next five-year plan ning period. From 2013-2017 one of the four main pr iority 
areas of the country´s CPF was natural resource con servation and utilization. FAO programs during this  period 
have included diverse measures to enhance sustainab le production and land use practices, including cli mate-
resilient agriculture, sustainable forest and water shed management, improve institutional and technica l capacities 
for climate change adaptation in the land use secto r, and strengthen climate-resilient value chains, a mong others.  
171. More information about how FAO will discharge its Accredited Entity functions is outlined in Sect ion C.7. 
172. The Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) will  be the Executing Entity  for the project, and has 
substantial experience with the management of bilat eral and multi-lateral funds for projects within th e land use 
sector. MoFE is responsible for the conservation, d evelopment, use, and sustainable management of fore sts. The 
Ministry has supported the implementation of many l arge projects focusing on sustainable natural resou rce 
management in the Churia and Terai regions of Nepal . This is further described in Sections C.4 and C.7 . 
173. MoFE is well placed to play a central role in the delivery of BRCRN.To assess the capacity of MoF E to implement 
the BRCRN project, FAO contracted an independent as sessment of the Ministry to gauge the level and typ es of 
risk inherent in such a role.  This assessment, con ducted from May-June 2018, found that this risk was  low, based 
largely on MoFE’s experience of managing and implem enting the projects mentioned above. Arrangements 
between MoFE (as Executing Entity) and FAO (as Accr edited Entity and co-Executing Entity) are further described 
in Section C.7. 
174. FAO’s comparative advantage as an internationa l agency with a mandate for provision of technical advisory 
services in SNRM is acknowledged by both parties as  an important element of the BRCRN project. The pro ject’s 
strong focus on technical advisory (TA) services an d institutional capacity building, particularly dur ing early stages, 
is therefore anticipated to involve FAO’s assistanc e. To this end, in support of MoFE (as Executing En tity), 
dedicated resources will be incorporated into the p roject budget for provision of technical capacity d evelopment 
services, to be implemented by FAO.These resources and associated support will be delivered by an FAO 
Technical Capacity Development team , which will serve as a co-Executing Entity providing services to PMU 
                                                                 
52 FCPF/MoFSC 2017


---
*Page 67*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
and PPMU in MoFE. More information about this team,  and its role in the broader institutional and impl ementation 
arrangements for the BRCRN project, is available in  Sections C.4 and C.7. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organiza tions and other relevant stakeholders  
Engagement with NDA 
175. Ongoing communication with the NDA has been co nducted since project conceptualization. Since May 2017, five 
bi-lateral meetings were organized with the NDA to discuss project development. In addition, concept n ote and 
proposal development were regularly informed by Tec hnical Committee Meetings (TCM), consisting primari ly of 
government representatives from across sectors, inc luding the NDA/ MoF, to present updates on proposal  
development. TCMs served as an important platform t o receive cross-sectoral feedback on the project co ncept 
and proposal. Non-governmental experts were also in vited to participate in TCMs to provide feedback in  line with 
their areas of expertise. These meetings reiterated  the Government´s commitment to scaling up climate- resilient 
land use in the Churia region of Nepal, and ensured  a collaborative effort across line agencies to dev elop a cross-
cutting multi-sectoral project. In total, 5 TCMs we re held from June 2017 to May 2018. It further iden tified co-
financing opportunities from government ministries,  and discussed the project´s exit strategy (further  described in 
Section D.2). A more detailed description of the af orementioned meetings is included in Annex 4).  
176. Thus, the proposal has been elaborated with on going coordination and support from the NDA, who ha s regularly 
provided insight into the process. With the submiss ion of the Concept Note to the GCF in 2017, the NDA  issued 
a letter of support. Upon the finalization of the d raft funding proposal, the proposal underwent a 30- day internal 
review by MoFE and the NDA. A Letter of No-Objectio n by the NDA is provided in Annex 1. 
 
Multi-stakeholder Engagement Plan and Consultations  
177. In addition to regular communication with gove rnment authorities and the NDA, project development  was informed 
by diverse stakeholder consultations. Throughout th e process these stakeholders expressed their views,  
expectations, concerns and recommendations for the BRCRN project. Over 420 people have been consulted 
through various workshops at the national and distr ict level, bi-lateral meetings with non-governmenta l 
organizations (at the national and local level), as  well as local CBOs and communities in the project area. 53  The 
stakeholder consultation process ensured the partic ipation of diverse stakeholders, including women, i ndigenous 
nationalities, Dalit people and other marginalized minority groups.  
178. The BRCRN project aims to maintain regular sta keholder engagement throughout project implementati on, 
ensuring the engagement of government authorities f rom national, provincial and local governments acro ss 
sectors, CSOs (including women´s organizations, ind igenous people’s federations and organizations, Dal it 
organizations, among others), CBOs, private sector actors, among others. A plan for continued stakehol der 
consultations during project implementation is prov ided in the ESMF (Annex 4), along with a detailed d escription 
of the stakeholder consultation process, meeting su mmaries and attendance sheets.  
179. It should also be noted that many of the proje ct activities have been piloted and included within  the framework of 
other projects and initiatives, many of which have undergone extensive stakeholder consultation proces ses 
themselves. In particular, the proposal has receive d considerable support from the President’s Churia 
Conservation Programme and Nepal’s REDD+ Implementa tion Centre –two key institutions with mandates for  
multi-stakeholder engagement for a number of projec ts related to sustainable land and forest managemen t, 
agricultural development and ecosystem management/r estoration. These platforms already engage with 
government institutions, other donor agencies and d evelopment partners, NGOs/CSOs, among others. While  new 
partnerships will be established as needed to broad en the scope of involvement of potential partners, the proposed 
project will continue to engage and build on the ex isting processes and platforms during implementatio n to ensure 
that these structures are strongly involved in guid ing the planning and implementation of project obje ctives.  
                                                                 
53 Meeting summaries can be found in Annex 3 of the ES MF.


---
*Page 68*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness o f the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
180. The total project costs are estimated at USD 4 7.34 million, comprised of a USD 39.3 million grant  from the GCF 
and USD 8.04 million in national co-financing from MoFE. The project requests grant finance given that : Nepal is 
a low-income country and Least Developed Country; t he project targets vulnerable regions, poor communi ties 
and predominantly (semi)-subsistence households; an d uses grant financing primarily for barrier-addres sing and 
non-revenue generating activities. Overall, the BRC RN project will directly benefit at least 200,681 h ouseholds, 
which is equivalent to at least 963,268 people. Thi s corresponds to a cost of about USD 49 per direct beneficiary. 
This is considered to be a competitive cost-per-ben eficiary ratio, particularly when considering that many project 
activities are cross-cutting in nature, and thus to tal project costs – which were used to calculate th is ratio – deliver 
both the aforementioned adaptation benefits as well  as considerable mitigation benefits (which are des cribed in 
more detailed in Section E.6.5). 
181. The project also takes into account the differ entiated needs, financial circumstances, and barrie rs to investment 
of the direct beneficiaries. For instance, measures  supporting bio-gas will provide technical support for middle 
income households to access government subsidies, e nsuring that private finance is not crowded out. In vestments 
for commercial forestry will focus on creating an e nabling environment to crowd-in private finance, wh ereas actual 
investments in woodlots for distant users will focu s on public land forest users containing marginaliz ed and poor 
households who are unable to cover the up-front cos ts of investing in such measures (a major barrier f or these 
individuals). Such targeted approaches will ensure the project delivers support in a cost-effective an d efficient 
manner. Such approaches are explained in further de tail in Section C.3 and in the Feasibility Study.   
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments (mitigation only)  
182. MoFE will provide USD 8.04 million in co-finan cing for the implementation of the BRCRN project, w hich is 
equivalent to about 17% of the total project cost. 
183. Project financing will leverage additional pri vate investment during and after the project, mainl y in form of the in-
kind contributions of farmers and project participa nts to manage agricultural and forestry interventio ns. GCF 
financing will cover only the initial investment co sts of transitioning to climate resilient agricultu ral and forestry 
models, while maintenance and management of the pro posed models will be financed by the project partic ipants.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
184. The financial viability of the proposed projec t is presented in detail in Annex 2 – Feasibility S tudy and Annex 3 – 
Integrated Financial Model, as well as in Section F .1 of the Funding Proposal.  
185. A financial analysis  was carried out for the project-supported agricult ure and forestry models. These were 
compared to a without project scenario to demonstra te the financial viability of the interventions. A summary is 
provided in Section F.1, which presents the net pre sent values (NPV) for these models, discounted at a  rate of 
10% for the ´with´ and ´without´ project scenario. This analysis demonstrates that all proposed climat e resilient 
models are financially more profitable compared to the without project scenario, thus justifying the i nvestment 
from the land user’s perspective.    
186. After 7 years, the economic rate of return  for the project is negative in absolute terms (NPV  at 10% discount 
rate: USD -11.73 million), while the incremental ER R (absolute project cash flows minus baseline proje ct cash 
flows) is positive with an ERR of 97% (NPV at 10% d iscount -18.05 million). In the long-run, increment al benefits 
of the project far outweigh the costs, resulting in  an incremental ERR of 114% (NPV: USD 78.53 million ) after 10 
years and ERR of 115% (NPV: USD 201.76 million) aft er 20 years. 
187. In short, GCF grant financing will cover up-fr ont costs of adopting climate-resilient models and practices promoted 
by the project – in part to incentivize this transi tion –and will build much-needed capacities to supp ort adoption of 
these models and practices during (and after) the p roject, all of which will significantly increase be nefits to the 
society after 10 years.


---
*Page 69*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
188. All of the technologies and practices promoted  within the framework of the BRCRN project are demo nstrated 
approaches that have a clear proof of concept based  on good practices. Component2 is largely built off  of the 
process to develop district-level REDD+ Action Plan s in Nepal, and processes for local engagement with in the 
framework of REDD+. It further builds off of decade s of lessons learned in supporting decentralized co mmunity-
based natural resource management, including commun ity-forests and collaborative forestry, among other  
initiatives.  
189. For Activity 2.1.3, various pilot programs hav e been implemented that have supported communities to strengthen 
their resilience and adopt risk reduction measures.  FAO has supported the Ministry of Agriculture, Lan d 
Management and Cooperatives in piloting disaster ri sk management plans at the district level including  in Siraha 
and Udayapur Districts, where climate change adapta tion and risk reduction are major components in the  plans.  
190. The promotion of biogas (within Activity 1.1.3 ) builds off of years of experience of the Alternat ive Energy Promotion 
Centre (AEPC) and MOEWRI in supporting the adoption  and scaling up of biogas in rural communities. 54  The 
activity is designed based on AEPC guidelines and c ommon practices applied. 
191. The measures promoted in Component 1 have all been piloted in various regions of the Churia withi n the context 
of diverse development projects (Terai Arc Landscap e Programme, Hariyo Ban Program), as well as throug h 
district-level governments, especially related to w ater management, forestry, agriculture and soil con servation. 
While a barrier in the past has been coordination b etween these institutions, there is a clear proof o f concept for 
the investment and many communities have expressed interest in the proposed measures. 
192. Related to gender, the project further promote s best practices and builds on the recommendations of various 
studies (e.g. promoting leadership skills and train ings, increasing the number of women extension staf f, providing 
targeted trainings for women). 55  The gender assessment and GAP were presented and d iscussed in a workshop 
with practitioners from different organizations, in cluding organizations representing indigenous and D alit women, 
reflecting their own lessons learned and experience s, as well as best practices based on the project´s  context. 
For social inclusion and the full and effective eng agement of indigenous peoples, Dalits, and other ex cluded 
groups, the project further builds on best practice s piloted in various projects from the Government i n the land use 
Sector (e.g. Hariyo Ban, FAO, GTZ Churia Project), and have been further discussed in stakeholder cons ultations, 
including with diverse organizations (e.g. NEFIN, D ANAR, FEDO) who provided insight on lessons learned  and 
best practices from their organizations. Specific e xamples are provided in the IPPF and Gender Action Plan. 
193. Thus, it is evident that project will support the application of best practices. However despite so many successful 
experiences, a major barrier to scaling up these pr actices has been the lack of finance given the coun try´s financial 
situation and endemic poverty, as well as the poor documentation and dissemination of best practices. The project 
will help to create an enabling environment to supp ort the uptake of proven climate-resilient land use  practices, 
and will further help fill information gaps and imp rove the consolidation of relevant information on c limate-resilient 
land use planning and management, while also improv ing extension services and training and information  
dissemination. Annex 2provides a detailed list per activity of key best practices and experiences for each activity.  
                                                                 
54  Bajgain and Shakya 2005 
55  E.g. Recommendations from: WWF´s Hariyo Ban Project , World Bank and FAO Recommendations (WB and FAO 20 18); CARE 
Nepal (including the SAKCHAM Project); Government o f Nepal; World Bank´s State and Peacebuilding Fund (SPF); HIMAWANTI 
consultations; FEDO consultations; RECOFTC 2015;  R EDD+ Consultations and Pilot Projects in Nepal, amo ng others. Examples of 
practices include: disaggregated data and gender-re sponsive monitoring, GESI mainstreamed into policy,  action plans and 
management plans as a crosscutting element, leaders hip training for men and women, targeted trainings for women, training of all 
project staff, extension staff and project partners  on GESI to enable gender equality and social inclu sion within the project, cooperation 
with women´s organizations and NGOs, capacity enhan cement on gender-based violence, promotion of femal e extension agents 
(including indigenous women, and Dalit women, among  others), awareness raising for women’s opportuniti es and rights within CBOs, 
and extension services tailored to female farmers, among others. See the GAP and IPPF for more detaile d information .


---
*Page 70*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 11 7 
 
 
 E 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF 
core 
indicators Estimated cost per t CO 2eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total project financing US$ 47.34 million  
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$39.3 million  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  11.48 million tCO 2eq  
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 4.13 / tCO 2eq  
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eqremoved (e = b / c)  US$ 3.43 / tCO 2eq  
 
Methodology used for calculating indicators: 
Cost (a) and (b): While both adaptation and mitigat ion measures are supported by the project many of t he 
activities are cross-cutting in nature and thus it is challenging to break the budget down into mitiga tion and 
adaptation-exclusive activities. Thus, the total bu dget was used for the calculation, which will resul t in a 
conservative estimation of the costs per emission r eductions overtime. In reality, the costs will like ly be 
lower as not all funds will be used for mitigation activities.  
Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime (c) is the same figure presented in Section E.1.2. The 
methodology for its calculation is summarized in Se ction E.1.2, and explained in more detail in the 
Feasibility Study. 
Comparison with appropriate benchmarks:  
The cost per tCO 2eq for the overall project and for the GCF are very  competitive. Many carbon projects/ 
programs, such as the Forest Carbon Partnership Fac ility´s Carbon Fund, have set a price of US$ 5 per 
tCO 2eq. Considering that the costs are a conservative c alculation, including funding for both adaptation 
and mitigation activities, this represents a cost-e ffective approach to reducing GHG emissions.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the p roposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and priva te sources (mitigation only) 
GCF grant will directly leverage USD 8.04 million i n national co-financing from MoFE. Overall, the pro ject 
will also leverage additional private investment du ring and after the project, mainly in form of the i n-kind 
contributions of farmers and project participants t o manage agricultural and forestry interventions. G CF 
financing will cover only the initial investment co sts of transitioning to climate resilient agricultu ral and 
forestry models, while maintenance and management o f the proposed models will be financed by the 
project participants.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)


---
*Page 71*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 11 7 
 
 
 F F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Economic Analysis 
194. For the economic analysis, the Net Present Val ue (NPV) and Economic Rate of Return (ERR) are used  as 
performance indicators. A discount rate of 10% was used, which reflects the opportunity cost of capita l. This is the 
rate that is currently used by multilateral develop ment agencies in Nepal for natural resource managem ent 
projects.   
195. A period of 7 years, 10 years and 20 years is used for the analysis. The 7-year period reflects t he GCF project length. 
Considering that many investments will continue to generate benefits into the future, the 10-year and 20-year periods 
were also analysed to better capture the full benef its of the project. 
196. The project is assessed from two perspectives:  One that integrates the social value of carbon (gl obal perspective) 
and one that excludes it (domestic perspective). A social carbon price of USD 40 / tCO 2 was used. This is based 
on the World Bank guidance note on the shadow price  of carbon in economic analysis.56  
197. Incremental costs and benefits are quantified as a result of comparing the ´ with ´ and ´ without ´ project scenarios. 
The project economic costs and benefits include all  investment and production costs as estimated in th e financial 
analysis (see below). The costs were converted to e conomic cost using the standard conversion factor o f 1 for 
production models. In addition, non-land-based inve stment cost requested from GCF and government co-fi nancing 
is integrated in the economic analysis. 
198. The project will directly support intervention s on 60,965 ha of agricultural land, 202,237 of for est land, and create 
about 7,300 ha of new (agro)-forests. The water and  soil conservation infrastructure investment will t arget about 
130 villages / settlements, which is equivalent to at least 21,300 ha of agricultural land. Biogas is expected to be 
adopted by at least 500 households as a result of s upport from the project. The economic analysis uses  anaverage 
adoption rate of 80%. At this adoption rate, the pr oject is estimated to deliver mitigation benefits o f 574,180 
tCO 2eq/year, which is equivalent to about 11.48 million  tCO 2eq over the 20-year lifetime of the project. 
199. In the ´ with ´ and ´ without ´ project scenarios, climate risks due to extreme e vents and slow onset impacts are taken 
into account. The project is expected to reduce cli mate change related economic losses in the target a rea by at 
least 50% compared to the without project scenario.  
200. Benefits that are excluded : Additional economic benefits are likely to be gen erated as a result of the project, including 
due to interventions that strengthen the capacities  of government and other stakeholders to respond to  climate change 
risks and manage natural resources in (and beyond) the project area. Further benefits may occur due to  the 
‘demonstration effect’, through which the project’s  support for land-use practices may prompt addition al 
communities/households to adopt similar practices b eyond the scope of the project. None of these poten tial benefits 
were factored into the economic analysis. In additi on, the project will generate considerable non-mark etable 
ecosystem services such as biodiversity protection that are excluded from the analysis due to the lack  of robust 
monetary values for these non-market services. The results of the economic analysis (below) are theref ore 
considered to be conservative.   
 
Results of economic analysis 
201. From the perspective of the Government of Nepa l (i.e. without social value of carbon), the econom ic analysis 
demonstrates that the project is profitable over it s 20-year lifetime, with an NPV of USD 40.9 million  and an ERR 
of 20%. The project is considerably more profitable  from a global perspective, resulting in a positive  NPV of USD 
18.1 million after just 7 years (ERR: 97%) and USD 201.8 million after 20 years (ERR: 115%).This clear ly justifies 
the GCF investment into the project from an economi c point of view.  
                                                                 
56  It suggests to use price ranges between USD 40 – 8 0 /tCO 2 for the year 2020.  To be conservative the lower c arbon price was used 
in the economic analysis for the BRCRN project.


---
*Page 72*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 11 7 
 
 
 F F 
 
Table 9.Results of the economic analysis with and w ithout GHG emission reduction 
  Governmental perspective without social value of 
carbon Global perspective with a  social 
value of carbon (USD 40/tCO2eq) 
  NPV (USD) ERR NPV (USD) ERR 
7 years -39,649,794  Not quantifiable 18,052,633  97%  
10 years -16,211,670  -2%  78,531,090  114%  
20 years 40,905,003  20%  201,763,711  115%  
 
202. A sensitivity analysis was also developed to a ssess how robust the economic benefits of the proje ct would be to 
key changes. The results of the sensitivity analysi s are summarized in Table 10 (below), and clearly d emonstrate 
that the project would deliver strong economic bene fits even if: costs were to increase; revenues were  to decrease; 
the social value of carbon were calculated differen tly; and the adoption rate were to decline.  
 
Table 10. Results of the sensitivity analysis 
Sensitivity analysis Change 
factor NPV (USD) 
10 years NPV (USD) 
20 years ERR 10 
years ERR 20 
years 
Base case   78,531,090 201,763,711  114% 115% 
Cost increases 10% 58,755,773 168,890,798  77% 81% 
20% 38,980,455 136,017,886  48% 57% 
30% 19,205,138 103,144,974  27% 40% 
Revenues reduction in project scenario -10% 51,380,097 150,628,103  72% 77% 
-20% 24,229,104 99,492,496 36% 48% 
-30% -2,921,889 48,356,888 7% 27% 
Social value of carbon (USD/tCO2) 60 125,902,470  282,193,064  220% 220% 
50 102,216,780  241,978,388  167% 168% 
30 54,845,400 161,549,034  69% 74% 
Adoption rate compared to base case (80%) 110% 88,403,878 222,831,487  130% 131% 
90% 68,658,302 180,695,934  98% 100% 
80% 58,785,515 159,628,157  83% 86% 
 
Financial Analysis 
203. Financial analysis was used to: evaluate the f inancial viability of the climate resilient investm ent and interventions 
promoted by the project from a land user perspectiv e; assess the incremental costs and revenues result ing from 
project interventions; and provide a basis for the economic analysis of the project. This involved per forming a Cost-
benefit analysis (CBA) for the ‘with’  and ‘without’  project scenarios. For each land use category, cos ts, yields, 
revenues and cash flows were compiled on a per hect are basis. The models used for the analysis are bri efly 
summarized in Table 14 below.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 11 7 
 
 
 F F 
 
Table 11. Intervention models considered in financi al analysis 
Churia  Terai  
Baseline  Project scenario  Baseline  Project scenario  
Agricultural land  
1.Mixed agricultural farming 
(maize and vegetables) 1.Transition to climate resilient 
mixed farming system (maize 
and vegetables) 
1.Mixed agricultural farming 
(maize and vegetables) 1.Transition to climate resilient 
mixed farming system (maize 
and vegetables 
2.Transition to horticulture 
systems (e.g. mango production) 2.Soil conservation measures, 
ponds and irrigation infrastructure 
rehabilitation 3.Soil conservation measures, 
ponds and irrigation 
infrastructure rehabilitation 
2.Agricultural land loss due to 
erosion and reduction of 
agricultural land 4.Gully stabilization 2.Agricultural land loss due to 
erosion and reduction of 
agricultural land 3.Gully stabilization 
Forest land  
1.Unsustainable management of 
natural forests under degradation   1. Natural Forest Management 
and enrichment planting with 
native tree species  1. Non-forest land along river 
banks subject to erosion and land 
loss 1.Protection forest establishment 
(e.g. bamboo) 
2. Commercial forest plantations 
(Teak) 
Non -land interventions  
Unsustainable extraction of 
fuelwood  Adoption of small-scale biogas 
plans at household level - - 
 
204. The analysis considers only the land-based cos t and revenues from a land user perspective. The br oader 
investment package for each land use will include e .g. improved extension and training and benefit fro m improved 
institutions. These are assessed as part of the eco nomic analysis and not integrated in the financial analysis.  
205. The financial analysis of the project is based  on prices, costs and yields collected during proje ct preparation, and 
a review of published literature on Nepalese forest ry and agriculture. The prices of farm products use d in the 
analysis are farm gate prices. The results of the f inancial analysis are summarized in the table below . 
 
Table 12.Net Present Values of production models wi th and without the BRCRN Project 
  
  Churia  Terai  
Without project  With project  Without project  With project  
Agriculture (10 years)  NPV (USD/ha)  NPV (USD/ha)  
Climate resilient farming practices -576 735 301 2,002 
Horticulture management practices -576 687   
Forestry (20 years)  
Sustainable Natural Forest  Management with enrichm ent planting 
with native tree species  233 257   
Sustainable natural forest management model - comme rcial 
utilization (per ha) 233 412   
Conservation of natural forests (only NTFP use) (pe r ha) 233 159   
Protection forest establishment - Bamboo on riverba nks   0 883 
Commercial forest plantation (Teak)   0 1,674 
Infrastructure - Soil and water conservation (10 years)  
Rehabilitation of ponds and small-scale irrigation infrastructure  -576 906 301 2,065 
Gully stabilization  -576 173 301 1,440 
Non -land based investment  
Biogas promotion and investment (per household) -84 3 217


---
*Page 74*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 11 7 
 
 
 F F 
206. The analysis demonstrates that all project sce nario models are profitable from a farmer /land use r perspective 
ranging between USD 159 /ha and USD 2,506 /ha. Howe ver, in order to achieve this profitability, GCF in vestments 
are required, as the increased revenue streams will  occur a few years after the initial investment – u p-front costs 
that the poor and vulnerable smallholders targeted by the BRCRN project cannot incur on their own. 
207. A more detailed overview of the economic and f inancial analysis done for this project is included  in Annex 2 – 
Feasibility Study  Section 6.2, and in Annex 3 – Integrated Financial Model ( specifically document  3.1 – Financial 
and Economic Analysis) . 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
208. The project has been designed building on the longstanding experience of FAO Nepal, MoFE,  MoALMC , MOEWRI 
and MoHA, among other key actors, on topics related  to climate change adaptation and mitigation. A sum mary of 
the technical evaluation considerations is included  here below. Detailed technical specifications for project-
supported practices, approaches and structures are included in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, Appendix A , 
specifically:  
a) Climate-resilient agriculture (nutrient manageme nt, soil and water conservation, agronomic practice s, 
tillage and residue management, agroforestry) in Ap pendix A.1.  
b) Ecosystem restoration (soil and water conservati on/bio-engineering, restoration and rehabilitation of 
degraded forest ecosystems, sustainable management of forest resources) in Appendix A.2.  
c) Tree planting on private and public lands (fruit  orchards/horticulture, smallholder woodlots, conto ur 
free/boundary planting, fodder banks, commercial tr ee plantations, protective plantations, nursery and  
seed management) in Appendix A.3.  
209. Various proven technologies and best practices  will be promoted within the context of the BRCRN p roject. 
Interventions will be based on climate-resilient la nd use planning focusing on integrated holistic man agement 
identifying key intervention areas and mapping best  practices at the local level, as well as local-lev el workshops 
and participatory land use planning with CBOs to su pport them to integrate climate-resilient land use into their 
management strategies and ensure that proposed meas ures are suitable based on the environmental, cultu ral 
and socio-economic context at the local level.  
210. The approach applied within Component 2 builds  off of government experiences, especially from RED D+ ER-PD 
and DRAP development, in combining top-down and bot tom-up planning, while also addressing existing cap acity 
gaps identified as barriers for the adoption and sc aling up of climate-resilient practices. Component 2 Activities 
will strengthen government capacities while support ing operational planning for project implementation , while also 
building on the results from this planning to stren gthen capacities and promote participatory land use  planning 
based on local contexts and priorities aligned with  CERPs. This approach will ensure that integrated p lanning at 
the river system level is adopted, while providing flexibility and engaging local CBOs to build their adaptive 
capacities and support them to plan and implement c limate-resilient land use tailored to their priorit ies and 
differentiated vulnerabilities.   
211. Given the new roles of newly formed institutio ns, CERPs and other local-level plans are important  to raise 
awareness of climate change risks and resilient lan d use practices and to build capacities on such pla nning 
processes. CERPs will further engage local governme nts and promote integrated land use planning, and w ill be 
developed with support from experts on topics rangi ng from integrated watershed management, biodiversi ty, 
agriculture, forestry and GESI.  
212. Technologies promoted under Component 1 (descr ibed in Section C.3 and E.6.4) have been selected d ue to their 
relevance and effectiveness for climate change adap tation and mitigation based on the context of the p roject area. 
Technologies and best practices promoted through th ese measures are all demonstrated measures with a c lear 
proof of concept, where the project will build on e xperiences and lessons learned from piloted project s in Nepal as


---
*Page 75*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 11 7 
 
 
 F F 
well as international best practices. A detailed as sessment of these measures is available within the feasibility 
study.  
213. Measures related to extension services have be en designed in close consideration of key barriers facing extension 
services (e.g. youth engagement, lack of informatio n on climate change, weak capacities, among others further 
described in Annex 2).  
214. Insufficient investments in ITC have been iden tified as a barrier for monitoring the impacts of c limate change, but 
also for disseminating knowledge and improving info rmation materials. 57  Within extension services, such 
investments have the potential to provide up-to-dat e information to local resource persons, farmers an d 
government officials and improve communication and coordination. To support the longevity of this meas ure, it will 
be delivered through MoITFE – who will receive regu lar trainings on the system and its management.  
215. Before the government transition, some pilot d istricts elaborated DRR plans at the district level . Such processes 
and the resulting plans, including efforts from FAO  to implement planning processes in Udayapur among others, 
were successful in providing increased attention to  DRR and providing orientation to support disaster 
preparedness and risk reduction processes. District s no longer exist under the current government stru cture, and 
thus the project aims to build on these experiences  and develop risk management plans at the Provincia l level for 
provinces 1-3. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
216. The FAO Project Environmental and Social Scree ning Checklist was prepared (ESMF - Annex 4), and t he project 
was identified as a Category B ( moderate risk ). 
Environmental Impacts and Risks 
217. While the project is expected to generate prim arily positive environmental impacts, there are som e potential short-
term and site-specific environmental impacts that c ould arise from project implementation. Small-scale  
environmental degradation could occur due to the co nstruction of small-scale infrastructure including check dams, 
stone walls, contour bunds, and conservation ponds (e.g. removing the dirt from conservation ponds cou ld result 
in increased erosion or runoff into local waterways ). Impacts will be mitigated through the preparatio n of a 
management plan for the proposed activities that wi ll be prepared together with local government techn icians from 
the Department of Soil Conservation. Before constru ction can occur, plans will need to be reviewed and  approved. 
These plans will take into account seasonal-restric tions and conditions, as well as measures to limit the 
environmental impact. Construction activities will be undertaken during the dry season in order to red uce erosion 
and sedimentation into rivers and bodies of water.  
218. One protected area´s buffer zone slightly over laps with one of the 26 BRCRN prioritized river sys tems (Adherei 
Khola, Baruwa Khola and Duar Khola River System): t he Koshi Tappu Wilfdlife Reserve. The Wildlife Rese rve was 
designated a Ramsar site in 1987, and is home to di verse wildlife including 485 species of birds, 31 s pecies of 
mammals, among other flora and fauna. 58  While no direct project interventions are planned for the core-
intervention area, a Biodiversity Management Framew ork has been developed to ensure the project causes  no 
harm and promotes positive environmental impacts wi thin and around the reserve (Annex 4). 
219. The project will also support the establishmen t of forest plantations and agroforestry systems on  degraded lands 
(that are not used for agricultural purposes and th at do not require deforestation). The project will ensure that 
relevant national regulations, such as the country´ s Forest Policy (2015), as well as operational guid elines for 
community-forest users groups. Both native and non- native species will be promoted for woodlots and co mmercial 
plantations, however non-native species will only b e promoted when they are locally adapted species wi th a long-
                                                                 
57  Dhital 2017 
58 https://www.nepjol.info/index.php/INIT/article/view /2513


---
*Page 76*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 11 7 
 
 
 F F 
history of implementation in the region, taking int o account the principle of site-species matching. 59  Only native 
species will be used for ecosystem restoration and rehabilitation in critical ecosystems. Additional i nformation on 
risk avoidance and mitigation measures can be found  within the BRCRN project´s ESMF (Annex 4).  
Social Impacts and Risks 
220. As with environmental impacts, majority of the  project´s impacts are expected to be largely posit ive and enhance 
the resilience of local communities. Nonetheless, i t is possible that site-specific short-term negativ e impacts could 
occur. The project could lead to conflicts between community members who disagree on land use planning  
processes. Changes in land use due to the mainstrea ming of climate-resilient SNRM practices and promot ion of 
improved livelihood practices could discriminate ag ainst some members of society, especially poor and 
marginalized communities (e.g. if they are no longe r able to free graze in forests). Participation in the BRCRN 
project is voluntary, and communities’ participatio n will be based on the principle of FPIC. The proje ct provides a 
flexible approach for communities to integrate clim ate-resilient land use practices into their local m anagement 
plans, where communities can decide, based on their  specific operational protocols and decision making  
processes, what practices are appropriate based on their context. Part of the process in Component 1 w ill also 
ensure that in instances where certain land uses ar e restricted that there is clear consultation with disadvantaged 
households and a plan to address potential limitati ons for these households.  
221. Indigenous peoples and marginalized minority g roups, including Dalits among others, often experie nce 
discrimination and may face additional barriers to their participation and engagement that could limit  their 
engagement within the project. The project has been  designed with extensive consultations from diverse  
stakeholders, and targeted measures to strengthen s ocial inclusion have been mainstreamed as cross-cut ting 
elements throughout the project proposal. Represent atives from indigenous federations, Dalit organizat ions and 
other organizations representing marginalized group s will be invited to participate in multi-stakehold er bodies 
within the project management structure, to enhance  coordination, collaboration and ongoing communicat ion 
during project implementation.   
222. Within the BRCRN project area, 31% of inhabita nts are indigenous peoples. An Indigenous Peoples P lanning 
Framework has been established within the context o f the BRCRN project, in consultation with diverse i ndigenous 
peoples, as well as representatives from indigenous  federations and organizations in Nepal, to ensure the project 
causes no harm to indigenous peoples. The planning framework further ensures that efforts will be made  to 
respect, include and promote indigenous peoples iss ues during project implementation, including their right to 
FPIC. The project will generate numerous additional benefi ts to indigenous peoples, and has been designed to 
take into account the different contexts and vulner abilities of indigenous peoples living in the proje ct area.  
Gender Equality  
223. At least 50% of project beneficiaries will be women, with proportional representation of indigeno us peoples, Dalits 
and other marginalized groups. All members of proje ct management structures will undergo trainings on GESI in 
the context of the BRCRN project, ensuring that all  staff are aware of potential barriers, differentia ted vulnerabilities 
and opportunities within the project to empower and  engage these groups of beneficiaries. Trainers and  local 
resource persons supporting the project will includ e diverse people, including women, indigenous peopl es and 
other marginalized groups, including Dalits.  
224. The project will build off of best-practice ap proaches piloted in the Churia and Terai Regions to  strengthen gender 
equality. Diverse consultations have been conducted  with women’s organizations, including organization s 
representing indigenous women and Dalit women, amon g others, as well as local community members and lo cal-
level gender focus groups. Based on these consultat ions as well as best-practice approaches, strategie s for 
supporting gender equality and empowerment within t he framework of the BRCRN project were devised and 
integrated into the GAP (including project-wide mea sures and activity-specific considerations).  
                                                                 
59  Species-site matching: selecting tree species so a s to align their particular growth requirements (e. g. nutrients; water; climate / altitude) 
with the given parameters at any one site. The sele ction of site-compatible species – irrespective of their provenance – is the prime 
option of choice.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 11 7 
 
 
 F F 
Grievance Redress Mechanism  
225. A grievance redress mechanism for the BRCRN pr oject has been developed to ensure that complaints are 
adequately addressed in an effective and timely man ner. Anyone who has a complaint or who is negativel y 
impacted by the project is able to communicate thei r complaints or problems thorough the official mech anism 
(described in greater detail within the ESMF - Anne x 4).  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
226. As the Accredited Entity for the BRCRN project , FAO will ensure that financial management and pro curement of 
goods and services using GCF resources will adhere to international standards and good practices. This  includes 
financial management and procurement performed by M oFE (as Executing Entity). An FAO-commissioned micr o-
assessment of MoFE in June 2018 (which included an assessment of MoFE’s financial management and 
procurement policies and practices) identified the ministry as a “low-risk” partner in this respect. T his includes a 
low-risk rating specifically for procurement action s to be undertaken by MoFE, which are done in line with the 
prevailing Public Procurement Law of the Government  of Nepal. To enable effective performance of finan cial 
management and procurement functions by the Executi ng Entity, the project will also hire: (i) a financ e officer, 
procurement officer and administrative officer to w ork in the PMU throughout the duration of the proje ct; and (ii) 
provincial administrative/finance officers in each of the PPMUs. 
227. The FAO Technical Capacity Development Team (a s co- Executing Entity) will perform a range of sup ervisory and 
support functions in relation to financial manageme nt and procurement performed by MoFE. These are gea red 
toward (inter alia) ensuring all procurement is don e in line with agreed standards and practices, and to minimize 
procurement-related risk. In addition, the FAO Tech nical Capacity Development Team will directly manag e a small 
proportion of the project budget to deliver Technic al Assistance and other such services to the projec t. Financial 
management and procurement performed by this team w ill be guided by relevant FAO rules and regulations , as 
well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Ma ster Agreement (AMA) signed by FAO and the GCF. The se 
rules and regulations were reviewed and deemed sati sfactory by the GCF Secretariat and Accreditation P anel as 
part of FAO’s accreditation to the GCF. 
228. FAO has deployed an Oracle based Enterprise Re source Planning (ERP) system entitled the ‘Global R esources 
Management System’ (GRMS). This system provides all  FAO employees around the world with travel, human 
resources, procurement and finance functionalities.  Using GRMS improves the flow of financial informat ion, 
supports financial monitoring and reporting, increa ses transparency and visibility, and strengthens in ternal control. 
FAO maintains a Chart of Accounts which is used by the whole Organization and that allows for a separa tion of 
income and expenditure by donor and project and it provides a standardised coding structure that enabl es data to 
be recorded, classified and summarised to facilitat e internal management and external reporting requir ements. 
229. Direct procurement by FAO is done in accordanc e with its Manual Section on “Procurement of Goods,  Works and 
Services”. To sub-contract the delivery of specific  activities using Letters of Agreement, FAO operate s in 
accordance with a specific Manual Section on “Lette rs of Agreement”. Such services are managed under t he FAO 
Procurement Service, which provides policy and oper ational support to FAO offices and staff undertakin g these 
activities to ensure the Organization procures good s, works and services based on “Best Value for Mone y” 
principles. To sub-contract delivery for agreed res ults, FAO operates in accordance with its policy th at governs the 
indirect implementation of FAO-led projects and pro grammes. 
230. Financial management and procurement by MoFE ( as Executing Entity) will also be overseen and supe rvised by 
the FAO-GCF project supervision team. As per the pr ovisions of the FAO Operational Partners Implementa tion 
Modality (OPIM), the FAO-GCF project supervision te am will undertake regular supervision missions, and  will 
recruit a qualified, internationally recognized aud iting firm to perform regular spot checks and audit s, to ensure 
financial management and procurement by the PMU and  PPMUs are being performed in line with agreed 
standards and practices. This will be governed by t he agreement to be signed between FAO and the Gover nment 
of Nepal before the project becomes operational.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Insufficient coordination and collaboration among 
government institutions and community-based natural  
resource management committees. Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Risk mitigation will focus on: (i) sensitization an d awareness raising of the importance of strong col laboration; (ii) 
alignment with government policies; (iii) drawing o n existing examples of inter-sectoral collaboration  in the delivery of 
similar projects (e.g. REDD+); iv) involving key st akeholders from the beginning through diverse consu ltations 60  with 
clear roles and responsibilities for all, including  representation on project management structures su ch as the PSC 
and PCU; (iv) ensuring transparency in decision mak ing, (v) organizing trainings to  build capacities and develop joint 
sense of purpose; and (vi) maintaining effective co mmunication channels. A results-based project frame work based 
on shared resources will further catalyze effective  coordination as these institutions will be fully a ware of the 
importance of the project in contributing towards t heir own respective development agendas and providi ng co-benefits.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Weak enforcement capacity that may make it 
challenging to change the status quo of illegal or 
unsustainable natural resource use. Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Incentives for local communities to engage in bette r resource management will act as a motivator for t he adoption of 
sustainable legal practices and improved enforcemen t. CBOs, as well as local and provincial government  staff will be 
trained to understand threats from climate change a nd suitable climate-resilient land use practices to  improve 
resilience. Targeted approaches will be applied tha t take into account the differentiated contexts, ne eds and 
vulnerabilities of local people. Furthermore, the p roject is closely aligned with key policies of Nepa l, and have strong 
synergies with the FIP and proposed ER-PD program t hat aim to reduce deforestation and unsustainable l and use. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
                                                                 
60 Additional information available in ESMF (Annex E) G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
231. Risk factors associated with the implementatio n of the BRCRN project include technical, instituti onal and 
operational risks. Prominent risks that may comprom ise the success of the BRCRN project include: 
a) The risk that government and non-government enti ties involved in the project may be unable/unwillin g 
to coordinate and collaborate, which is essential t o the success of the project and its efforts to pro mote 
a landscape and ecosystem-based approach. 
b) Weak enforcement capacity among key entities, an d path dependency among communities, that may 
make it difficult to sustainably achieve changes in  land-use patterns and decision-making. 
c) Institutional risks associated with the ongoing political transition in Nepal, which may complicate  
project implementation if the government decides to  further adjust the specific distribution of 
mandates, roles and/or responsibilities. 
232. These risks, as well as the project´s risk mit igation strategies, are briefly presented below.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Turnover of key project personnel, implementing 
agencies, provincial and local governments.  Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
While some personnel turnover is expected to occur,  the negative impacts on project implementation wil l be mitigated 
through various measures. Project operational handb ooks will be developed to provide project staff a s tandard training 
on project activities. Project standard processes f or project implementation, management and reporting  will ensure 
clear processes and mechanisms are in place for kno wledge transfer. PPMUs will further ensure close co ordination 
with provincial and local governments. The developm ent of provincial strategies and CERPs will further  help to ensure 
the medium- to long-term orientation to support the  implementation of the BRCRN project. The presence of FAO´s 
office in Nepal will further help to ensure continu ous coordination.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Potential climate change impacts may prevent the 
expected positive environmental outcomes, even if 
the project is successful in encouraging local 
communities to mainstream and implement climate-
resilient SNRM and DRR. Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Implemented activities will take into account the r isk of extreme weather events and climate risks int o their design. 
Environmental and social management plans will be d eveloped for Component 1 Activities during the seco nd year of 
project implementation that will identify protocols  for risk management, monitoring and maintenance. S easonal risks 
will also be taken into account in local-level acti vity planning and implementation. Detailed informat ion on activity-
specific risks and mitigation measures is provided within the ESMF (Annex 4).  
The introduction of resilient practices over a larg e contiguous area, alongside complementary efforts funded by other 
donors, will help mitigate risks that climate chang e is likely to cause.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Women, indigenous peoples, Dalits and other 
marginalized groups do not participate in project 
activities.  Social and 
environmental Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Diverse stakeholders have been consulted for the el aboration of the project funding proposal, includin g women, 
indigenous peoples, Dalits and other marginalized g roups. Based on these consultations, recommendation s to 
strengthen the engagement of these groups have been  mainstreamed across activities and components. A G ESI-
responsive M&E framework will ensure regular monito ring is conducted, and adjustments are made as nece ssary to 
strengthen GESI within the project context. 
The project will draw on existing protocols to ensu re that regulations and best practices are followed  on all times to 
ensure full participation of such marginalized grou ps in planning, decision-making and implementation of project 
activities. All members of the project management b odies will undergo GESI trainings. The GAP and IPPF  will further 
contribute to the effective and sustained engagemen t of these key stakeholders in project implementati on. Trainers 
hired will include women, indigenous peoples and Da lits, among others. Representatives from women’s gr oups, 
indigenous federations and Dalit organizations, amo ng other organizations representing marginalized gr oups, will be 
invited to participate on the PCU in each Province.  Close cooperation will be sought with such organiz ations.


---
*Page 80*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Site-specific environmental impacts due to the 
construction of small-scale rural infrastructure 
(retention ponds, check dams, etc.) Social and 
environmental Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Small-scale site-specific impacts could arise due t o the project´s activities. Environmental and Socia l Management 
Plans will be developed for Component 1 Activities to address and manage potential site-specific impac ts. Annual 
reporting on the maintenance and monitoring of thes e measures will be done local authorities, and repo rted to the 
PMU safeguards officer. Activity-specific mitigatio n measures to are described in further detail withi n the ESMF.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Conflicts within CBOs about land use decisions, 
including decisions that could have disproportionat e 
impacts on some community members, especially 
poor households and marginalized groups Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Local level land use planning based on participator y local-level planning processes based on consultat ions with 
members of local CBOs/users groups, promoting propo rtional representation women, indigenous peoples an d people 
from marginalized minority groups. Through the appl ication of a local participatory process, climate r esilient SNRM 
and land use planning is integrated based on commun ities priorities and local context. Decision-making  processes will 
be based off of the organization/ user group´s oper ational guidelines and protocols. GESI consideratio ns and pro-poor 
measures have been integrated operational guideline s and laws, which will help ensure the integration and 
participation of diverse men and women, including i ndigenous peoples, Dalits and other marginalized pe rsons.  
Trainers and project management will be trained in GESI. Awareness raising and capacity building on cl imate-resilient 
land use planning and SNRM, based on piloted good p ractices, will ensure local CBOs are aware of clima te risks and 
risk-reduction measures, such as climate resilient SNRM. Investments in climate-resilient land use wil l target highly 
vulnerable ecosystems and households, taking into a ccount differentiated needs and vulnerabilities. In  the case where 
any household/ person feels discriminated against o r has concerns related to the project, they are abl e to access the 
project´s grievance redress mechanism (described gr eater detail within Annex 4). 
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring 
Long-term sustainability of investments 
 Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Investments in long-term land use practices (e.g. f orestry) or soil and water conservation measures ma y require future 
investments to maintain investments. For all invest ments that will require ongoing maintenance costs, such costs will 
be clearly communicated prior to activity implement ation. Operational management plans will be develop ed for all 
CBOs who adopt such practices, which will clearly c ommunicate management needs and maintenance require ments, 
and establish a plan for financing future maintenan ce costs based on operational guidelines and proced ures of the 
respective community-based organization. Local reso urce persons and local government officials will be  trained on 
monitoring, management and maintenance of such inve stments to lower costs. An emphasis on capacity bui lding and 
trainings will further build capacities for appropr iate management and maintenance.  
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description Risk category Level of impact Probability of risk 
occurring


---
*Page 81*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
Government transition could lead to delays or 
adjustments in anticipated government structures. Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Government of Nepal is currently undergoing a t ransition from a constitutional monarchy to a feder al democratic 
republic. While the Constitution and Local Governme nt Operation Act (2017) both provide detailed infor mation on the 
roles, responsibilities and coordination mechanisms , in practice capacities and institutions are still  being built and 
established. This is seen as a low-risk since the p roject was closely developed with a cross-sectoral committee from 
various ministries and departments, whom are highly  aware and engaged in the transition process, Nonet heless, there 
may need to be additional fine-tuning upon project approval to ensure that institutional structures pr oposed for the 
project are still appropriate during the project in ception phase. The PSC will further support close c ommunication with 
government officials to address potential delays or  adjustments.  
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Large volume of procurement to be managed by 
MoFE could result in compliance risks associated 
with financial management (e.g. AML/CFT). Financial  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) will  manage a large volume of contracts and procurement  under the 
proposed GCF project. MoFE policies, practices and track record on financial management and procuremen t were 
reviewed by a qualified audit and accounting firm d uring project design and deemed (by the firm and FA O_ to be 
satisfactory to ensure compliance with internationa l standards. The FAO Technical Capacity Development  Team will 
further mitigate the above-mentioned risks by worki ng closely with MoFE to deliver activities under th e proposed 
project, and by recruiting a procurement advisor/su pport expert to directly support MoFE with its proc urement actions 
to ensure international standards are adhered to. I n addition, the FAO-GCF project supervision team wi ll recruit a 
qualified audit/accounting firm to perform regular audits and spot checks to further reinforce complia nce with 
international standards. 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon


---
*Page 82*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
H.1. Logic Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fu nd level 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-
emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathways The BRCRN project will contribute to reducing defor estation, supporting reforestation, sustainably man aging forest 
resources, conserving and enhancing forest carbon s tocks and adopting land management practices that e nhance 
carbon sequestration. The project will do so by sup porting community-based organizations (CBOs) to ado pt and 
apply such practices in their communities, while al so building the capacity of these CBOs and their go vernments to 
sustain and scale up such investments beyond projec t closure.  
Increased 
climate-
resilient 
sustainable 
development The BRCRN project will contribute to increasing the  resilience of the most vulnerable communities and ecosystems 
in 26 vulnerable river systems by working with CBOs t o scale up adoption of climate-resilient land use p ractices 
and other climate-resilient SNRM approaches. The pr oject will do so by directly supporting CBOs to ado pt and 
apply such practices in their communities, while al so building the capacity of these CBOs and their go vernments to 
sustain and scale up such investments beyond projec t closure. 
Expected 
Result Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target 
Assumptions Mid-term 
(end of PY4) Final 
(end of PY7)  
Fund-level impacts  
GCF core 
indicator 
(Mitigation) Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(tCO 2eq) reduced or 
avoided as a result of 
Fund-funded 
projects/programmes. Forest 
Reference 
Emission 
Levels 
Project 
reports 0 743,764 tCO 2eq 2,366,485 tCO 2eq 
(after 7 years) The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4. 
CBOs adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices (assuming the adoption 
rate that is specified in Section F.1). 
Other assumptions are described in 
detail in Section E.1 as well as in 
Annex 2 – Feasibility Study.  
Avoided deforested and degraded 
land within 20 years 27,357 ha 
Baseline emissions of 7,149,259 tCO 2 
over 20 years from projected 
deforestation. 
Cost per tCO 2eq 
decreased for Fund-
funded mitigation 
projects/programmes.  Forest 
Reference 
Emission 
Levels 
Project 
reports 
Maps/remote 
sensing 0 USD 18.06 per 
tCO 2eq  USD 17.33 per 
tCO 2eq Costs used for calculations are GCF 
grant financing only. 
The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4, 
as well as the total GCF grant 
financing expected to be committed 
by the end of PY4.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
GCF core 
indicator 
(Adaptation) Total number of direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries (gender 
disaggregated) Baseline and 
completion 
surveys 
Project 
Reports 
Training 
logs/attendan 
ce sheets 
National 
Population 
and Housing 
Census (est. 
2021) Direct: 
0 men 
0 women 
0 total 
beneficiaries 
 
 
Indirect: 
0 men 
0 women 
0 total 
beneficiaries 
 Direct: 
115,584 men 
115,584 women 
231,168 total 
beneficiaries 
[equivalent to 
48,160 
households] 
 
Indirect: 
061  men 
0 women 
0 total 
beneficiaries Direct: 
481,634 men 
481,634 women 
963,268 total 
beneficiaries 
[equivalent to 
200,681 
households] 
 
Indirect: 
1.6 million men 
1.6 million 
women 
3.2 million total 
beneficiaries  Surveys to be implemented at start-
up and completion. Surveys will 
collect data to (inter alia) assess 
household resilience at baseline and 
completion. The surveys will be 
administered by an independent 
firm to be contracted by FAO (as co-
EE). 
CBOs adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices. 
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, conducted with all 
beneficiaries prior to 
implementation of investments. 
The mid-term target for direct 
beneficiaries is an estimate based on 
the number of CBOs and households 
that are expected to be reached 
through field-level support by the 
end of PY4, multiplied by the 
average number of people (4.8) 
living in each household in the 26 
river systems that comprise the 
project area. 
Number of 
beneficiaries relative to 
total population  Direct: 
0% of the 
population of the 
project area 
Indirect: 
0% of the 
population of the 
project area Direct: 
7% of the 
population of the 
project area 
Indirect: 
0% 62  of the 
population of the 
project area Direct: 
30% of the 
population of the 
project area 
Indirect: 
100% of the 
population of the 
project area These figures are presented as 
percentages of the total population 
of the project area, which comprises 
26 vulnerable river systems. These 
river systems had a combined 
population of about 3.2 million 
people in 2011 – the most recent year 
for which census data is available. 
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services A4.1 Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems protected 
and strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and change. Project 
reports 
Training logs 
Land use and 
land cover 
assessment 
using FAO 
Open Foris 0 About 12,189 ha 
of climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
About 45,848 ha 
of forest 
ecosystems About 48,772 ha 
of climate-
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
148,998 ha of 
forest 
ecosystems The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4. 
Baseline forest cover across the 26 
targeted river systems is about 
226,850 ha (2015). 
                                                                 
61 The project expects to have supported some direct a nd indirect beneficiaries to adopt climate-resilien t SNRM practices by mid-term, but this will not be 
measured. This is because the number of people bene fiting from the adoption of such practices is consi dered to be meaningfully measured through a 
household survey, which in the interest of efficien t use of resources will not be commissioned at mid- term because project activities that will directly produce 
the beneficiary benefits begin in PY3 and reach sca le in PY5, and thus a mid-term household survey wou ld not provide an accurate indication of project 
progress.  
62 Ibid.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
Collect Earth 
toolkit 
Ground-
truthing 
exercises by 
project staff. 
 sustainably 
managed 
About 4,000 ha 
community-
managed natural 
forests restored 
through assisted 
regeneration 
0 ha of new 
planted forests 
established sustainably 
managed  
About 12,792 ha 
community 
managed natural 
forests restored 
by assisted 
regeneration 
About 5,840 ha 
new planted 
forests 
established CBOs adopt climate -resilient land 
use practices (assuming the adoption 
rate that is specified in Section F.1)  
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, conducted with all 
beneficiaries prior to 
implementation of investments 
Some measures may overlap in 
terms of area, as some hectares of 
land may benefit from two of the 
three forms of support listed in the 
previous column. For this reason, the 
targets are listed in terms of the 
total geographic reach of each type 
of support (figures within which 
there is no potential for overlap) 
rather than an overall aggregated 
figure.  
Investments for public land forest 
user groups depend on formalization 
of public land forest user groups at 
the local level.  
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
land use, 
reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, 
and through 
sustainable 
forest 
management 
and 
conservation 
and 
enhancement 
of forest 
carbon stocks M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(tCO 2eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) as 
a result of Fund-
funded 
projects/programmes.  Forest 
Reference 
Emission 
Levels 
Project 
reports 
Maps/remote 
sensing  0 743,764 tCO 2eq 2,366,485 tCO 2eq 
(after 7 years) The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4. 
CBOs adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices (assuming the adoption 
rate that is specified in Section F.1), 
and also reduce the extent to which 
they degrade and encroach on 
forests and other ecosystems within 
the project area. 
Other assumptions are described in 
detail in Section E.1 as well as in 
Annex 2 – Feasibility Study.  
Avoided deforested and degraded 
land within 20 years 27,357 ha 
Baseline emissions of 9,976,598 tCO 2 
over 20 years from projected 
deforestation.


---
*Page 85*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
 
 
                                                                 
63  Level for each coordination mechanism is expressed  on a scale of 1-4. Each ‘level’ refers to a differ ent degree of effectiveness (1 = no 
coordination mechanism; 2 = coordination mechanism in place; 3 = coordination mechanism in place, meet ing regularly with appropriate 
representation (gender and decision-making authorit ies); 4 = coordination mechanism in place, meeting regularly, with appropriate 
representation, with appropriate information flows and monitoring of action items/issued raised). H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Proj ect/Programme level 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Project 
outcomes Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land 
or forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions reductions M9.1 Hectares of 
land or forests 
under improved 
and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO 2 
emission reductions Maps/remote 
sensing 
Project reports 0 About 12,189 ha 
of climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
About 45,848 ha 
of forest 
ecosystems 
sustainably 
managed 
About 4,000 ha 
community-
managed natural 
forests restored 
through assisted 
regeneration 
0 ha of new 
planted forests 
established About 48,772 
ha of climate-
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
About 148,998 
ha of forest 
ecosystems 
sustainably 
managed  
About 12,792 
ha community 
managed 
natural forests 
restored by 
assisted 
regeneration 
About 5,840 ha 
new planted 
forests 
established Beneficiaries adopt climate-
resilient land use practices 
(assuming the adoption rate that 
is specified in Section F.1). 
Communities not only engage 
with the project to adopt project-
promoted climate-resilient SNRM, 
but also reduce the extent to 
which they degrade and encroach 
on forests and other ecosystems 
within the project area. 
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, are concluded. 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
for climate-
responsive planning 
and development A5.2Number and 
level 63  of effective 
coordination 
mechanisms  Project reports 
Reports and 
minutes from 
CFUG network 
meetings. 
Reporting by 
CBOs via the 
Churia Knowledge 
Centre 26 river-system 
level CFUG 
coordination 
networks at 
Level 1  26 river-system 
level CFUG 
coordination 
networks at Level 
2 
 26 river-system 
level CFUG 
coordination 
networks at 
Level 4 
 CFUGs in each of the 26 targeted 
river systems engage with the 
project. 
CFUGs in each of the 26 targeted 
are able to coordinate well 
amongst themselves.


---
*Page 86*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
 
  A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
change threats and 
risk reduction 
processes A8.1 Number of 
males and females 
made aware of 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses Baseline and 
completion 
surveys 
Workshop/trainin 
g attendance 
sheets and 
materials 
Project reports 
Reporting by CBOs 
via the Churia 
Knowledge Centre 0 men 
0 women 
0 total 115,584 men 
115,584 women 
231,168 total 481,634 men 
481,634 women 
963,268 total Beneficiaries are interested in 
adopting climate resilient land 
use practices.  
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, conducted with all 
beneficiaries prior to 
implementation of investments.  
Indigenous peoples, marginalized 
groups, and women are 
effectively targeted and enabled 
to participate in the project.  
The mid-term target for direct 
beneficiaries is an estimate based 
on the number of CBOs and 
households that are expected to 
be reached through field-level 
support by the end of PY4, 
multiplied by the average number 
of people (4.8) living in each 
household in the 26 river systems 
that comprise the project area.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
 
Project/Programme Performance Indicators 
 Expected 
Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Component 1: Scaling up climate-resilient SNRM 
Farmers are 
skilled in using 
climate-resilient 
land use 
practices. Proportion of 
farmers trained 
by the project 
who begin to 
apply climate-
resilient land 
use practices on 
their fields in 
the relevant 
season following 
their respective 
trainings. Assessments 
(administered by 
trainers) of 
farmers’ actions 
during the 
relevant seasons 
following 
trainings. 
Reporting by 
CBOs via the 
Churia Knowledge 
Centre. 
Randomized site 
visits to farmers’ 
fields by project 
monitoring 
specialists. 0 At least 80% of 
the farmers 
involved in 
project trainings 
by the end of PY4 
report that they 
have begun to 
apply project-
promoted 
climate-resilient 
land use practices 
in the season 
following their 
training. At least 80% of the 
farmers involved in 
project trainings by 
the end of PY7 
report that they 
have begun to apply 
project-promoted 
climate-resilient 
land use practices in 
the season following 
their training. The final selection of practices 
to be promoted at each 
specific training site are highly 
relevant to targeted farmers’ 
cropping systems and 
conditions, as well as the 
climate change challenges with 
which they must contend. 
Trainings are delivered in a 
form and manner that is 
accessible to, and relevant for, 
targeted farmers. 
Local structures 
are enhancing 
resilience against 
climate change-
induced erosion, 
sedimentation 
and flooding 
risks. Volume of 
sedimentation  In-person 
assessments 
performed by 
project staff at 
lower gabions. Baseline 
sedimentation level 
in each of the 
targeted river 
systems in which 
the project 
constructs / 
establishes gully and 
riverbank 
stabilization 
measures to be 
established in PY1. Sedimentation 
level in each of 
the targeted river 
systems in which 
the project 
constructs / 
establishes gully 
and riverbank 
stabilization 
measures is 
reduced by 5% 
(relative to the 
baseline level) by 
the end of PY4. Sedimentation level 
in each of the 
targeted river 
systems in which 
the project 
constructs / 
establishes gully and 
riverbank 
stabilization 
measures is reduced 
by25% (relative to 
the baseline level) 
by the end of PY7. Extreme events (e.g. seismic 
activity) do not damage the 
project-supported structures 
to the extent that they are 
unable to perform their 
anticipated functions. 
An unexpectedly large number 
of extreme precipitation 
events do not occur in short 
periods of time, which would 
otherwise increase runoff and 
sedimentation independently 
of the project-supported 
structures. 
Other climate-resilient SNRM 
practices (including Activities 
on climate-resilient land use, 
sustainable management of 
forests and reforestation) are 
successfully implemented, 
further reducing potential for 
erosion and sedimentation.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
Natural forest 
ecosystems are 
better 
maintained and 
protected within 
the project area. Density of forest 
area in each of 
the 26 targeted 
river systems. Biomass 
measurements in 
permanent 
sample plots of 
National Forest 
Inventory (NFI) in 
the project area Baseline forest 
density in each of 
the 26 targeted 
river systems to be 
established PY1. Forest density in 
each of the 26 
targeted river 
systems is 
increased by 1% 
(relative to the 
baseline level) by 
the end of PY4. Forest density in 
each of the 26 
targeted river 
systems is increased 
by 2% (relative to 
the baseline level) 
by the end of PY7. NFI permanent sample plots 
which are measured in the 
second NFI cycle (2018-20) are 
identified and re-measured 
before project end. 
Communities not only engage 
with the project to adopt 
project-promoted climate-
resilient SNRM, but also 
reduce the extent to which 
they degrade and encroach on 
forests and other ecosystems 
in the project area. 
The mid-term target is an 
estimate only, and is based on 
the expected reach and 
benefits of the relevant project 
activities by the end of PY4. 
Forests and tree 
cover are 
restored and 
maintained in the 
river system 
landscapes. Additional area 
of non-forest 
land converted 
and total forest 
cover in each of 
the 26 targeted 
river systems. Forest cover 
assessment using 
FAO Open Foris 
Collect Earth 
toolkit 
Ground-truthing 
exercises by 
project staff. 
 About 227,276 ha of 
forest cover across 
the 26 targeted 
river systems. Area of non-forest 
land converted to 
forest land across 
the 26 targeted 
river systems 
totals 3,636 ha by 
the end of PY4. 
This is expected 
to result in forest 
cover of about 
230,912 ha across 
the 26 river 
systems at the 
end of PY4. Area of non-forest 
land converted to 
forest land across 
the 26 targeted 
river systems totals 
19,040 ha by the 
end of PY7. This is 
expected to result in 
forest cover of 
about 246,316 ha 
across the 26 river 
systems at the end 
of PY7. The mid-term target is an 
estimate only, and is based on 
the expected reach and 
benefits of the relevant project 
activities by the end of PY4. 
Estimates of total forest cover 
in PY4 and PY7 assume 
historical annual deforestation 
rates in PY1-2 (-1.2%), and a 
reduced annual deforestation 
rate in PY3-7 (-0.5%), in line 
with the assumptions used in 
the mitigation impact 
calculations. This will be re-
assessed/updated during 
project inception to account 
for the latest trends in 
deforestation rates. 
Communities not only engage 
with the project to adopt 
project-promoted climate-
resilient SNRM, but also 
reduce the extent to which 
they degrade and encroach on 
forests and other ecosystems 
in the project area. 
Baseline data on forest cover is 
from 2015. The baseline for 
the area of forest cover across 
the 26 targeted river systems 
will therefore be re-
assessed/updated during 
project inception. 
Component 2: Strengthening institutions and plannin g for climate-resilient SNRM


---
*Page 89*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
Provincial and 
local 
governments in 
Provinces 1, 2 
and 3 are 
equipped to 
continue 
monitoring 
natural resources 
and mapping 
critical 
ecosystems to 
inform future 
planning and 
investment 
decisions. Change in 
provincial and 
local 
government 
staff’s 
understanding 
of: (i) current 
and projected 
climate change 
impacts in the 
project area; (ii) 
the current 
state of natural 
resources and 
critical 
ecosystems in 
the project area; 
and (iii) the use 
of key GIS tools 
that facilitate 
monitoring and 
mapping of 
natural 
resources and 
ecosystems. Assessments 
(administered by 
project staff) of 
local and 
provincial 
government 
staff’s 
understanding of 
climate change 
impacts, natural 
resources and key 
GIS tools, 
measured on a 
scale of 1-5 
(1=limited 
understanding; 
2=basic 
understanding; 
3=moderate 
understanding; 
4=strong 
understanding; 
5=advanced 
understanding). 0 75% of surveyed 
staff in the 
provincial and 
local governments 
improve their 
assessment scores 
by at least 1 level 
when surveyed at 
mid-term relative 
to their baseline 
assessments. 100% of surveyed 
staff in the 
provincial and local 
governments 
improve their 
assessment scores 
by at least 2 levels 
when surveyed at 
end-term relative to 
their baseline 
assessments. Provincial and local 
governments mobilize staff 
with appropriate technical 
backgrounds for project 
trainings. 
Note: Baseline levels of 
understanding of provincial 
government staff will be 
assessed during project year 1. 
Community-
based 
organizations 
(CBOs) are 
actively 
promoting 
climate-resilient 
SNRM within 
their 
communities. Proportion of 
beneficiary 
CBOs in which 
individuals 
trained by the 
project have 
organized their 
own trainings 
(or other forms 
of 
learning/knowle 
dge exchange) 
on climate-
resilient SNRM 
for other 
households/me 
mbers of their 
CBO. Baseline and 
completion 
surveys. 
Reporting by 
CBOs via the 
Churia Knowledge 
Centre. 
Randomized site 
visits to 
communities by 
project 
monitoring 
specialists. 0 At least 40% of 
the 750 
beneficiary CBOs 
have organized 
their own training 
(or other forms of 
learning/knowled 
ge exchange) on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM for 
member 
households, 
including those 
who did not 
directly benefit 
from project 
trainings. At least 80% of the 
750 beneficiary 
CBOs have 
organized their own 
training (or other 
forms of learning / 
knowledge 
exchange) on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM for member 
households, 
including those who 
did not directly 
benefit from project 
trainings. Beneficiary CBOs nominate 
qualified individuals to 
participate in project trainings 
(i.e. those with the capacity to 
not only learn, but also teach 
other households/individuals 
within their CBOs). 
Climate-resilient SNRM 
practices promoted to specific 
CBOs are highly relevant to 
their conditions and needs. 
Trainings to CBOs are 
delivered in a form and 
substance that is accessible to 
CBO members. 
Component 3: Improving knowledge, awareness and loc al capacity for climate-resilient SNRM 
Extension 
workers and 
Local Resource 
Persons (LRPs) 
are skilled in 
promoting 
climate-resilient 
SNRM. Change in 
understanding 
of government 
extension 
workers on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM practices. Pre-training (PY3), 
post-training 
(PY4) and follow-
up (PY7) 
assessments 
completed by 
extension workers 
benefiting from 
training, 
measured on a 
scale of 1-5 
(1=limited 0 At least 80% of 
trained extension 
workers improve 
their assessment 
score by at least 1 
level in their post-
training 
assessment (PY4) 
relative to their 
pre-training 100% of trained 
extension workers 
improve their 
assessment score by 
at least 2 levels in 
their follow-up 
assessments (PY7) 
relative to their pre-
training 
assessments (PY3). Although extension workers 
will only be trained once in 
PY4, the project assumes they 
will continue to enhance their 
understanding of climate-
resilient SNRM through 
engagement with other 
extension workers over the 
subsequent years. This is 
expected to result in all 180 
trained extension workers 
having a strong understanding


---
*Page 90*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
understanding; 
2=basic 
understanding; 
3=moderate 
understanding; 
4=strong 
understanding; 
5=advanced 
understanding). assessments 
(PY3). of climate -resilient SNRM by 
PY7. 
Note: Baseline levels of 
understanding of LRPs will be 
assessed during project year 3. 
Change in 
understanding 
of CBO 
members 
trained by 
extension 
workers (under 
Component 1) 
on climate-
resilient SNRM 
practices. Pre- and post-
training 
assessments 
completed by 
CBO members 
(administered by 
extension workers 
/ trainers) 
participating in 
project trainings, 
measured on a 
scale of 1-5 
(1=limited 
understanding; 
2=basic 
understanding; 
3=moderate 
understanding; 
4=strong 
understanding; 
5=advanced 
understanding). 
 0 80% of CBO 
members trained 
by extension 
workers (under 
Component 1) by 
the end of PY4 
score at least 1 
level better on 
their post-training 
assessments than 
on their pre-
training 
assessments. 90% of CBO 
members trained by 
extension workers 
(under Component 
1) by the end of PY7 
score at least 2 
levels better on 
their post-training 
assessments than 
on their pre-training 
assessments. Government fulfils its 
commitment to make qualified 
extension workers/field staff 
available to be trained by (and 
deliver support under) the 
project. 
Trained extension 
workers/field staff are 
retained by the government 
and do not transfer to other 
jobs. 
The extension system can only 
sustainably (i.e. after project 
closure) promote climate-
resilient SNRM if extension 
agents not only have a strong 
understanding of such 
practices, but are also able to 
effectively support farmers 
and other land users to learn 
about such practices – a key 
step in the process of changing 
behaviour and practices at 
field level. 
 
Activity Description Sub-activities Deliverables 
Sub-Component 1.1  
1.1.1: Establish Farmer Field Schools 
to promote climate-resilient land use. Establish a network of training sites 
on which farmers can be trained on 
climate-resilient SNRM during and 
after the project. - Identify sites for Farmer Field 
Schools (FFS). 
- Establish FFS, including 
procurement of farming 
equipment. 
- Training of trainers (ToT) for field 
staff to build capacity of FFS. - 120 FFS established and 
operational. 
1.1.2: Train farmers to adopt and 
apply climate-resilient land use 
practices. Strengthen farmers’ capacities to 
adopt/apply climate-resilient 
farming practices in their own 
fields, as well as support other 
members of their CBOs to 
adopt/apply such practices. - Procure basic farming 
tools/equipment to support 
adoption of tailored climate-
resilient farming practices (based 
on results of CERPs). 
- Deliver trainings and associated 
farming tools/equipment. - 260 training events organized 
(reaching about 7,800 Farmer 
Beneficiaries). 
1.1.3: Train farmers to adopt 
agroforestry and livestock 
management practices. Strengthen farmers’ capacities to 
adopt/apply suitable agroforestry 
and livestock management - Organize initial training  for CBO 
households on agroforestry and 
livestock management practices. - 120 initial Agro -forestry and 
Livestock Beneficiaries supported 
to adopt project-promoted


---
*Page 91*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
prac tices on their own land, as well 
as support other members of their 
CBOs to adopt/apply such 
practices, thereby building 
household-level resilience and 
easing the expansionary pressures 
driving deforestation and forest 
degradation. - Procure materials to establish 
small on-farm tree nurseries for 
initial training beneficiaries. 
- Regular site visits by field staff in 
PY3-7 to support broader 
adoption of agroforestry and 
livestock management practices, 
as well as identify and support 
livestock-owning households to 
access the government biogas 
subsidy.  practices and establish small on -
farm tree nurseries. 
- Approximately 500 households 
supported to access the 
government biogas subsidy and 
purchase/install biogas digesters. 
1.1.4: Construct check dams, gully 
stabilization measures and other local 
infrastructure to enhance resilience 
against climate change-induced 
erosion, sedimentation and flooding 
risks. Construct local structures in each 
of the 26 targeted river systems 
that will reduce community 
vulnerability to climate change 
impacts (accounting for both 
upstream and downstream 
dynamics), including: (i) erosion risk 
and sedimentation in upstream 
areas; and (ii) flooding risk and 
water stress in downstream areas. - Identify specific sites for 
community structures. 
- Develop technical specifications 
and construction guidelines for 
individual structures once sites are 
identified. 
- Recruit service providers to build 
structures in upstream and 
downstream locations, and 
supervise them while they do so. - Establish relevant structures and 
practices to stabilize 86 gullies, 
mostly in the Churia hills. 
- Establish and maintain check 
dams and/or community-
managed water harvesting ponds 
in 129 sites, mostly in the Bhavar 
zone. 
Sub-Component 1.2  
1.2.1: Support CBOs to 
develop/strengthen and deliver 
forest management operational 
plans. Improving the application of 
sustainable forest management 
practices in all forest land managed 
by forestry-related CBOs within the 
Project Area, ensuring silvicultural 
practices are implemented and 
maximizing ecosystem service 
provision and resilience, as well as 
generating significant climate 
change mitigation benefits. - Recruit service providers to work 
with all forestry-related CBOs to 
develop and/or strengthen forest 
management operational plans. 
- Procure relevant equipment for 
each relevant CBO to support 
implementation of forest 
management operational plans. 
- Regular site visits by field staff (in 
PY3-7) to provide ongoing advice 
and guidance to enable 
implementation of forest 
management operational plans. - Approximately 600 forest 
management operational plans 
developed and/or strengthened. 
1.2.2: Train CBOs and land owners to 
enable more sustainable 
management of forest ecosystems. Build the capacity of government 
staff and all forestry-related CBOs 
to better understand the principles 
and practices that underpin 
sustainable management of forest 
ecosystems, and continue applying 
such principles and practices after 
project closure. - Deliver Training of Trainer (ToT) 
events for MoITFE field staff. 
- Deliver trainings for forestry-
related CBOs and other land 
owners (“Forest Training 
Beneficiaries”). - Approximately 26 ToT events 
organized. 
- Approximately 122 local training 
events for forestry-related CBOs 
organized. 
Sub-Component 1.3  
1.3.1: Establish and support the 
operation of 52 multi-purpose tree 
nurseries to serve the plantation and 
restoration needs of CBOs and other 
forest sector stakeholders. Establish tree nurseries in the 
Project Area to support tree 
planting and forest restoration 
under this project, as well as 
planting and restoration by 
communities throughout the 
Project Area during the project and 
after project closure. - Procure equipment and materials 
needed to establish two nurseries 
in each of the 26 river systems. 
- Identify suitable sites and stablish 
nurseries on these sites. 
- Procure material inputs and 
labour needed for production of 
seedlings in PY3-7, ensuring each 
nursery has the capacity to 
produce at least 50,000 seedlings 
per year. 52 tree nurseries established and under 
operation. 
1.3.2: Establish and maintain 7,300 ha 
of forest plantations to enhance 
resilience. Establish and support maintenance 
of different types of forest 
plantations (demonstration 
plantations; public land forests on - Train MoITFE staff in each 
province on sustainable plantation 
management. - Three training events organized (1 
per province) for MoITFE staff. 
- 1,300 ha of demonstration 
plantations established.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
river bank sites; public land forests 
on community land) to build 
resilience and deliver important 
mitigation benefits, while also 
building capacity to support 
sustainable forestry activities 
beyond project closure. - Procure materials, seed  stock and 
local labour needed to plant 1,300 
ha of demonstration plantations 
in the Bhavar and Terai zones, and 
directly support and oversee this 
planting. 
- Procure materials, seedlings and 
local labour needed to establish 
1,000 ha of riparian plantations 
(on river bank sites), and directly 
support and oversee this planting. 
- Assist relevant CBOs to sign formal 
agreements with local 
Municipality offices for 
management of riparian 
plantations, as well as develop 
management plans. 
- Procure materials, seedlings and 
local labour needed to establish 
5,000 ha of plantations on 
community land, and directly 
support and oversee this planting. 
- Assist relevant CBOs to sign formal 
agreements with local 
Municipality offices for 
management of plantations on 
community land, as well as 
develop management plans. - 1,000 ha of riparian plantations 
established (on river bank sites). 
- 5,000 ha of plantations 
established on community land. 
1.3.3: Train government field staff 
and CBOs on Forest Landscape 
Restoration, and support CBOs to 
implement Assisted Natural 
Regeneration on 15,990 ha. Assist (and build the capacity of) 
CBOs to expand forest cover and 
restore forest landscapes in critical 
locations in each of the 26 targeted 
river systems, thereby restoring 
crucial ecosystem functions and 
ecosystems resilience while also 
generating significant mitigation 
benefits. - Prepare trainin g materials on 
Forest Landscape Restoration 
(FLR). 
- Train provincial forestry field staff 
on FLR. 
- Train CBOs on FLR. 
- Identify specific sites and 
communities for Assisted Natural 
Regeneration (ANR) support, and 
develop ANR methodologies and 
implementation plans. 
- Procure tools, equipment, inputs 
and local labour needed to 
implement ANR on 15,990 ha of 
community-managed forest land, 
and directly support and oversee 
this planting. - 12 training events on FLR 
organized for provincial forestry 
field staff. 
- 180 training events on FLR 
organized for relevant CBOs. 
- ANR methodologies and 
implementation plans (adapted to 
local contexts) developed. 
- ANR implemented on 15,990 ha 
of community-managed forest 
land. 
1.3.4: Provide technical guidance and 
seedlings to establish tree cover on 
16,500 ha of woodlots to enhance 
ecosystem resilience, and improve 
fuelwood and timber availability in 
downstream communities. Establish woodlots on small-scale 
landowners’ land, thereby 
enhancing resilience of soils and 
broader ecosystems, while also 
easing expansionary pressures 
(particularly from downstream 
communities and ‘distant forest 
users’) that are driving 
deforestation and forest 
degradation. - Identify landowners with whom to 
collaborate to establish woodlots. 
- Organize exchange visits between 
prioritized small-scale landowners 
and other successful forest 
owners in neighbouring districts. 
- Procure seedlings needed to 
establish woodlots on 16,500 ha 
of land, and directly oversee and 
support this planting (coupled 
with labour provided by 
beneficiary households and 
advisory services provided by 
government). Woodlots established on 16,500 ha of 
land owned by small-scale landowners. 
Sub-Component 2.1


---
*Page 93*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
2.1.1: Strengthen institutions on 
climate change impacts and 
ecosystem mapping. Build the capacity of key entities 
that intend to collaborate with 
and/or benefit from the project – 
including those that will play an 
important role in sustaining and 
scaling up support for climate-
resilient SNRM after project closure 
– on climate change and climate-
resilient land use planning & 
management practices. - Train relevant national, provincial 
and local stakeholders on climate 
change and climate-resilient land 
use planning & management, as 
well as GESI principles and 
measures. 
- Train relevant national and 
provincial stakeholders on 
relevant GIS tools for critical 
ecosystem mapping. - 4 national -level trainings on 
climate change and climate-
resilient land use planning & 
management organized. 
- 3 provincial-level trainings on 
climate change and climate-
resilient land use & planning 
organized. 
- 64 local-level trainings on climate 
change and climate-resilient land 
use & planning organized. 
- 1 national-level training on GIS 
tools for critical ecosystem 
mapping organized. 
- 6 provincial-level trainings on GIS 
tools for critical ecosystem 
mapping organized. 
2.1.2: Develop and validate Critical 
Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) 
for 26 river systems. Assist provincial and local 
stakeholders to develop a Critical 
Ecosystem Restoration Plan (CERP) 
for each of the 26 targeted river 
systems, thereby providing 
governments and CBOs with 
common plans and priorities to 
guide coordinated investments in 
climate-resilient SNRM. - Recruit a service provider to 
perform a multi-criteria spatial 
analysis for each of the 26 
targeted river systems, and use 
this analysis as a basis to identify 
needs and propose 
investment/intervention priorities 
in each river system. 
- Organize a consultation in each 
river system to discuss identified 
priorities and develop them into a 
CERP for each river system. 
- Organize field consultations to 
raise awareness about (and secure 
buy-in for) CERP priorities among 
relevant CBOs. 
- Organize national and provincial-
level workshops to secure high-
level government validation of 
CERPs. - 26 CERPs developed and 
validated. 
- 26 river system-level 
consultations organized. 
- 52 field consultations organized. 
- 2 national and 6 provincial 
validation workshops organized. 
2.1.3: Support provincial 
governments to plan and increase 
resilience to projected climate 
change-related extreme events. Raise awareness of the evolving 
risks related to climate change-
induced extreme events within the 
Project Area, and assist provincial 
governments to develop risk 
management plans for such 
extreme events. - Organize awareness -raising 
workshops for provincial and local 
government staff. 
- Develop provincial risk 
management plans for climate 
change-induced extreme events, 
building on detailed hazard 
mapping, vulnerability 
assessments and risk mapping 
from CERPs. 
- Organize multi-stakeholder 
validation workshops for risk 
management plans. - 26 awareness -raising workshops 
organized. 
- 3 provincial risk management 
plans for climate change-induced 
extreme events developed. 
- 26 multi-stakeholder validation 
workshops organized. 
Sub-Component 2.2  
2.2.1: Establish, formalize and 
register CBOs to enable climate-
resilient SNRM. Assist community-based 
organizations to overcome 
institutional hurdles that are 
otherwise impeding them from 
providing effective support for their 
member households to adopt and 
scale up climate-resilient SNRM. - Ensure all 750 beneficiary CBOs 
are registered with the relevant 
authorities in line with Provincial 
and Federal Law (i.e. supporting 
any non-registered CBOs to 
become registered). 
- With a view to establishing 
Community Forest User Groups 
(CFUGs) and private forest owner 
networks, organize initial - All 750 beneficiary CBOs 
registered with the relevant 
authorities. 
- Organize 39 initial (one-day) 
workshops for CFUG and private 
forest owner networks. 
- Logistical support provided to 260 
CFUG and private forest owner 
network meetings.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
workshops for each of these 
networks and provide financial 
and logistical support for annual 
meetings of such groups from 
PY3-7. 
2.2.2: Train CBOs on climate-resilient 
land use planning, and assist them to 
mainstream SNRM into their CBO 
management plans. Build technical capacities of CBOs 
to understand climate change risks 
and how best to respond through 
climate-resilient SNRM approaches 
that are catered to their local 
needs, drawing on insights gained 
through the CERP process. - Recruit a service provider to 
organize Training of Trainers (ToT) 
for Local Resource Persons (LRPs) 
on climate-resilient land use. 
- Organize community workshops 
at which LRPs will train members 
from all 750 beneficiary CBOs. 
- Provide advice and guidance to 
mainstream climate-resilient 
SNRM into CBO management 
plans for the most vulnerable 
CBOs in the Project Area. - 26 ToT training events for LRPs 
organized. 
- 250 community-level workshops 
for CBOs organized (with about 3-
5 CBOs per workshop). 
- 250 CBO management plans 
developed and/or strengthened 
to mainstream support for 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
Sub -Component 3.1  
3.1.1: Equip Local Resource Persons 
(LRPs) with best practices on climate-
resilient SNRM from local experience, 
including indigenous knowledge. Gather local and indigenous 
knowledge on climate-resilient 
SNRM and distil this information 
into user-friendly guidelines for 
LRPs to train and support CBO 
members to adopt such practices 
during and beyond the project. - Recruit a servi ce provider to 
organize local consultations to 
gather local and indigenous 
knowledge. 
- Develop a compendium of local 
and indigenous knowledge, 
building on insights gained from 
consultations. 
- Organize workshops to 
review/validate the compendium. 
- Recruit a service provider to 
develop best practice guidelines 
for LRPs, drawing in part on the 
compendium. - 105 community consultations 
organized (about 4 in each of the 
26 targeted river systems). 
- 1 compendium of local and 
indigenous knowledge developed. 
- 5 provincial-level validation 
workshops organized. 
- 1 set of best practice guidelines 
for LRPs developed. 
3.1.2: Raise awareness on climate-
resilient SNRM through local schools, 
media and intra-regional exchange. Organize awareness-raising 
campaigns and other forms of 
information exchange to promote 
climate-resilient SNRM, and 
increase interest in such practices 
and communities living throughout 
the Project Area. - Recruit a service provider to 
develop a knowledge 
dissemination and communication 
plan. 
- Recruit a service provider to 
develop curricula on climate-
resilient SNRM for local high 
schools. 
- Establish student-run eco-clubs in 
all 26 targeted river systems. 
- Organize local-level radio 
programmes. 
- Organize exchange visits for local 
government authorities. - 1 knowledge d issemination and 
communication plan developed. 
- 1 set of high school curricula 
developed. 
- Student-run eco-clubs 
established, and 260 sessions held 
at schools in the Project Area. 
- 119 local-level radio programmes 
broadcast. 
- 28 local exchange visits for local 
government officials organized. 
Sub -Component 3.2  
3.2.1: Develop 10 modules on 
climate-resilient SNRM to be used by 
extension workers, including in the 
farmer field schools. Develop locally-relevant training 
modules that cover the range of 
climate-resilient SNRM practices to 
be supported by the project, which 
extension workers and other 
trainers can use to promote more 
widespread adoption/application of 
climate-resilient SNRM throughout 
the Project Area during and after 
the project. - Develop training modules.  
- Recruit a service provider to 
translate training modules. - 10 training modules developed 
and translated.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
 
  
 
                                                                 
64  Please refer to FAO OED webpage for further detail s: http://www.fao.org/about/who-we-are/departments/off ice-of-evaluation/en/  3.2.2: Enhance and deliver quality 
extension services on climate-
resilient SNRM to households. Build the capacity of extension 
workers and LRPs to understand 
and apply the 10 training modules 
developed under Activity 3.2.1, as 
well as engage the services of 
provincial extension workers to 
promote and support adoption of 
climate-resilient SNRM in the 
Project Area by: (i) supporting 
delivery of project-organized 
trainings; and (ii) continuing to 
support CBOs to adopt and 
continue using climate-resilient 
SNRM, including among households 
who were not selected by their 
CBOs to participate directly in 
project-organized trainings. - Train extension workers and LRPs 
on climate-resilient SNRM, 
including how to use/apply the 10 
training modules developed under 
Activity 3.2.1. 
- Engage provincial extension 
workers (using MoFE co-financing) 
to deliver climate-informed 
extension support in the Project 
Area, including under 
Components 1 and 2. - 78 training events organized.  
- Extension workers providing 
11,880 months of project-related 
support for climate-resilient 
SNRM, with the specific 
distribution of these working 
months (i.e. days per worker) to 
be determined. 
3.2.3: Establish and operate a Churia 
Knowledge Centre (CKC) in each 
province to enable continuous 
delivery of climate-informed 
extension services and planning, and 
to monitor implementation and 
results of CERPs and CBO 
management plans. Establish (and build capacity to use) 
the CKC as a platform to underpin 
the continued provision of climate 
change-informed extension and 
advisory services, as well as 
support continued monitoring of 
natural resources and evidence-
based planning in the Project Area, 
beyond project closure. - Recruit a service provider to 
establish the CKC, including 
provincial hubs within the MoITFE 
offices in Provinces 1, 2 and 3. 
- Train government staff and other 
relevant specialists to understand 
the CKC, and the information they 
can access from it. 
- Develop CKC manuals, protocols 
and guidelines (including Standard 
Operating Procedures, SOPs). 
- Train relevant MoITFE staff on CKC 
protocols and SOPs to support 
continued maintenance/operation 
of the CKC. - CKC platform established.  
- 3 provincial CKC hubs established 
in MoITFE offices in Provinces 1, 2 
and 3. 
- 4 training events on CKC 
use/access organized. 
- 1 set of CKC manuals, protocols, 
guidelines and SOPs developed. 
- 3 training events on CKC 
maintenance/operations 
organized. 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluati on  
233. In its role as Accredited Entity, FAO (specifi cally the FAO-GCF project supervision team) will ov ersee and supervise 
the implementation of this project in accordance wi th the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed between 
FAO and the GCF. As per the GCF Monitoring and Acco untability Framework, and in accordance with the AM A, 
FAO will provide the GCF with an Inception Report, Annual Performance Reports, an independent Mid-term  
Evaluation report, a Project Closure Report and an independent Final Evaluation report. FAO will also provide semi-
annual and annual Financial Reports throughout proj ect implementation. 
 
Evaluation 
234. In accordance with the AMA between FAO and GCF , the FAO Office of Evaluation 64 will be responsible for the 
independent interim and final evaluations for BRCRN . The evaluations will use a question-driven approa ch, and may 
include assessments against the criteria of relevan ce, effectiveness and sustainability, among others.  The interim 
evaluation will be instrumental in contributing – t hrough operational and strategic recommendations – to improve 
implementation, setting out any necessary correctiv e measures for the remaining period of the project.  The final 
evaluation will assess the relevance of the interve ntion, its overall performance, as well as sustaina bility and 
scalability of results, differential impacts and le ssons learned. The evaluation should also assess th e extent to which


---
*Page 96*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 11 7 
 
 
 H H 
 the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s high er-level goal of achieving a paradigm shift to low- emissions 
sustainable development pathways and climate-resili ent sustainable development in Nepal. To measure at tributable 
changes, the evaluation will draw on mixed-methods,  using qualitative methods (e.g. participatory rura l appraisal) in 
combination with counterfactual analysis (e.g. quas i-experimental methods, depending on the existence of reliable 
control group data from the project’s baseline and completion surveys, which will be confirmed during project 
inception). In addition to primary data collected b y the evaluators and secondary national data, both interim and final 
evaluations will draw on the baseline and completio n surveys financed by the project, as well as monit oring reports 
and other data and activities prepared by project s taff, including remote sensing data on changes in f orest and land-
use patterns. Careful attention will be paid to the  disaggregation of data, results and outcomes by ge nder. 
 
Project monitoring and reporting 
235. Project-level monitoring will be the responsib ility of the PMU. The PMU will establish an effecti ve monitoring system 
to track implementation and continuously assess eff icacy, targeting and project assumptions and target s. The 
project´s monitoring  will be designed to be responsive, and provide ong oing feedback to permit for adaptive 
management as needed, and to generate key lessons l earned.  
236. Within the PMU, the National Project Director (NPD) will oversee project implementation and monit oring, and ensure 
coordination between FAO, PSC and PMU, as well as o ther relevant stakeholders. The NPD will be support ed by a 
project gender focal point and monitoring & reporti ng specialists, all of whom will be members of the PMU. FAO will 
support the NPD and project management entities as necessary to ensure transparent, effective and incl usive 
monitoring & reporting. All members of project mana gement bodies will be trained on project monitoring  & reporting 
protocols during project inception. 
237. Project progress will be assessed in part agai nst the detailed project implementation plan, gende r action plan, 
indigenous peoples plan and social inclusion plan, while results will be measured against the targets outlined in 
Section H.1 (above). Such assessments will be guide d by a detailed Monitoring Plan, which will be deve loped during 
project inception and submitted to the GCF as part of the Project Inception Report. Monitoring of proj ect progress 
will take place on a quarterly basis, with PPMUs re porting to the main monitoring & reporting speciali st in the PMU, 
who in turn will provide progress updates to the PS C and FAO (as AE).Project progress will be communic ated to the 
GCF Secretariat in the form of Annual Progress Repo rts. 
238. The basic parameters of the anticipated BRCRN monitoring system are briefly summarized here, and elaborated in 
more detail in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, Section  7.2.The project monitoring system will feature a c ombination of 
activity-based proxy indicators and scientific mode ls that will be used to assess performance. The sys tem design is 
based on a COMBINATION  of field-based surveys and user group self-monitor ing and digital data collection, 
communication and information technologies. The sys tem will be directly developed as an integral part of the CKC 
(Component 3). In terms of monitoring project impac t/ performance in a quantitative manner, the key ap proach is 
that beneficiaries in the project perform periodic self-assessments (using easy self-assessment sheets ) using proxy 
indicators. For every 5-10 registered CBOs, one com munity member is selected as the Community Group Le ader 
(CGL). The group leader is trained on how to total the specific data from individual self-assessment s heets (those 
developed by individual group members) into a group  record. Summarized data of each group will be coll ected and 
entered into the web-based data project MIS system – the CKC. This aggregated self-assessment data can  then be 
used to complement other elements of the monitoring  system and ultimately assess progress against targ ets. To 
avoid any potential bias in monitoring and reportin g of project results, the project will also recruit  an external entity 
to administer baseline and completion surveys in th e project area, providing robust data that will con tribute to 
providing a complete picture of the evolving econom ic, social and environmental conditions in the 26 t argeted river 
systems over the course of the project implementati on period. This project-generated information will also be 
triangulated against data sources generated outside  the project, including the National Population and  Housing 
Census (which is expected to be administered in 202 1).In addition, the project will use remote sensing  to monitor 
some forest and land use-related indicators (as out lined in Section H.1) as well as triangulate data f rom other 
indicators to ensure accuracy.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 11 7 
 
 
 I I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL  
☒ NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ Feasibility Study 
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivi ty analysis of critical elements (xls format, if ap plicable)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (If applicable) 
☐ Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet 
☒ Environmental and Social Management Framework 
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with reco mmendations(If applicable) 
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project(If applic able) 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/program me 
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation 
 
List of Annexes: 
Annex  Name of Annex  Document(s) within Annex  
Annex 1  Commitment letters  1.1 – Letter of No-Objection by the NDA (Ministry o f 
Finance)  
1.2 – Co-financing letter  
Annex 2 Feasibility Study  2.1 – Feasibility Study  
Annex 3  Integrated Financial Model  3.1 – Economic and Financial Analysis  
3.2 – Detailed budget  
3.3 – Indicative procurement plan  
3.4 – GHG mitigation calculations 
Annex  4 Environmental and Social 
Management Framework  4.1 – Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (including Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework and Biodiversity Management Framework)  
4.2 – ESMF Annex 3 (Consultations) 
Annex 5  Gender assessment and action 
plan  5.1 – Gender assessment  and action plan 
Annex 6  Timetable for project 
implementation  6.1 – Timetable for project implementation


---
*Page 98*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 11 7 
 
 
 I I 
References 
Acharya, G.P., McDonald, M.A., Tripathi, B.P., Gard er, R.M., Mawdesley, K.J. 2007. Nutrient losses fro m 
rain-fed bench terraced cultivation systems in high  rainfall areas of the mid-hills of Nepal. Land 
degradation & Development, 18(5): 486-499.  
ADB, Asian Development Bank. 2017. Nepal. Available  online: < 
https://www.adb.org/countries/nepal/overview>[Acces sed 2017.12.20]  
Ando, M. 1998. Risk assessment of global warming on  human health. Global Environmental Research, 2: 
68-78 
Bajgain, S., Shakya, I.S. 2005. The Nepal Biogas Su pport Program: A Successful Model of Public Private  
Partnership for Rural Household Energy Supply. The Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, SNV – 
Netherlands Development Organization and Nepal Biog as Sector Partnership, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Bhattarai, K., Conway, D., Yousef, M. 2009. Determi nants of deforestation in Nepal´s Central Developme nt 
Region. Journal of Environmental Management, 91(2):  471-488.  
Bouchama, A., Parhar, R.S. El-Yazigi, A., Sheth, K. , Al-Sedairy, A. 1991. Endotoxemia and release of t umor 
necrosis factor and interleukin 1 alpha in acute he atstroke. Journal of Applied Physiology 70(6): 2640 -
2644. 
CBS. 2014. Population Monograph of Nepal. Vol. II ( Social Demography). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
CBS. 2018. GIS Maps. Available online: CBS 2018;  
<http://cbs.gov.np/index.php?route=information/gis_m aps >[Accessed 2018.03.24]  
Centre for Excellence in Disaster Management and Hu manitarian Assistance. 2015. Nepal Disaster 
Management Reference Handbook. Available online: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/res ources/disaster-mgmt-ref-hdbk-2012-nepal.pdf ) 
Chettri, N., Chaudhary, S., Uddin, K., Sharma, B., Kandel, P., Bahadur Khatri, T., Dhakal, M., Ning, W ., 
Sharma, E. 2016. Biodiversity values of the Koshi T appu Wildlife Reserve. In: Doody, T.M., Cuddy, S.M. , 
Bhatta, L.D. [eds.]. Connecting flow and ecology in  Nepal: current state of knowledge for the Koshi Ba sin. 
Sustainable Development Investment Portfolio Projec t. CSIRO, Australia. Pp. 71-78. 
CIAT, World Bank, CCAFS, LI-BIRD. 2017. Climate-Sma rt Agriculture in Nepal. CSA Country Profiles for 
Asia Series. International Center for Tropical Agri culture (CIAT); The World Bank; CGIAR Research 
Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Sec urity (CCAFS); Local Initiatives for Biodiversity 
Research and Development (LI-BIRD). Washington, D.C . 26 p 
Climate-Smart Agriculture in Nepal. CSA Country Pro files for Asia Series. International Center for Tro pical 
Agriculture (CIAT) 
Collins, M., Knutti, R., Arblaster, J., Dufresne, J .L., Fichefet, T., Friedlingstein, P., Gao, X., Gut owski, W.J., 
Johns, T., Krinner, G., Shongwe, M., Tebaldi, C., W eaver, A.J., Wehner, M. 2013. Long term climate 
change: Projections, commitments and irreversibilit y. In: Climate change. The physical science basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assess ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. [Stocker TF; Qin D; Plattner GK; Ti gnor M; Allen SK; Boschung J; Nauels A; Xia Y; Bex 
V; Midgley PM. (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,  Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, 
USA. pp. 1029–1036;  
CSRC, Community Self Reliance Centre. 2005. Communi ty Self Reliance Centre. Available online: 
<www.csrcnepal.org > [Accessed 2018.06.08] 
DFRS/FRA. 2014. Churia Forests of Nepal. Forest Res ource Assessment Nepal, Department of Forest 
Research and Survey (DFRS). Kathmandu, Nepal 
DFRS/FRA. 2015. State of Nepal's Forests. Forest Re source Assessment Nepal, Department of Forest 
Research and Survey. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Dhital, P.R. 2017. Agricultural extension in Nepal:  Experiences and Issues. Journal of Advances in 
Agriculture, 7(3): 1071-1082. 
DHM, 2016. Study of Climate and climatic variation over Nepal. Kathmandu: Department of Hydrology and 
Meteorology (DHM), Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment


---
*Page 99*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 11 7 
 
 
 I I 
Dixit, A. Climate Change in Nepal: Imapcts and Adap tive Strategies. Available online: 
<http://www.wri.org/our-work/project/world-resource s-report/climate-change-nepal-impacts-and-
adaptive-strategies>[Accessed 2018.04.28] 
Dixit, A., Moench, M., Stapleton, S.O. 2007. When r ealities shift: Responding to floods and the challe nges 
of climate change in Ganga Basin. In: Moench, M., D ixit, A. [eds.], Winds of Change:Towards Strategies  
for Responding to the Risks Associated with Cliamte  Change and other Hazards, ProVention Consortium, 
Institute for Social and Environmental Transition I nternational and Institute for Social and Environme ntal 
Transition, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
EIU. 2016 Food Security Index. Available online : < http://foodsecurityindex.eiu.com >[Accessed 2018.02.04]  
Epstein, Y., Sohar, E., Shapiro, Y. 1995. Exception al heatstroke: A preventable condition. Israel Jour nal of 
Medical Science, 31: 454-462. 
FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the Unite d Nations. 2015. Environmental and Social 
Management Guidelines. Rome, Italy. 
FAO. 2014. Managing climate risks and adapting to c limate change in the agriculture sector in Nepal. F AO, 
Rome, Italy.  
GESI Working Group. 2017. A Common Framework for Ge nder Equality and Social Inclusion. Gender 
Equality and Social Inclusion Working Group, Intern ational Development Partners Group, Nepal.  
Government of Nepal National Planning Commission. 2 017. National Review of Sustainable Development 
Goals. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Government of Nepal/ FCPF. 2017. Carbon Fund: Emiss ion Reductions Program Document (ER-PD). 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility. Kathmandu, Nepa l. 
GTZ. German Technical Cooperation. 2004. Restoring Balances: Milestones of the Churia Forest 
Development Project in Eastern Nepal. GTZ, Lahan, N epal. 
Gurung, C.B. 2017. Analysis: Nepal´s Forest Fires. CIFOR Forests News. Available online: < 
https://forestsnews.cifor.org/48187/nepals-forest-f ires?fnl=en>[Accessed 2018-04-03] 
ICIMOD 2019. Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabili ty in the Eastern Himalayas. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
IDS-Nepal, PAC and GCAP. 2014. Economic Impact Asse ssment of Climate Change in Key Sectors in 
Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal: Integrated Development Soc iety (IDS) 
IMF, International Monetary Fund. 2017. Nepal: 2017  Article IV Consultation – Press Release; Staff Rep ort. 
IMF Country Report No. 17/74. Washington D.C., USA.  
Karki, S., DeWald, J., Polo, K. 2011. Strengthening  cardamom and ginger value chains in eastern Nepal.  
Mercy Corps Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Karn, P.K. 2007. A Study Report on Economic Valuati on of the Churia Region. Published by IUCN.  
Kühhas, B., Silawal-Giri, B., Barton, T. 2016. SAKC HAM and Women Empowerment in Nepal: Stories and 
strategies – lessons and guidelines. CARE Nepal and  CARE Austria. Available at: 
<http://www.carenepal.org/uploads/pdf/publication/_ SAKCHAM%20Manual%20final.pdf>[Accessed 
2018.03.20] 
Local Initiatives for Biodiversity Research and Dev elopment (LI-BIRD). Washington, D.C. 26 p 
Mainali, J., Pricope, N. 2017. High-resolution spat ial assessment of population vulnerability to clima te 
change in Nepal. Applied Geography, 80: 66-82. 
ManandharG.B., S.K. Adhikary and G. Sah 2009. Susta inable agricultural practices andtechnologies in 
Nepal. TECH MONITOR. Special Feature: Sustainable A griculture 
Maplecroft. 2011. Climate Variability Index. Availa ble at: 
<https://maplecroft.com/about/news/ccvi.html>[Acces sed 2018.02.04]  
MoAD, Ministry of Agricultural Development. 2013. F ood and Nutrition Security Plan of Action (FNSP). 
Available online: < http://www.nnfsp.gov.np/PublicationFiles/d405d609-b b00-4708-831c-
149dea4b4f49.pdf >[Accessed 2018.06.08] 
MoE. 2010a. Climate Change Vulnerability Mapping fo r Nepal. Ministry of Environment. Kathmandu, Nepal.  
MoE. 2010b. National Adaptation Programme of Action  (NAPA) to climate change. Kathmandu, Nepal.  
MoE. 2011. Climate Change Policy. Kathmandu, Nepal.    
MoF, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey – F iscal Year 2011/12. Kathmandu, Nepal.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 11 7 
 
 
 I I 
MoF, Ministry of Finance. 2016. Economic Survey—Fis cal Year 2015/16. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoFSC. 2014. Churia Forests of Nepal: Forest Resour ce Assessment. Ministry of Forest and Soil 
Conservation. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoFSC. 2015. Strategy and Action Plan 2015-2025. Te rai Arc Landscape, Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoFSC. 2016- Forestry sector strategy. Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation. Kathmandu, Nepal  
MoHA, Ministry of Home Affairs. 2011. Nepal Disaste r Report 2009: The Hazardscape and Vulnerability. 
Kathmandu, Nepal.  
MoPE, Ministry of Population and Environment. 2016.  Renewable Energy Subsidy Policy, 2073 BS. 
Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoSTE, Ministry of Science, Technology and Environm ent. 2015. Study of Climate and Climatic Variation 
over Nepal. [DRAFT REPORT], Department of Hydrology  and Meteorology, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
MoSTE. 2015. Indigenous and Local Knowledge and Pra ctices for Cliamte Resilience in Nepal. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
NCVST, Nepal Climate Vulnerability Study Team. 2009 . Vulnerability through the eyes of the vulnerable:  
Climate change induced uncertainties and Nepal´s De velopment predicaments. ISET-Nepal. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
Nepal. S., 2016. Impacts of climate change on the h ydrological regime of the Koshi river basin in the 
Himalayan region. Journal of Hydro-environment rese arch, 10: 76-89. 
NPC, National Planning Commission, Government of Ne pal. 2017. Nepal’s Sustainable Development 
Goals Baseline Report June 2017. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Ørnemark, C., Thapa, M. 2013. Nepal: Final Evaluati on Report of the CHULI Programme. CARE Denmark. 
Paudel, B., Tamang, B.B., Lamsal, K. &  Paudel, P. 2011. Planning and costing of agricultural adaptati on 
with reference to integrated hill-farming systems i n Nepal. International Institute for Environment an d 
Development (IIED), London, UK. http://pubs.iied.org 
Practical Action Nepal Office. 2009. Temporal and S patial Variability of Climate Change over Nepal (19 76-
2005). Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Ramírez J., Jarvis A. 2008. High-resolution statist ically downscaled future climate surfaces. Internat ional 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT); CGIAR Resea rch Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and 
Food Security (CCAFS).Cali, Colombia  
Ramírez-Villegas J; Thornton PK. 2015. Climate chan ge impacts on African crop production. Working Pape r 
No. 119. CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
Regmi H.  2007. Effect of unusual weather on cereal  crop production and household food security. Journ al 
of Agriculture and Environment 
Robinson, S., Mason-D´Roz, D., Sulser, T., Islam, S ., Robertson, R., Zhu, T., Gueneau, A., Pitois, G.,  
Rosengrant, M.W. 2015. The International Model for Policy Analysis of Agricultural Commodities and 
Trade (IMPACT): Model description for version 3 (IF PRI Discussion Paper). Washington, D.C: 
International Food Policy Research Institute. 
Satyal Pravat, P., Humphreys, D. 2013. Using a mult ilevel approach to analyse the case of forest confl icts 
in the Terai, Nepal. Forest Policy and Economics, 3 3: 47-55. 
Shrestha, N., Raes, D., Sah, S.K. 2013. Strategies to improve cereal production in the Terai region (N epal) 
during dry season: simulations with aquacrop. Proce dia Environmental Sciences, 19: 767-775. The 
Government of Nepal President Chure-Tarai Madhesh C onservation Development Board. President 
Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Management Mas ter Plan 2017 
Shresta et al. 2013. Strategies to improve cereal p roduction in the Terai region(Nepal) during dry sea son: 
simulations with aquacrop. Four Decades of Progress  in Monitoring and Modelling of Processes in the 
Soil-PlantAtmosphereSystem - ApplicationsandChallen ges. Procedia Environmental Sciences 19 (2013) 
767 – 775 
Synnott P. 2012. Climate Change, Agriculture, & Foo d Security in Nepal Developing Adaptation Strategie s 
and Cultivating Resilience. Report prepared for Mer cy Corps Nepal


---
*Page 101*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 11 7 
 
 
 I I 
UNDP, United Nations Development Programme. 2014. N epal Human Development Report 2014: Beyond 
Geography: Unlocking Human Potential. Kathmandu, Ne pal. 
UNDP, United Nations Development Programme. 2017. R enewable Energy for Rural Livelihood (RERL). 
Kathmandu, Nepal.  
UNDP. 2016. Human Development Report 2016. New York , USA. 
UN-REDD. 2014. Understanding drivers and causes of deforestation and forest degradation in Nepal: 
Potential policies and measures for REDD+ Discussio n Paper. UN-REDD Programme. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
West, S. 2012. REDD+ and Adaptation in Nepal. REDD Net Case Study. Available online: 
<https://theredddesk.org/sites/default/files/resour ces/pdf/2012/redd_adaptation_nepal_simon_west.pdf 
>[Accessed 2018-03-23] 
Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natu ral Resource Management. 2017. Gender 
Integration in REDD+ and the ERPD in Nepal: Assessm ent Report and Gender Action Plan. Report for 
the FCPF, Kathmandu, Nepal 
World Bank. 2011. Vulnerability and Adaptation to C limate Change, Nepal. Climate Risk and Adaptation 
Country Profile. World Bank. Washington DC, USA. 
World Bank. 2014. World Bank Data Catalogue. Availa ble online:< https://data.worldbank.org/topic/poverty > 
[Accessed 2018.02.04] 
World Bank. 2016. ThinkHazard! Tool. Available onli ne: < http://thinkhazard.org/en/ >[Accesed 2018.02.04]  
WWF Nepal. 2012. Biogas Comes to Madhunam: A story of change. Kathmandu, Nepal.  
WWF. 2017a. Biodiversity, People and Climate Change : Final Technical Report of the Hariyo Ban Program,  
First Phase. WWF Nepal, Hariyo Ban Program, Kathman du, Nepal. 
WWF. 2017b. Climate Change. Available online: 
<http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/where_we_work/easte rn_himalaya/threats/climate/ > [Accessed 2018.06.08


---
*Page 102*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 11 7 
 
 
 I I 
Attachment 1 – Theory of Change 
 
        CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS     VULNERABILITY FA CTORS  
CHALLENGES  BARRIERS INHIBITING RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE CHAL LENGES  
PROJECT  
 HIGHER-LEVEL RESULTS  
PRELIMINARY RESULTS TO OVERCOME BARRIERS  KEY PROJECT RESULTS  
Assumption: CBOs engage in 
project activities, and secure 
broad buy-in from community 
members. Assumption: Federal, 
provincial and local 
governments remain 
committed to the project. Assumption: Project practices 
are suited to local needs, and 
are successful in addressing 
encroachment on forests. Assumption: Major exogenous 
shocks do not significantly 
disrupt project delivery.  Assumption: CBOs continue to 
apply climate-resilient SNRM 
practices and promote them 
within their communities.  Assumption: Extension and 
advisory services continue to 
provide guidance and advice on 
climate-resilient SNRM. Assumption: Governments 
support coordinated investment 
(at scale) in climate-resilient 
SNRM in line with CERPs.  
Increasing 
temperatures 
and shifting 
precipitation 
patterns.  Seasonal water 
stress, 
extended dry 
periods and 
increasing 
flooding risk.  Poverty, livelihood 
strategies and 
community locations 
exacerbate the 
vulnerability of 
people throughout 
project area. Increased 
erosion (with 
both up- and 
down-stream 
impacts).  Poverty and 
financial barriers 
among 
communities.  Limited awareness 
of CC dynamics and 
projected impacts.  Weak inter-sectoral 
coordination.  Limited capacity to 
plan and deliver 
support.  Limited capacity to 
monitor CC 
impacts.  1.1: Climate-resilient land 
use practices are 
adopted. 
1.3: Forests and tree 
cover are restored and 
maintained in the river 
system landscape. 2.2: CBOs are equipped to 
scale up climate-resilient 
SNRM. 3.2: The extension system 
is equipped to promote 
climate-resilient SNRM. 1.2: Natural forest 
ecosystems are better 
maintained & protected. 2.1: Planning for climate-
resilient SNRM is 
enhanced. 3.1: Local knowledge on 
climate-resilient SNRM is 
enhanced. Component 3 result: Knowledge, awareness and 
local capacity for climate-resilient SNRM are 
strengthened. Component 2 result: Institutions and planning 
for climate-resilient SNRM are strengthened. Component 1 result: Climate-resilient 
sustainable natural resource management 
(SNRM) is implemented at scale in Project Area. Project objective: Strengthen the resilience of loca l communities and ecosystems to adapt to 
climate change and reduce emissions from deforestat ion and forest degradation, and equip 
these stakeholders to scale up adoption of climate-r esilient SNRM after project closure. Paradigm shift to low-emission sustainable developm ent pathway, and increased climate-
resilient sustainable development. 
 
Catalyzing a transformation of the ways in which la nd, water, forests and other natural 
resources are managed in Nepal, while equipping a c ritical mass of community-based 
organizations, government entities and other stakeh olders to sustain (and scale up) this 
transformation beyond project closure. 
Important contributions toward achieving the object ives of: 
• Nepal’s Nationally Determined Contribution; 
• Nepal’s Fourteenth Development Plan (2017); and 
• The President’s Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation an d 
Management Master Plan. Delivery against GCF adaptation & mitigation core i ndicators and: 
• A4.0 – Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosyst em services. 
• M4.0 – Reduced emissions from land use, deforestati on, forest 
degradation, and through sustainable management of forests and 
conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks . 
Deforestation, forest 
degradation, and 
degradation of the 
broader natural 
resource base and 
local ecosystems.  
 Particular 
vulnerability among 
indigenous peoples, 
Dalits and other 
excluded groups due 
to social and 
economic exclusion. Knowledge and 
contributions of IPs 
and Dalits under-
appreciated.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 11 7 
 
 
 I I 
Attachment 2 – Simplified overview of climate chang e impacts, baseline conditions and project-promoted  measures, disaggregated by biophysical zone  
CHURIA HILLS 
Climate change challenges Description of baseline land use 
trends Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices to be promoted Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, coupled with decreasing numbers of moderate rainfall days and increasing 
numbers of very wet days, is expected to: (i) increase soil erosion and top soil loss in the hills, with significant downstream impacts; and (ii) increase risks of landslides in the hills.  Households use fuelwood for 
household energy needs. Forests also provide fodder, forage, timber and NTFPs. 
 Majority of terrain unsuitable for 
agriculture, however many households have subsistence farms within the hills. Agricultural production is characterized by rain-fed, low-yield fallow agriculture with different crops. Erosion and soil degradation pose major barriers. 
 Subsistence from agriculture 
provides livelihoods only for 6-8 months a year.  
 Many households have small-
livestock 
65  and/or buffalo raised 
in primarily low-yield free-grazing systems. 
 Churia Hills play a vital function 
as a watershed for the downstream Terai plain - where inhabitants rely on delivered water resources for domestic and agricultural purposes (regulating water).  75% of deforestation in 
BRCRN area occurs in the Churia Hills. Deforestation and degradation increase vulnerability to erosion and sedimentation that reduce agricultural productivity, and increase exposure to flooding and landslides. 
 Unsuitable agricultural 
practices increase vulnerability to erosion through vegetation removal and soil degradation (e.g. agricultural practices on sloped hills, lack of soil and water conservation practices).  Climate-resilient agricultural 
practices: implementing practices that stabilize slopes (agroforestry, terracing, grass strips, alley crops etc.), improved livestock practices (stall-feeding, fodder banks). 
 Intensification of agricultural 
land through integrated agroforestry-crop-livestock systems in order to improve soil fertility and productivity while reducing pressure on forests. 
 Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, forest restoration and sustainable management, bio-engineering/ soil and water conservation infrastructure to stabilize river banks and reduce flows  Reduced risk of erosion, 
reduced exposure to landslides. 
 Reduced exposure to 
flooding, particularly in downstream areas. 
 Reduced emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation. 
 Improved storage of soil 
carbon. 
 Improved forest quality and 
quantity. 
                                                                  
65 goats, rams, pigs


---
*Page 104*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
BHAVAR REGION 
Climate change challenges Description of baseline land use 
trends Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, coupled with decreasing numbers of moderate rainfall days and increasing 
numbers of very wet days, is expected to: (i) increase soil erosion and top soil loss in the hills, with significant downstream impacts; and (ii) increase gully erosion (land loss) and vulnerability to flooding.  Terrain is primarily 
unsuitable for rain-fed agriculture due to the irregular supply of water. Many households have small-livestock and/or buffalos using primarily free-grazing production systems. 
 
 Majority of households use 
fuelwood for household energy needs. Forests also provide fodder, forage, timber and non-timber forest products.  Deforestation and 
degradation contribute to increased sedimentation and erosion that reduce agricultural productivity. Such land use trends further increase the vulnerability of downstream communities to flooding through accelerated sedimentation and erosion.  
 Reduced vegetation cover 
(from deforestation and inappropriate agricultural practices) limit ground water recharge, increasing the vulnerability of downstream communities to extreme heat and challenges related to water deficit.  
 Gully erosion leads to 
significant loss of land.  Climate-resilient agriculture 
practices to reduce erosion and improve soil moisture and overall soil fertility (tillage management, nutrient management, residue management, inter-cropping, alley crops), improved livestock practices to reduce degradation (stall-feeding, fodder banks). 
 Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, green belt establishment along vulnerable river banks, forest restoration, sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soil and water conservation (conservation ponds, check-dams, contour bunds). 
 Resilient forestry: 
commercial plantations, wood lots and horticulture plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and other forest products.  Improved resilience to 
extreme heat and water deficit challenges. 
 River bank stabilization 
limits the impact of flooding. 
 Reduced emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation. 
 Improved forest quality and 
quantity. 
 Improved groundwater 
recharge due to reduced sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to water scarcity downstream.


---
*Page 105*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
DUN VALLEY 
Climate change challenges Description of baseline land use 
trends Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 Decrease in average 
precipitation in the winter season, coupled with increases in the number of consecutive dry days as well as particularly large increases in winter temperature, are expected to further increase the risk of water deficit in the winter months. 
 Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, coupled with decreasing numbers of moderate rainfall days and increasing 
numbers of very wet days, is expected to increase sedimentation and riverbank cutting (land loss) as well as risk of flooding in downstream communities, in part as a result of the upstream impacts of these changes in climatic variables (as described further above).  Most households use 
fuelwood for household energy needs. Forests also provide fodder, forage, timber and non-timber forest products. 
 Among the most fertile and 
productive lands in Nepal with steady groundwater supply. Major production area for staple foods including paddy, cereals, pulses and oilseeds. Many households have small-livestock and/or buffalo raised in primarily low-yield free-grazing production systems.  Deforestation within the Dun 
Valley, as well as in the Churia Hills, increases the vulnerability of local communities and ecosystems to extreme flooding events. 
 Inappropriate agricultural 
practices do not apply soil or water conservation practices that leave areas vulnerable to flooding, extreme heat, water deficit and soil erosion.  
 Upstream deforestation and 
forest degradation, as well as the continued use of practices that fail to address issues related to soil degradation and water deficit, exacerbate challenges associated with dry-season crop production.  Climate-resilient agriculture 
practices to reduce erosion and improve soil moisture and overall soil fertility. 
 Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, green belt establishment along vulnerable river banks, forest restoration, sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soil and water conservation to reduce erosion, improve ecosystem stability and resilience. 
 Resilient forestry: 
commercial plantations, wood lots and horticulture plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and other forest products,  Improved resilience to 
extreme heat and water deficit challenges. 
 River bank stabilization 
limits the impact of flooding. 
 Reduced emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation. 
 Improved forest quality and 
quantity. 
 Improved groundwater 
recharge due to reduced sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to water scarcity downstream.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 102 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
TERAI 
Climate change challenges Description of baseline land use 
trends Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 Decrease in average 
precipitation in the winter season, coupled with increases in the number of consecutive dry days as well as particularly large increases in winter temperature, are expected to further increase the risk of water deficit in the winter months. 
 Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, coupled with decreasing numbers of moderate rainfall days and increasing 
numbers of very wet days, is expected to increase sedimentation and riverbank cutting (land loss) as well as risk of flooding in downstream communities, in part as a result of the upstream impacts of these changes in climatic variables (as described further above).  Farmers in the Terai 
produce most of the country´s grains (wheat, maize, rice, among others) and other crops. The Terai is the sole region in agricultural surplus, and thus is the principal area of production relied upon to supply the less productive hill and mountain areas. 
 More heavily populated than 
the other three zones. Population growth in the Terai puts increased pressure on natural resources. Many communities in the Terai are ´ distant forest users ´, 
dependent on forest resources in Churia and Bhavar forests. While most households use cow dung for energy needs, forests are still an important source of fodder, forage, timber and NTFPs.  Distant-forest users from 
the Terai contribute to deforestation and forest degradation upstream, with impacts described in the rows above.  
 Inappropriate agricultural 
practices do not apply soil or water conservation practices that leave areas vulnerable to flooding, extreme heat, water deficit and soil erosion.  
 Combined factors from 
upstream deforestation and forest degradation, as well as use of practices that fail to address issues related to soil degradation and water deficit, exacerbate challenges associated with dry-season crop production in the Terai. 
 Upstream land 
management practices (described above) increase exposure to sedimentation in the Terai.  Climate-resilient agriculture 
practices to reduce erosion and improve soil moisture and overall soil fertility (tillage management, nutrient management, residue management, inter-cropping, alley crops). 
 Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, green belt establishment along vulnerable river banks, forest restoration, sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soil and water conservation (conservation ponds, check-dams, contour bunds, stone walls) 
 Resilient forestry: 
commercial plantations, wood lots and horticulture plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and other forest products,  Improved resilience to 
extreme heat and water deficit challenges. 
 River bank stabilization 
limits the impact of flooding. 
 Planted forests are able to 
reduce the reliance on upstream forests. 
 Improved groundwater 
recharge due to reduced sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to water scarcity downstream.


---
*Page 107*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 103 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Attachment 3 –  Activity description, deliverables and sustainabili ty considerations 
 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
COMPONENT 1 – SCALING UP CLIMATE -RESILIENT SUSTAINABLE NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ( SNRM)  
Sub -Component 1.1 – Climate -resilient land use practices are adopted   
1.1.1: Establish 
Farmer Field Schools (FFS) to promote climate-resilient land use. Establish a network of 
training sites on which farmers can be trained on climate-resilient SNRM during and after the project. - Identify FFS sites.  
- Establish FFS, including procurement of farming equipment. 
- Training of trainers (ToT) for field staff to build capacity of FFS. - 120 FFS established 
and operational. - 120 FFS established in 
each river system at or near locations which are either i) highly or moderately susceptible to erosion or ii) highly or moderately susceptible to flooding (i.e. highly vulnerable to climate-related hazards). FFS support particularly vulnerable people, and aim to strengthen their capacities to implement climate-resilient land use practices, offering them improved livelihood opportunities (combined with improved knowledge for FFS, covered in Component 3, and the operationalization of FFS in 1.1.2 and 1.1.3). - Alignment with the Critical Ecosystem Restoration 
Plan (CERP) will ensure that FFS are strategically established in the most vulnerable areas , 
ensuring climate-informed advisory and extension services . Such an approach can be 
replicated  in different river systems to provide 
targeted and climate-informed services for the most vulnerable people and ecosystems. 
- FFS will enable interested CBOs In vulnerable areas to adapt and scale-up climate resilient agriculture practices and technologies (within sub-component 1.2-1.4).  
- Provincial Ministries will mobilize their extension staff to support FFS  from year 3 to the 
end of the project period. The Government is providing considerable co-financing to improve the extension system throughout project implementation, demonstrating their recognition of this pressing need and commitment to address it. Knowledge management systems (CKC), institutionalization of trainings, development of high-quality training modules on low-GHG and climate-resilient SNRM, and capacity development of government staff will facilitate Provincial and Central Government to mobilize the funds needed and continue investment beyond project closure.  
- With support from extension services, farmers 
participating in FFS will continuously improve and consolidate their knowledge and skills , 
including through testing and validating on their own farmland. 
- The FFS and the practices promoted by the project are economically sustainable . 
Participation in FFS is voluntary and will employ locally available resources (materials and labour),


---
*Page 108*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 104 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
so economic means will not limit farmers to 
undertake the improved practices. Moreover, the practices promoted improve farmers’ income through increased productivity, cost savings, or other means. 
- FAO experience in the region including in Nepal shows a positive rate of farmers adopting new 
technologies/practices through FFS , including 
among non-participant who observe the benefits of such practices. 
- Ultimately, investments in FFS will address the main barriers faced by the current system (highlighted in the FS in Table 9 and Box 1) by improving the reach of services in highly 
vulnerable areas, and increasing the quality of trainings  (trained Local Resource Persons, 
promoted good climate-resilient land use practices), and providing targeted support for 
women and excluded/ marginalized groups  (see 
GAP and IPPF/SIPF for specific measures).  
1.1.2: Train 
farmers to adopt and apply climate-resilient land use practices. Strengthen farmers’ 
capacities to adopt/apply climate-resilient farming practices and as support other members of their CBOs to adopt/apply such practices. - Procure basic farming 
tools/equipment to support adoption of tailored climate-resilient farming practices (based on results of CERPs). 
- Deliver trainings and associated farming tools/equipment. - 260 training events 
organized (reaching about 7,800 Farmer Beneficiaries). 48,772 ha of climate -resilient, 
profitable agricultural practices implemented (mid-term: 12,189 ha) - Increased-resilience to climate change through the adoption of SNRM, especially practices that improve soil moisture, improve resilience to water scarcity and extreme heat, enhance soil carbon  conservation, reduce soil erosion, and promote improved farmer income. 
- Reduced deforestation and forest degradation by addressing a key driver in the Churia hills and Bhavar region. - Improved awareness  of climate change, climate -
risks, and risk-reduction strategies will encourage  
CBOs to adopt climate-resilient practices. 
- Strengthened capacities will enable CBOs and farmers to adopt low-carbon and climate-resilient practices during and after the project. 
- The selection of profitable, climate -resilient 
farming techniques  and dissemination of 
economic benefit evidence will encourage CBOs and farmers to continue the practices beyond the life of the project. 
- Initial investments in climate -resilient practices  
covered by the project will enable highly 
vulnerable and poor small -holder farmers to apply 
the practices  and benefit from them. 
- Increased income from  climate-resilient practices, 
combined with additional benefits  (improving soil 
nutrition and soil moisture, increased resilience to flooding, improved yields, increased food security, etc.) will 
incentivize the continued


---
*Page 109*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 105 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
- More detailed info on 
climate benefits available in Table 4 of the FP, and in the FS in the Table on page 82 and FS Annex A  
 adoption  of the practices including risk -taking by 
farmers to invest in these practices. 
- Financing of equipment/ tools for climate-
resilient practices beyond project end will be 
from increased revenue streams  from these 
practices. Measures that deliver financial benefits  
for farmers have been intentionally designed and selected to ensure financial sustainability (see financial and economic assessment). 
- Promoted activities (described in greater detail in FS and FP, designed for their relevance for Nepal) were assessed to have a NPV of $735 on 
a per hectare basis,  providing incentives for 
CBOs and local farmers to reinvest in climate resilient agriculture. A 2019 case study in Nepal demonstrated that climate-resilient activities like  
those promoted by the project can deliver benefits for farmers (Subedi et al. 2019 - Climate-smart practices for improvement of crop yields in mid-hills of Nepal).  
1.1.3: Train 
farmers to adopt agroforestry and livestock management practices. Strengthen farmers’ 
capacities to adopt/apply suitable agroforestry and livestock management practices on their own land, as well as support other members of their CBOs to adopt/apply such practices, thereby building household-level resilience and easing drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. - Organize initial training 
for CBO households on agroforestry and livestock management practices (materials to be developed in Component 3; examples of suitable practices identified in FS Appendices 1.6-1.7). 
- Procure materials to establish small on-farm tree nurseries. 
- Regular site visits by field staff in PY3-7 to support broader adoption of agroforestry and livestock management practices, as well as identify and support livestock-- 120 initial 
Beneficiaries supported to adopt promoted practices and establish small on-farm tree nurseries. 
- Approximately 500 households supported to access the government biogas subsidy and purchase/install biogas digesters. 
- Agroforestry activities implemented on about 15,202 ha (models identified as relevant for the project area included - Establishment of 
agroforestry activities on 15,202 ha of agricultural land, while simultaneously reducing the impact per livestock unit on the degradation of forests in the project area.  
- Increased-resilience to climate change through the adoption of SNRM and agriculture, especially practices that improve soil moisture, reduce soil erosion, and enhance soil organic carbon, among other benefits (refer to FS appendices A1.6-A1.7. 
- Reduced deforestation and forest degradation by - Improved awareness of climate change, climate -
risks and climate -resilient livelihood strategies  will 
encourage CBOs to adopt agroforestry and livestock management practices understanding the relevance, costs, and additional benefits. 
- Strengthened capacities  will enable CBOs and 
local people to adopt low-carbon and climate-resilient practices by improving their understanding of the benefits. 
- Such practices will increase the inc omes  of poor 
and vulnerable small-scale households. 
- Biogas support  will be targeted to middle-income 
households with larger livestock (and considering other key criteria, as presented in the response to  
ITAP comments).   
- The project’s activities can be financially supported after the project as they are profitable: a biogas unit  generates US $217 in 
NPV . 
- One of the key barriers identified for households to access the biogas subsidy is a lack of


---
*Page 110*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 106 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
owning households to 
access the government biogas subsidy.  in FS Appendices 
A1.6-1.7). reducing pressure on 
forests from agriculture and livestock.  
-  knowledge and capacity, as w ell as (often) more 
limited access to relevant advisory services that would enable them to overcome this barrier. Therefore, the project proposes to scale up the provision of advisory services to targeted CBOs to enable interested households to access the government subsidy and credit facility (if needed) to install and operate biogas plants. FAO and MoFE are confident that with the technical advisory services budgeted into this project (of which about 77% is financed through MoFE co-financing), approximately 500 households will be able to access the subsidy and install biogas digesters, who would not otherwise do so.  
 
1.1.4: Construct 
check dams, gully stabilization measures and other local infrastructure to enhance resilience against climate change-induced erosion, sedimentation and flooding risks. Construct local structures in 
each of the 26 targeted river systems that will reduce community vulnerability to climate change impacts (accounting for both upstream and downstream dynamics), including: (i) erosion risk and sedimentation in upstream areas; and (ii) flooding risk and water stress in downstream areas. The structures are presented in Appendix A2 and are based on best practices and experiences in Nepal assessed in the FS, including those highlighted in the MOFSC Green Book for Soil Conservation and Watershed Management, as well as experiences from FAO, ICIMOD and others (see FS for references in - Identify specific sites for 
community structures. 
- Develop technical specifications and construction guidelines for individual structures once sites are identified. 
- Recruit service providers to build structures in upstream and downstream locations, and supervise them while they do so. 
- Train communities and government officials to monitor and maintain structures. - Establish relevant 
structures and practices to stabilize 86 gullies, mostly in the Churia hills. 
- Establish and maintain check dams and/or community-managed water harvesting ponds in 129 sites, mostly in the Bhavar zone.  - Sedimentation level in 
each of the targeted river systems in which the project constructs / establishes gully and riverbank stabilization measures is reduced by 25% (relative to the baseline level) by the end of PY7. 
- Improved resilience against climate-related hazards, in particular through the adoption of bio-engineering (check dams, contour bunds and stonewalls, conservation ponds, gully stabilization and river bank stabilization). See Table on the climate benefits of promoted bio-engineering measures on page 84 of the FS, which provides a more detailed summary of the relevant - The water and soil conservation infrastructure 
investments will be operated and maintained by 
CBOs .  
- Selected measures are often combined with 
revenue generating activities  to ensure their 
financial sustainability (e.g. river bank stabilization with grasses and bamboo/ tree planting), as evidenced in the financial and economic analysis (water conservation practices have a NPV of $2,002 per hectare). 
- Investments on public land will be maintained by the government institutions responsible for the infrastructure. 
- Project-supported bio-engineering measures and structures are mostly made from locally available materials, and thus operations and maintenance costs are expected to be modest, and can be covered by revenues from sustainably produced products (e.g. bamboo, broom grass, NTFPs in riparian areas).  
- In addition, the structures are all durable, thus further contributing to ensuring that maintenance costs to be borne by CBOs remain sufficiently modest that they can cover such 
costs beyond project closure.


---
*Page 111*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 107 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
regards to design 
considerations). climate -resilient land use 
practices. 
Sub -Component 1.2 – Natural forest ecosystems are better maintained and  protected  
1.2.1: Support 
CBOs to develop/strengthe n and deliver forest management operational plans. Improving the application of 
sustainable forest management practices in all forest land managed by forestry-related CBOs within the Project Area, ensuring silvicultural practices are implemented and maximizing ecosystem service provision and resilience, as well as generating significant climate change mitigation benefits. - Recruit service providers 
to work with all forestry-related CBOs to develop and/or strengthen forest management operational plans. 
- Procure relevant equipment for each relevant CBO to support implementation of forest management operational plans. 
- Regular site visits by field staff (in PY3-7) to provide ongoing advice and guidance to enable implementation of forest management operational plans. - Approximately 600 
forest management operational plans developed and/or strengthened. - Management plans will 
guide project management and post-project management of CBO forests, enabling a medium-term trajectory for the continued adoption of sustainable forest management resulting in REDD+ and increased ecosystem resilience. 
 - Increased awareness and strengthened capacities 
of CBOs and government staff on sustainable forest management planning will ensure that SFM (incl. planning for climate risks and the promotion  
of resilient and sustainable practices) is mainstreamed in current and future plans.  
- Planning in Component 2, and knowledge management and transfer via the CKC will also help these groups to continue to utilize climate information in planning and decision making during and after the project. 
- Training of government staff, and supporting the institutionalization of trainings (through ToT and training module development), will enable the replication of similar processes in the future within other areas of the 26 river systems, and in other river systems in Nepal. 
- Networks in place to support information exchange and continued upscaling for CFUGs in 26 river systems. These networks are also a key institution to support knowledge dissemination and sharing of experiences between CFUGs, and will share project information and lessons learned and ultimately encourage CBOs within the river systems (including non-direct beneficiaries) to understand climate-risks specific to their river system, and encourage them to adopt suitable climate-resilient SNRM practices 
 
1.2.2: Train CBOs 
and land owners to enable more sustainable management of forest ecosystems. Build the capacity of 
government staff and all forestry-related CBOs to better understand the principles and practices that underpin sustainable management of forest ecosystems, and continue applying such principles and - Deliver Training of 
Trainer (ToT) events for MoITFE field staff. 
- Deliver trainings for forestry-related CBOs and other land owners (“Forest Training Beneficiaries”). - Approximately 26 
ToT events organized. 
- Approximately 122 local training events for forestry-related CBOs organized. 148,998 ha of forests are 
sustainably managed, contributing to REDD+ and increasing the resilience of forest ecosystems in vulnerable river systems.. - Forest ecosystems with healthy structure permanent cover - Forests if sustainably managed provide one of the 
best low -cost adaptation measures  for this region 
of Nepal, with high vulnerability and exposure to climate-induced disasters 
- SFM is financially sustainable . Improving training 
capacities, networks, and CBO management plans, will enable in the long-term CBOs to finance future investments in SFM, which has an estimated 
NPV of $833 per ha .


---
*Page 112*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 108 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
practices after project 
closure. maximize ecosystem 
services including flood protection, water recharge, erosion control, wind control, sponge effect against heavy rainfall events, reduction of gully formation, reduction in water runoff, biodiversity enhancement, and conservation, and various other socio-economic benefits (see Annex A in the FS for more detailed info) 
- REDD+ 
- Sequestration of additional carbon in forests under protection and SFM 
- Increase in soil organic carbon - Income from SFM will incentivize the con tinued 
adoption of SFM, combined with additional benefits (improving biodiversity, increased resilience to flooding, etc.). 
- Financing of equipment/ tools, fencing and other materials  (see Annex 3.2 for equipment budget under Activity 1.2.1) for maintaining SFM beyond project end will be 
financed by increased revenue 
streams . 
Sub -Component 1.3 – Forests and tree cover are restored and maintained in the river system landscape  
1.3.1: Establish 
and support the operation of 52 multi-purpose tree nurseries to serve the plantation and restoration needs of CBOs and other forest sector stakeholders. Establish tree nurseries in 
the Project Area to support tree planting and forest restoration under this project, as well as planting and restoration by communities throughout the Project Area during the project and after project closure. - Procure equipment and 
materials needed to establish two nurseries in each of the 26 river systems. 
- Identify suitable sites and stablish nurseries on these sites. 
- Procure material inputs and labour needed for production of seedlings in PY3-7, ensuring each nursery has the capacity to produce at least 50,000 seedlings per year. - 52 tree nurseries 
established and under operation. - Establishment and 
operationalization of 52 multi-purpose tree nurseries to serve the plantation and restoration needs of CBOs and other forest sector stakeholders. This ensures that there are suitable inputs to support reforestation and ecosystem-based adaptation efforts within the project area. - Nurseries established through project support 
will be hosted and managed by CFUGs, or other CBOs, where there is a presence 
 of individuals 
trained and/or experienced in nursery management, availability of, and willingness to allocate, necessary space and labour. The CBOs must be assessed as possessing the potential capacity to sustain the nursery as a viable enterprise beyond the duration of the project. 
- Nursery sites will be selected based on criteria described in the FP, to ensure their long-term suitability for seedling production, and also for access to markets and transport networks 
- Nurseries, once established, have the potential to become self-sustaining, through provision of planting materials to CBO members and to


---
*Page 113*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 109 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
external stakeholders as an income -generating 
activity    
 
 
 
1.3.2: Establish 
and maintain 7,300 ha of forest plantations to enhance resilience. Establish and support 
maintenance of different types of forest plantations (demonstration plantations; public land forests on river bank sites; and public land forests on community land) to build resilience and deliver mitigation benefits, while also building capacity to support sustainable forestry activities beyond project closure. - Train MoITFE staff in 
each province on sustainable plantation management. 
- Procure materials, seed stock and local labour needed to plant 1,300 ha of demonstration plantations in the Bhavar and Terai zones, and directly support and oversee this planting. 
- Procure materials, seedlings and local labour needed to establish 1,000 ha of riparian plantations (on river bank sites), and directly support and oversee this planting. 
- Assist relevant CBOs to sign formal agreements with local Municipality offices for management of riparian plantations, as well as develop management plans. 
- Procure materials, seedlings and local labour needed to establish 5,000 ha of plantations on community land, and directly support and oversee this planting. - Three training events 
organized (1 per province) for MoITFE staff. 
 - 1,300 ha of demonstration plantations established. 
 - 1,000 ha of riparian plantations established (on river bank sites). 
 - 5,000 ha of plantations established on community land. - Establishment and 
maintenance of 7,300 ha of forest plantations to enhance resilience. 
- Expanded forest cover 
(with a focus on vulnerable, degraded, sub-utilized and/or abandoned land) will enhance resilience against climate-change induced soil erosion (thus reducing downstream risks related to sedimentation and flooding) and enhance crucial ecosystem functions that underpin the resilience of upstream communities, while also providing mitigation benefits (e.g. REDD+, carbon stock enhancement, soil organic carbon).  
- More detailed information on the impacts available in FS page 90, and within FS Annex A (see A3.1 overview of interventions for tree planting on private and public lands).  - Plantation support  will be pr ovided to highly 
vulnerable and marginalized households on 
community land and in riparian areas,  
safeguarding key ecosystem services, strengthening resilience and enhancing carbon stocks.  
- Tree planting and multi-purpose tree plantations are needed to reduce pressure on natural forests for timber, fodder and fuelwood among other products. Highly marginalized households do not have the resources to invest in such plantations, and may need support for plantation establishment combined with inputs and technical trainings. The formalization of public land forest user groups will be an effective measure to engage such households (considering public land forest groups consist of some of highly vulnerable and marginalized men and women, often including indigenous peoples, women and Dalits), supporting them to establish planted forests on degraded, sub-utilized or abandoned land.  As well as receiving direct support through this activity for plantation establishment, the public land forest user groups will, once registered be eligible for support from provincial government extension services.  
- The financial and economic analysis demonstrated that these activities are profitable in the long-run, enabling and incentivizing re-investment by CBOs.  
- Demonstration plantations  in accessible public 
land (1,300 ha) will be established to expand tree cover of native high value timber species and build capacity of local forestry staff to promote sustainable plantation management beyond project closure. This in turn will deliver long-ter m


---
*Page 114*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 110 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
- Assist relevant CBOs to 
sign formal agreements with local Municipality offices for management of plantations on community land, as well as develop management plans. adaptation and mitigation benefits. To do so, 
project staff will train 20 forestry staff in each of 
the three provinces and support inputs for plantation in Bhavar and Terai zones of the 26 targeted river systems. These demonstration plantations will enable forestry staff to promote and support sustainable plantation management after project closure.  
- CBOs, such as CFUGs, will learn from the demonstration plantations and targeted extension support to promote CBO investment in high value timber species. It will support CBOs and interested private sector actors to understand necessary site-conditions, and management practices for successful investments (reducing investment risk and improving awareness on investment opportunities).  
1.3.3: Train 
government field staff and CBOs on Forest Landscape Restoration, and support CBOs to implement Assisted Natural Regeneration on 15,990 ha. Assist and build the capacity 
of CBOs to expand forest cover and restore forest landscapes in critical locations in each of the 26 targeted river systems, thereby restoring crucial ecosystem functions and ecosystems resilience while generating significant mitigation benefits. - Prepare training 
materials on Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR). 
- Train provincial forestry field staff on FLR. 
- Train CBOs on FLR. 
- Identify specific sites and communities for Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR) support, and develop ANR methodologies and implementation plans. 
- Procure tools, equipment, inputs and local labour needed to implement ANR on 15,990 ha of community-managed forest land, and directly support and oversee this planting. - 12 training events on 
FLR organized for provincial forestry field staff. 
- 180 training events on FLR organized for relevant CBOs. 
- ANR methodologies and implementation plans (adapted to local contexts) developed. 
- ANR implemented on 15,990 ha of community-managed forest land. - Implement Assisted 
Natural Regeneration on 15,990 ha by training government field staff and CBOs on Forest Landscape Restoration. - Building up the  training capacities on FLR will 
enable in the long-term CBOs to finance future investments in FLR. 
- Increased income from FLR will incentivize the continued adoption of SFM, combined with additional benefits (improving biodiversity, increased resilience to flooding, etc.). 
- Financing of equipment/ tools, fencing and other materials for assisted regeneration (relatively low-cost) beyond project end will be financed by increased revenue streams from FLR.


---
*Page 115*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 111 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
1.3.4: Provide 
technical guidance and seedlings to establish tree cover on 16,500 ha of woodlots to enhance ecosystem resilience, and improve fuelwood and timber availability in downstream communities. Establish woodlots on small -
scale landowners’ land, thereby enhancing resilience of soils and broader ecosystems, while also easing expansionary pressures (particularly from downstream communities and “distant forest users”) that are driving deforestation and forest degradation. - Identify landowners with 
whom to collaborate to establish woodlots. 
- Organize exchange visits between prioritized small-scale landowners and other successful forest owners in neighbouring districts. 
- Procure seedlings needed to establish woodlots on 16,500 ha of land, and directly oversee and support this planting (coupled with labour provided by beneficiary households and advisory services provided by government). - Woodlots established 
on 16,500 ha of land owned by small-scale landowners. Tree cover established on 
16,500 ha of woodlots to enhance ecosystem resilience, and improve fuelwood and timber availability in downstream communities.  - Reduced forest degradation from 
fuelwood collection 
(especially from distant-
forest users downstream), 
improving forest health and the provision of ecosystem services  
- Reduced erosion and sedimentation, reduced exposure to landslides and 
flooding from upstream 
deforestation  
- Improved energy security  
- Carbon sequestration (REDD+ from reducing 
pressure on natural forests, carbon stock 
enhancement)  - Sites for woodlot establishment will (i) focus on 
households with clarity of tenure and no prevailing ownership disputes; (ii) prioritize lower-income households (specific thresholds due to be determined during inception, based on baseline survey) to maximize sustainable development benefits and ensure project does not crowd out private investment; (iii) provide maximum 1 ha plantation support per household; and (iv) ensure at least 100 households are supported in each river system. Sites will be proposed by MoITFE after consultation with local municipalities and Private Forest Owners Associations, validated by MoFE and FAO experts, and finalised through dialogue with private land owners  
- The small land-owners targeted under this activity will be primarily identified through publi c 
land forest user groups, therefore receiving extension support through provincial government staff beyond project timeframe, to facilitate sustainability 
 
 
 
 
COMPONENT 2 – STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS AND PLANNING FOR CLIMATE -RESILIENT SNRM  
Sub -Component 2.1 – Planning for climate -resilient SNRM is enhanced  
2.1.1: Strengthen 
institutions on climate change impacts and ecosystem mapping. - Build the capacity of 
key entities that intend to collaborate with and/or benefit from the project – including those that will play an important role in sustaining and scaling up support for climate-resilient SNRM after project closure – on climate change and climate-resilient land - Train relevant national, 
provincial and local stakeholders on climate change and climate-resilient land use planning & management, as well as GESI principles and measures. 
- Train relevant national and provincial stakeholders on relevant - 4 national -level 
trainings on climate change and climate-resilient land use planning & management organized. 
- 3 provincial-level trainings on climate change and climate-resilient land use & planning organized. - Strategy and action plan 
will provide an improved policy framework and clear roadmap for mainstreaming and scaling up climate-resilient SNRM and DRR, including measures with adaptation benefits  - Strengthened capacities of provincial and local 
authorities to understand climate risks, 
interlinked dynamics related to REDD+ and climate risk, and important planning consideration s. 
- The creation of a framework to identify 
ecosystems and communities that are vulnerable to climate change,  especially climate-
related hazards, combined with strengthening government capacities to operationalize  this 
framework and conduct  a vulnerability 
assessment will enable them to consider climate-
related information in planning, and decision-


---
*Page 116*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 112 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
use planning & 
management practices. GIS tools for critical 
ecosystem mapping. - 64 local -level 
trainings on climate change and climate-resilient land use & planning organized. 
- 1 national-level training on GIS tools for critical ecosystem mapping organized. 
- 6 provincial-level trainings on GIS tools for critical ecosystem mapping organized. making . This is particularly relevant given the 
political context in Nepal and the devolution of 
decision making power  to the provincial and local 
levels.   
- Materials (guidelines, manuals, protocols and trainings) will be stored in the CKC, enabling institutionalized knowledge management and 
information retention , and will ultimately help 
facilitate replication of this approach in other river systems. 
2.1.2: Develop and 
validate Critical Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) for 26 river systems. Assist provincial and local 
stakeholders to develop a CERP for each of the 26 targeted river systems, thereby providing governments and CBOs with common plans and priorities to guide coordinated investments in climate-resilient SNRM. - Recruit a service 
provider to perform a multi-criteria spatial analysis for each of the 26 targeted river systems, and use this analysis as a basis to identify needs and propose investment/intervention priorities in each river system. 
- Organize a consultation in each river system to discuss identified priorities and develop them into a CERP for each river system. 
- Organize field consultations to raise awareness about (and secure buy-in for) CERP priorities among relevant CBOs. 
- Organize national and provincial-level workshops to secure - 26 CERPs developed 
and validated. 
- 26 river system-level consultations organized. 
- 52 field consultations organized. 
- 2 national and 6 provincial validation workshops organized. - 26 CERPS will identify 
particularly vulnerable priority areas within already vulnerable river systems and enable holistic planning to plan and implement priority measures for climate change adaptation and mitigation.  - The capacity of government stakeholders and 
local CBOs will be built to understand and assess 
climate risks, utilize climate information and vulnerability assessments to plan, and monitor climate resilient land use, and further monitor local risks  and resources in the future. This will 
equip them to continue investing in climate-resilient SNRM – in a manner that coordinates 
upstream and downstream interventions to maximize adaptation and mitigation benefits  – 
beyond project closure. 
- Priority measures will be implemented through investments covered in Component 1, and aligned with best practices  (see FS) and Nepal´s 
Churia Master Plan, among other national 
policies and strategies  
- Additional funding for further measures (e.g. non-priority measures) may be provided by the Provincial Government and/or the President’s Chure Terai Madhesh Conservation Development Board; both have been working in forests, soil and water conservation initiatives in the project area. 
- Engagement of diverse stakeholders, including governmental entities from different sectors and levels (national, provincial, local), NGOs, CBOs and local people will create improved 
commitments and ownership over climate


---
*Page 117*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 113 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
high -level government 
validation of CERPs. change adaptation and mitigation efforts  within 
each river system. 
- Improved cross-sectoral coordination  (including 
strengthening the engagement of DHM in planning processes), will result in improved planning and decision-making (including trans-
provincial decision-marking ) outcomes that 
benefit multiple sectors and promote low-carbon and climate-resilient development. 
- Supported by the activities in Component 1, CBOs will be able to reinvest profits in climate-resilient practices, with ongoing communication and guidance from the Nepali Government. 
- Based on the demonstration  of this process , this 
process can be replicated  in other parts of the 
country (due to strengthened capacities, supporting materials, improved knowledge management and institutional trainings) with notable benefits for the government to invest in maintaining such processes (reduced disasters, strengthened livelihoods and ecosystem services). 
2.1.3: Support 
provincial governments to plan and increase resilience to projected climate change-related extreme events. Raise awareness of the 
evolving risks related to climate change-induced extreme events within the Project Area and assist provincial governments to develop risk management plans for such extreme events. - Organize awareness -
raising workshops for provincial and local government staff. 
- Develop provincial risk management plans for climate change-induced extreme events, building on detailed hazard mapping, vulnerability assessments and risk mapping from CERPs. 
- Organize multi-stakeholder validation workshops for risk management plans. - 26 awareness -raising 
workshops organized. 
- 3 provincial risk management plans for climate change-induced extreme events developed. 
- 26 multi-stakeholder validation workshops organized. - Holistic planning that 
considers climate risks, upstream and downstream impacts, and vulnerable ecosystems and communities will enable provinces 1, 2 and 3 to increase their resilience to climate change-related extreme events. - Land use planning processes are strengthened 
and applied by balancing integrated spatial planning with participatory land use planning, accompanied by capacity building for local and provincial governments and CBOs. Combined with Activities 2.1.1-2.1.2, this will 
enable 
provincial governments to understand climate 
risks, and implement a holistic approach for 
disaster r isk -reduction , as well as low-carbon and 
climate-resilient land use. Such an approach will 
demonstrate a new framework for low GHG and 
climate -resilient planning  in Nepal, which will be 
replicable in other river systems in the country.  
- This is necessary to support the country’s needs, 
given the high vulnerability of the region  and the 
political context of the country, where there is a need to quickly 
invest in the capacities of 
provincial and local policy makers to enable the 
adoption of  necessary adaptation measures .


---
*Page 118*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 114 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
Sub -Component 2.2 – Community -based organizations (CBOs) are equipped to scale up  climate -resilient SNRM  
2.2.2: Train CBOs 
on climate-resilient land use planning, and assist them to mainstream SNRM into their CBO management plans. Build technical capacities of 
CBOs to understand climate change risks and how best to respond through climate-resilient SNRM approaches that are catered to their local needs, drawing on insights gained through the CERP process. - Recruit a service 
provider to organize Training of Trainers (ToT) for Local Resource Persons (LRPs) on climate-resilient land use. 
- Organize community workshops at which LRPs will train members from all 750 beneficiary CBOs. 
- Provide advice and guidance to mainstream climate-resilient SNRM into CBO management plans for the most vulnerable CBOs in the Project Area. - 26 ToT training 
events for LRPs organized. 
- 250 community-level workshops for CBOs organized (with about 3-5 CBOs per workshop). 
- 250 CBO management plans developed and/or strengthened to mainstream support for climate-resilient SNRM. - Adaptation and mitigation 
measures mainstreamed into local CBOs’ management plans, which provide short- and medium-term guidance for planning and implementing climate-resilient land use to improve the resilience of local livelihoods and ecosystems. This will strengthen local capacities, and reduce their vulnerability to climate change. 
- Improved awareness on climate-change impacts from deforestation and forest degradation and unsustainable NRM, and building capacities on SNRM and DRR measures in 750 CBOs.  
- Improved awareness on climate-change risks, and building capacities on climate resilient SNRM.  
- Improved use of climate information in planning and decision-making at the local level in 750 CBOs.  - CBOs and their members will have increased 
awareness on climate-risks, and climate-risk reduction measures, and measures for REDD+ and climate-resilient land use  that are suitable 
for their context.  
- Mainstreaming support will provide them with clear guidance for adopting climate-resilient SNRM (in combination with other technical and investment support within Components 1 and 3). 
- The integration of training materials into the CKC, and the institutionalization of training  
(training trainer materials and handbooks, training materials) will enable such an approach 
to be replicated  in other areas of the river 
system, and within the country. For example, there are over 18,000 CFUGs alone  established 
in Nepal, comprised of 2.2 million households that manage over 1.7 million ha of forests. Once materials are developed, early experiences conducted and staff trained, there is a significant  
potential to replicate such an approach in other parts of the country through extension services of provincial and local government staff and CBOs.  
- Mainstreamed climate-resilient SNRM measures (implementation and investment support included within Component 1 and 3) will have various co-benefits, including improved water quality and quantity, food security, improved health, biodiversity conservation, among others, providing additional incentives for CBOs to continue to invest in climate-resilient land use .  
COMPONENT 3 – IMPROVING KNOWLEDGE, AWARENESS AND LOCAL CAPACITY F OR CLIMATE -RESILIENT SNRM  
Sub -Component 3.1  – Local knowledge on climate -resilient SNRM is enhanced  
3.1.1: Equip Local 
Resource Persons (LRPs) with best practices on climate-resilient Gather local and indigenous 
knowledge on climate-resilient SNRM and distil this information into user-friendly guidelines for LRPs - Recruit a service 
provider to organize local consultations to gather local and indigenous knowledge. - 105 community 
consultations organized (about 4 in each of the 26 - Local and indigenous 
knowledge on climate-resilient SNRM will be identified and distilled into user-friendly - Indigenous and local knowledge should be 
combined with scientific knowledge and other best practices to provide vulnerable communities with diverse strategies to adapt to climate change. Local and traditional knowledge


---
*Page 119*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 115 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
SNRM from local 
experience, including indigenous knowledge. to train and support CBO 
members to adopt such practices during and beyond the project. - Develop a compendium 
of local and indigenous knowledge, building on insights gained from consultations. 
- Organize workshops to review/validate the compendium. 
- Recruit a service provider to develop best practice guidelines for LRPs, drawing in part on the compendium. targeted river 
systems). 
- 1 compendium of local and indigenous knowledge developed. 
- 5 provincial-level validation workshops organized. 
- 1 set of best practice guidelines for LRPs developed. guidelines for LRPs and 
other local stakeholders to train and support CBO members to adopt such practices during and beyond the project, scaling up best practices piloted by the Government of Nepal (MoSTE 2015, mentioned in the FS). identified from this activity will provide insight 
into how local communities from different cultural backgrounds identify climate change and cope with these changes – building on their own lessons learned. Such practices can help ´bridge national strategies ´with local level realities, an d 
enable the adoption of climate-resilient land use based on local and traditional knowledge – especially promotion the adoption of such practices by men and women from diverse indigenous groups, and castes (as suitable - see IPPF/SIPF for more information).   
- Knowledge and information on local climate-adaptation strategies will be integrated and disseminated via CKC (3.2.3), and awareness campaigns (3.1.2). This knowledge will further be mainstreamed into the training modules below, promoting the adoption of low-cost, local and culturally appropriate adaptation strategies. Combined with investment support provided in Component 1, this enables the promotion and adoption of such practices taking into account the available resources and barriers faced by particularly vulnerable households.  
3.1.2: Raise 
awareness on climate-resilient SNRM through local schools, media and intra-regional exchange. Organize awareness -raising 
campaigns and other forms of information exchange to promote climate-resilient SNRM, and increase interest in such practices and communities living throughout the Project Area. - Recruit a service 
provider to develop a knowledge dissemination and communication plan. 
- Recruit a service provider to develop curricula on climate-resilient SNRM for local high schools. 
- Establish student-run eco-clubs in all 26 targeted river systems. 
- Organize local-level radio programmes. - 1 knowledge 
dissemination and communication plan developed. 
- 1 set of high school curricula developed. 
- Student-run eco-clubs established, and 260 sessions held at schools in the Project Area. 
- 119 local-level radio programmes broadcast. 
- 28 local exchange visits for local - Increased awareness of 
local people on climate change, climate risks and climate-resilient SNRM and available resources, initiatives and opportunities. - Engagement with local and  provincial 
governments, NGOs, indigenous people’s federations, Dalit organizations, women’s organizations and others, the service provider will  
establish methods for widespread dissemination of project-generated information (including what is developed under Sub-Component 3.1 and the information contained in the CKC established under Sub-Component 3.3) via these entities’ respective networks. 
- This will increase awareness of climate risks and available resources (including the CKC), to support local people to adapt to climate-risks.


---
*Page 120*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 116 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
- Organize exchange visits 
for local government authorities. government officials 
organized. 
Sub -Component 3.2 – The extension system is equipped to promote climate -resilient SNRM  
3.2.1: Develop 10 
modules on climate-resilient SNRM to be used by extension workers, including in the FFS. - Develop locally -
relevant training modules that cover the range of climate-resilient SNRM practices to be supported by the project, which extension workers and other trainers can use to promote more widespread adoption/application of climate-resilient SNRM throughout the Project Area during and after the project. - Develop training 
modules. 
- Recruit a service provider to translate training modules. - 10 training modules 
developed and translated.  - Government extension 
workers have locally-adapted training modules to be used when training farmers and other land users to adopt project-promoted climate-resilient SNRM practices (supporting trainings and adoption of measures presented in Component 1). The modules will cover sensitization and extension processes for rural communities and beneficiaries including implementation planning, self-learning, quality assurance and incentive structures, and will support the facilitation of all key interventions under Component 1. 
 - Training modules draw on best practices 
identified in the feasibility work done for this project, as well as the insights gained from the CERP process (under Activity 2.1.2) and the collection of local and indigenous knowledge (under Activity 3.1.1). 
- Enables improved institutional and individual learning, improved knowledge management, and facilitates the replication of training in other pa rts 
of the country. 
 
3.2.2: Enhance and 
deliver quality extension services on climate-resilient SNRM to households. - Build the capacity of 
extension workers and LRPs to understand and apply the 10 training modules developed under Activity 3.2.1; engage the services of provincial extension workers to promote and support adoption of climate-resilient SNRM in the Project - Train extension workers 
and LRPs on climate-resilient SNRM, including how to use/apply the 10 training modules developed under Activity 3.2.1. 
- Engage provincial extension workers (using MoFE co-financing) to deliver climate-informed extension support in the Project Area, including - 78 tra ining events 
organized. 
- Extension workers providing 11,880 months of project-related support for climate-resilient SNRM, with the specific distribution of these working months (i.e. days per worker) to be determined. - To promote lasting and 
sustainable behavioural change to enable the adoption of climate-resilient and low-carbon land use (including practices aimed at addressing the main drivers and underlying causes of deforestation and forest degradation, and increasing resilience of local livelihoods and - By building the capacity of local extension 
workers and drawing on their existing insights and networks, the project expects to generate high adoption rates among CBOs. This approach will also ensure that the provincial governments are well equipped to continue providing climate-informed extension services in the Project Area after project closure – thereby increasing the prospects for scaling up and out that are so important to the broader process of sector transformation that this project aims to set in motion.


---
*Page 121*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 117 OF 1 17 
 
 
 I I 
Activity  Description  Sub -activities  Deliverables  Impact  Sustainability Considerations  
Area by: (i) supporting 
delivery of project-organized trainings; and (ii) continuing to support CBOs to adopt and continue using climate-resilient SNRM, including among households who were not selected by their CBOs to participate directly in project-organized trainings. under Components 1 
and 2. ecosystems), it is essential 
to scale up the delivery of high-quality, climate-informed extension services in all 26 targeted river systems. 
- Extension workers will directly support delivery of project-financed trainings and extension & advisory services that support investments under Component 1. 
 - MoFE co -financing will be used to engage the 
services of provincial-level extension workers (on contract with MoITFE and MoALMC) to specifically support the delivery of climate-informed extension modules and support under the BRCRN project, and signals an intention to continue to finance these services after closure.  
- They will provide ongoing advice, guidance and support to CBOs throughout the project implementation period to enable the continued adoption and use of climate-resilient SNRM practices promoted by the project, including among households who were not selected by their CBOs to directly participate in formal trainings organized by the project.  
3.2.3: Establish 
and operate a Churia Knowledge Centre (CKC) in each province to enable continuous delivery of climate-informed extension services and planning, and to monitor implementation and results of CERPs and CBO management plans. - Establish (and build 
capacity to use) the CKC as a platform to underpin the continued provision of climate change-informed extension and advisory services, as well as support continued monitoring of natural resources and evidence-based planning in the Project Area, beyond project closure. - Recruit a service 
provider to establish the CKC, including provincial hubs within the MoITFE offices in Provinces 1, 2 and 3. 
- Train government staff and other relevant specialists to understand the CKC, and the information they can access from it. 
- Develop CKC manuals, protocols and guidelines (including Standard Operating Procedures, SOPs). 
- Train relevant MoITFE staff on CKC protocols and SOPs to support continued maintenance/operation of the CKC. - CKC platform 
established. 
- 3 provincial CKC hubs established in MoITFE offices in Provinces 1, 2 and 3 (integrating into existing institutions). 
- 4 training events on CKC use/access organized. 
- 1 set of CKC manuals, protocols, guidelines and SOPs developed. 
- 3 training events on CKC maintenance/operati ons organized. - Improved collection, 
analysis, and dissemination of climate-related information leading to the delivery of climate-informed extension services, integration of climate change into decision making process and planning, and to support monitoring and implementation of climate interventions. - CKC will be embedded in existing instit utions – 
within MoITFE Offices (specifically within the Science Environment and Climate Change Division). It will support knowledge management and learning beyond project closure.  
- Besides investing in the design and development of CKC, an emphasis is placed on building the capacity of MoITFE staff in each of the provincial CKC hubs to operate the CKC.  
- Manuals, protocols and guidelines will be developed to guide provincial staff on CKC knowledge generation, gathering and management, including after project completion. This will include the development of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), which will be agreed with MoITFE to ensure the provincial CKC hubs are well operated and maintained beyond project closure (ensuring it is fully embedded within the institution).  
- MoITFE staff will be trained on the protocols, guidelines and SOPs in PY7 to build their capacity to continue operating the CKC, and ensure it fulfils its role as a repository to support climate -
informed extension services and planning into the future.


---
*Page 122*
---

_ .. i:r� ..... Governll\ lqtbf Nepal 
MINISTRY:� INANCE 
, . r,1m!;n\ �-
Internationa l Economic'OOQ?.eratrorl Coordina11on OiviSton .� • J - • 
·', •. 
J:E�C� /MoF/ �c.Fr100 I 2.018-d/9/tJ04  
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
Songdo International Business District 
175, Art Center-daero  
Yeonsu-gu, lcheon 406840 
Republic of Korea SINGHADURBAR 
KATHMANDU , NEPAL 
Kathmandu, 26 November 2018 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations regarding 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the project Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to us on 18 September 
2018. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Finance, International Economic 
Cooperation Coordination Division, the National Designated Authority of Nepal. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the project {or programme] as included in the funding proposal. 
By communica ting our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of Nepal has no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal;
(b)The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Nepal's national priorities,
strategies and plans;
(c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme.  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Name: Shreekris hna Nepal 
Title: Joint Secretary  
Tel: Minister 4211809, Secretary 4211332, International Economic Cooperation Coordination Division 4211372, 4211867 
Fax No. 4211164, 4211165, Website: www.mof.gov.np  No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 123*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme 
title  Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN)  
Existence of 
subproject (s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO ) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or 
location (s) of programme  The selected river systems  in Nepal : Kokaha; Gideri Khola; 
Patnali Khola; Thakur Khola; Sun Koshi; Chadaha Khola; 
Kamala- North; Tawa -North; Tawa -South; Kankai Nadi; Ratuwa 
Nadi; Adherei K hola, Baruwa Khola, Duar Khola; Lakhandehi 
Khola; Kamala- South; Biring Khola; Balan Khola; Charnath; 
Bataha Khola; Budhi Khola; Lohandra Nadi; Kamala, Belsot, 
Jogiya; Ratu Nadi; Mechi Khola; Bakraha Khola; Bihul Nadi; and 
Khado Khola  
Environmental and Soc ial Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, October 4, 2019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Nepali  
Explanation on language  Nepali is the official language of Nepal. Civil society 
organizations and indigenous people’s  representatives 
requested translat ion into Nepali .  
Link to disclosure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ ca6456en/ca6456en.pdf   
 Nepali:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456ne/ca6456ne.pdf   
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
 
FAO Nepal (country office) website:  
http://www.fao.o rg/nepal/en/  
Remarks  An ESIA  consistent with t he requirements for a category B  
project is  contained in the  Environmental and Social 
Management Framework  (ESMF).    
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, October 4, 2019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Nepali  
Explanation on language  Nepali is the official language of Nepal. Civil society 
organizations and indigenous people’s  representatives 
requested translation into Nepali.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456en/ca6456en.pdf


---
*Page 124*
---

Nepali:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456ne/ca6456ne.pdf    
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
 
FAO Nepal (country office) website:  
http://www.fao .org/nepal/en/   
Remarks   An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained  in the ESM F.  
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website   N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks   N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, October 4, 2019  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Nepali  
Explanation on language   Nepali is the official language of Nepal. Civil society 
organizations and indigenous people’s  representatives 
requested translation into Nepali.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456en/ca6456en.pdf    
 
Nepali:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456ne/ca6456ne.pdf   
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
 FAO Nepal (country office) website:  
http://www.fao.org/nepal/en/   
Remarks  An Indigenous Peoples’ Plan and Framework (IPP/IPPF) , Social 
Inclusion Plan and Framework (SIP/SIPF) , and Biodiversity 
Management Framework are  contained in the ESMF . 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, October 4, 2019  
Place  FAO Nepal (country office) website , as a location closer to  the 
project  stakeholders:  http://www.fao.org/nepal/en/   
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Tuesday, November 12, 2019  
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting  Tuesday, November 12, 2019  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 125*
---

G
CF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 125 
Secretariat’s 	assessment 	of	FP118	
Proposal name: Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRC RN) 
Accredited entity: Food and Agric ulture Organization of the Uni ted Nations (FAO) 
Country/(ies): Nepal 
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Overall	assessment 	of	the	Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideratio n with the following
remark s:
Strengths 	 Points	of	caution	
The level of recipients’ needs is high as the 
project targets Nepal, a least developed 
country and one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change. The 
project area is already suffering from 
increasing temperatures and changing 
precipitation patterns caused by climate change Weak enforcement capacity may cause it to be challenging to change the status quo of 
illegal or unsustainable natural resource use, 
especially after the project’s completion 
The project takes an integrated sustainable 
natural resource management and cross-
sectoral approach that takes into consideration the inter-connectedness of 
ecosystems and land-use systems  
There is strong stakeholder engagement, 
including with all levels of government and 
community-based organizations 
2. The Board may wish t o consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and  
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and rec ommendations”.
II. Summary	 of	the	Secretariat’s	 assessment
2.1 Project background  
3. The Churia region of Nepal is characterized by the critical nature of its geophysical
location, its socio-economic marginality, ecological sensitivit y, and its sensitivity to climate
change. It provides vital role in maintaining the ecosystem of the heavily populated Terai plains
downstream, including groundwater regulation, prevention of sil tation, flood control and the
supply of raw materials for various livelihoods, including fuel  and construction materials. For
decades the natural resources of the region have been managed i n an unsustainable manner.
This created a vicious cycle of land degradation, causing decre ased productivity which in turn


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 126 
 
 
caused further land degradation and the unsustainable extractio n of natural resources, resulting 
in sedimentation, landslides and erosion in downstream farmland s. This situation is further 
exacerbated by the effects of climate change – increasing tempe ratures, changing precipitation 
patterns and more frequent and more intense hazards, such as fl oods, necessitate adaptation in 
the agriculture and forest sectors to safeguard the ecosystem a nd products of the land. 	
4. The proposed project will take an integrated approach to enhanc ing the resilience of 
ecosystems and vulnerable communities through the promotion of the widespread adoption of 
climate-resilient land-use pract ices, restoration of ecosystems  and forests, confronting the 
challenges of deforestation and forest degradation, and buildin g resilience to more frequent and 
more intense hazards. The proposed interventions are categorize d by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the accredited entity  (AE), as a category B project, 
with medium environmental and social risk.  
5. The total project cost is USD 47.3 million with a request to GC F to finance USD 39.3 
million (83 per cent) in grant form. The remaining cost will be  covered by the Government of 
Nepal through the Ministry of Fo rests and Environment (MoFE). 	
2.2 Component-by-component analysis  
Component 	1:	Scaling	up	climate‐resilient	sustainable 	natural	resource	management 	(SNRM)	
(total	cost:	USD	34.0	million;	GCF	cost:	USD	33.03	million,	or	97	per	cent)	
6. The project will target 26 of the  most vulnerable  river systems  within the selected three 
provinces, where over 3.2 million people live. Under this compo nent, community-based 
organizations (CBOs) and their members, as well as local govern ment, will be provided with 
technical and financial support to scale up sustainable practic es, including: 
(a) Climate-resilient agricultural practices on 60,965 ha;  
(b) The restoration of 202,237 ha of critical forest, wetland and g rassland ecosystem; and  
(c) Tree planting on 23,800 ha  as new forest systems. 
7. This support will be delivered i n each of the targeted river sy stems, guided by river 
system-based spatial and operati onal plans developed under comp onent 2, where specific 
measures are selected considering differentiated vulnerabilitie s within each river system.  
8. Activities in this component will  absorb the majority of GCF fi nance (84 per cent). The 
proposed interventions are deemed to be appropriate and adequat e in addressing the 
underlying drivers of land degradation in the project area, lea ding to further emission 
reductions through reduced defor estation and forest degradation  as well as improved carbon 
sequestration. 
Component 	2:	Strengthening 	institutions 	and	planning	for	climate‐resilient	SNRM	(total	cost:	USD	
3.31	million;	GCF	cost:	USD	3.04	million	or	91.8	per	cent)	
9. As a precursor to guide investments in component 1, activities in component 2 will 
support provincial and local gove rnment stakeholders and CBOs i n identifying and assessing 
climate-change risks and resource degradation within the target  river basins and in developing 
locally relevant plans to respon d to the identified risks.  
10. The proposed interventions in th is component are critical not o nly to ensuring 
investments in each target river basin are locally appropriate but also to equipping government 
stakeholders and CBOs to be able  to continue investing in clima te-resilient SNRM beyond 
project completion. It is particularly necessary, given Nepal’s  ongoing political transition, to 
delegate the responsibilities fo r natural resource management t o provincial and local 
governments.


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 127 
 
 
Component 	3:	Improving 	knowledge, 	awareness 	and	local	capacity	for	climate‐resilient	SNRM	
(total	cost:	USD	8.01	million;	GCF	cost:	USD	1.65	million	or	20.6	per	cent)  
11. Component 3 will improve the awareness of climate-change threat s and build the 
capacities necessary to continuo usly monitor climate-change ris ks and vulnerabilities at the 
provincial, local and CBO levels . This will be achieved by meas ures that strengthen extension 
materials and guidelines for far mer-field schools, scaling up t he reach of extension services, and 
trainings for trainers to implem ent climate-resilient SNRM prac tices. An innovative knowledge 
centre will also be established to enhance climate monitoring, knowledge management and 
dissemination. 
12. The proposed activities under this component are complementary to components 2 and 
3 in setting a strong enabling e nvironment to sustain and scale  up the SNRM interventions 
following project completion. 
Component 	4: Project	management 	(total	cost:	USD	2.04	million;	GCF	cost:	USD	1.58	million	or	77	
per	cent)  
13. Project management costs will be covered by GCF and the Governm ent of Nepal 
proportional to the overall contribution to the project. The to tal project management cost is 
around 4.2 per cent of the total project cost, which is complia nt with the GCF policy on fees. 	
III. Assessment 	of	performance 	against	investment 	criteria	
3.1 Impact potential                        Scale:	High	
14. The project addresses environmental degradation through multipl e angles, leading to 
significantly increased climate-resilient communities and envir onmental resilience to climate 
change. Climate change is affecting the agricultural production  potential of the region and 
increasing the risk of the loss of life and property through na tural disasters. The project’s 
interventions will positively impact both issues, leading to di rect benefits for nearly 1 million 
people in the project area, and over 3.2 million indirect benef iciaries in the downstream areas of 
the project. 
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                            Scale:	High  
15. The project takes an ecosystem-based approach that promotes int egrated management. 
The integration of the areas of SNRM is new to Nepal, thus, thi s project has significant scalability 
potential for other regions in the country and worldwide differ ent with regard to its successful 
practices and lessons learned. 
16. Following the adoption of Nepal’s  new Constitution in 2010, gov ernance in the country 
has devolved to provincial and local levels of government. Thro ugh its institutional capacity-
building component, this project focuses on these lower levels of government, ensuring the 
continued consideration of SNRM beyond the lifetime of the proj ect. 
3.3 Sustainable development po tential                    Scale:	High	
17. Sustainable 	Development 	Goal	(SDG)	1: the project will deliver crucial economic 
benefits through its support for agricultural development. Its direct beneficiaries, which are 
mostly poor, will see improvements in their livelihood support systems through increased 
agricultural productivity, the g reater availability of fuelwood  and timber, and reduced exposure 
to disasters.


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 128 
 
 
18. SDG	15: better management of natural r esources, which are currently ve ry degraded, 
will lead to reduced erosion in the project area and reduced as sociated sedimentation in rivers. 
19. SDGs	5	and	7: the support for biogas digester s will lead to significant bene fits for 
women, in particular through a r educed need to collect fuelwood  and less air pollution during 
cooking. The project has strong gender mainstreaming throughout .  
3.4 Needs of the recipient             Scale:	High	
20. Nepal is a least developed country and is ranked as the world’s  fourth most vulnerable 
country to climate chan ge. Moreover, the project area lies in t he Churia hills, which provide vital 
ecosystem functions to the heavily populated plains downstream in Nepal and India. 
21. Nepal is also susceptible to natural disasters, such as earthqu akes. The most recent 
major earthquake struck the nation’s capital, Kathmandu, in 201 5 and led to an estimated total 
damage of USD 10 billion, approx imately 50 per cent of nominal gross domestic product. Other 
natural disasters include landslides and glacial lake outburst floods. As a result, susceptibility to 
natural disasters, its fiscal space is very restricted. 
3.5 Country ownership                        Scale:	High	
22. The project is aligned with key policy frameworks and co-financ ing is being provided by 
the Nepali Government. 
23. The project responds directly to Nepal’s first nationally deter mined contribution, with 
specific reference to three of the four components of the Pilot  Program on Climate Resilience: “i) 
Building climate resilience of wa tersheds in mountain eco regio ns, ii) Building resilience to 
climate related hazards, iii) Mai nstreaming climat e change risk  management in development”. 
Apart from that, the project references national policies of fo rests, biodiversity, ecosystem-
based adaptation and pro-poor strategies. 
24. The Government of Nepal has actively engaged in the development  of the funding 
proposal, which is one of the key programmes of the MoFE. 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness            Scale:	High	
25. The mitigation impact of the project is estimated at USD 4.24 p er tonne of carbon 
dioxide equivalent, with an external rate of return of 81 per c ent over 20 years, inclusive of 
ecosystem benefits, and 20 per cent excluding them. The project  invests USD 50 per direct 
beneficiary, which is considered competitive.  
26. Project co-financing is relatively limited at 17 per cent, bein g provided by the 
Government of Nepal. FAO, as the  AE, will not provide any co-fi nancing. 
IV. Assessment 	of	consistency 	with	GCF	safeguards 	and	policies	
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards 
27. The project aims to enhance the climate resilience of ecosystem s and vulnerable 
communities in the Churia region of Nepal through integrated SN RM approaches. The 
interventions will be undertaken in 26 river systems in the reg ion and will provide benefits to 
women, indigenous peoples and ma rginalized minority groups, inc luding Dalits, through CBOs. 
To achieve its objective, the pr oject will undertake activities  organized into the following


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 129 
 
 
components: (1) scaling-up of cl imate-resilient SNRM; (2) stren gthening institutions and 
planning for climate-resilient SNRM; and (3) improving knowledg e, awareness and local 
capacity for climate-resilient SNRM.  
28. The AE considered the project as having a potential moderate en vironmental and social 
risk classification. This risk classification takes into consid eration the likely adverse 
environmental and social risks and impacts of the project, whic h it finds to be less adverse and 
fewer in number (compared to hig h environmental and social risk  projects); the risks and 
impacts are considered site-spec ific, and mitigation measures h ave been readily designed and 
implemented to address the identif ied risks and impacts. GCF co nfirms the risk classification of 
the proposed project as equivalent to category B for moderate e nvironmental and  social risks.  
29. The AE has submitted an environmental and social management fra mework (ESMF) 
since the specific locations and  interventions still have to be  finalized. The ESMF describes the 
processes for integrating environmental and social consideratio ns in the activities. The ESMF 
describes the due diligence process, including screening, asses sment, and the management and 
planning of measures to avoid, m inimize and mitigate the identi fied risks and impacts. 
Incorporated in the ESMF are an indigenous peoples planning fra mework, biodiversity 
management framework, social inclusion planning framework, and stakeholder engagement 
and grievance redress systems th at will be established for the project.  
30. Key	environmental 	and	social	risks	and	impacts.  The project involves activities that 
are expected to generate positive environmental and social impa cts, such as improving natural 
resources management and ecosystem services as well as the clim ate resilience of ecosystems 
and vulnerable communities. Poten tial adverse environmental and  social risks and impacts have 
also been identified for the activities that will be supported by the project. 
31. Indigenous 	peoples	and	other	vulnerable 	groups.  Indigenous peoples form 
approximately 31% of the populat ion in the project area, of whi ch 50% are women, and 
according to the project logic w ill form both 31% of the direct  beneficiaries and 31% of the 
indirect beneficiaries. In line with its own Policy on Indigeno us and Tribal Peoples, and the 
Environmental and Social Management Guidelines, the AE has prov ided an ‘Indigenous Peoples 
and Social Inclusion Planning Fr amework’ (IP SIP  Framework) as a comprehensive section of 
the ESMF. Including Dalits along with indigenous peoples in the ir consideration of vulnerable 
groups, IP SIP Framework describ es both measures to mitigate po tential negative impacts and 
enhance positive benefits. Further participation could be enhan ced by identifying links, if any, 
between the AE’s Project Supervision Unit, Executing Unit and e xisting indigenous-related 
institutions within the AE such as the Interdepartmental Workin g Group, FPIC Task Force and 
the informal caucus of indigenous peoples’ focal points.  
32. Applicable national commitments include the ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples 
Convention, 1989 (No. 169), that was ratified in 2007. Both nat ional and AE commitments 
explicitly mention the need to attain free, prior and informed consent (FPIC), and within the 
project framework, outcomes are explicitly conditional on wheth er FPIC agreements have been 
signed prior to implementation. 
33. Indigenous peoples, including national indigenous organizations , and national 
indigenous women’s organizations , were included in the consulta tions for the development of 
the funding proposal. In the imp lementation of the project, the  representation of indigenous 
peoples is explicitly mentioned at the level of the Provincial Coordination Units, as well as 
representation ‘engaged in the PSC where they will be invited t o discuss thematic issues, and 
project progress.’ A budget line is dedicated to ensuring the p articipation of indigenous peoples 
in the PMC and PCU. 
34. The IP SIP Framework envisages th e creation of an Indigenous Pe oples and Social 
Inclusion Plan as well as separate IP SIMPs in each of the twen ty-six river systems. The IP SIP 
Framework discussions impact and mitigation measures including that the project will not be


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 130 
 
 
involved in displacement of indigenous peoples’ social and econ omic activities, nor in 
challenging traditional use of forest, land and water resources  by indigenous peoples. The 
project, via the IP SIP Framewor k, also explicitly supports the  full, effective and proportional 
representation of indigenous peoples, and provides documentatio n of consultations already 
carried out with indigenous peop les, while acknowledging the re quirement for additional 
consultations for key indigenous organizations. The project’s g rievance redress mechanism 
respects the inclusion of inform al and/or customary conflict ma nagement and resolution 
processes. Activities for the deve lopment of the IP SIP Framewo rk earmarked to discrete 
financial resources are set aside under the ESMF workplan. This  includes the hiring of an 
Indigenous Peoples and Social Inclusion Specialist in the PMU f or the lifespan of the project. 
35. Biodiversity 	and	natural	habitats.  The project is expected to improve the 
ecosystemsecosystem services and the overall vegetation cover o f the Churia region through 
SNRM.  However, it is likely that some of the project activitie s will be implemented within an 
established protected area and RAMSAR site, the Koshi Tappu Wil dlife Reserve. To ensure that 
the activities will not reduce the biodiversity value of the ar ea and impair its ecosystem 
services, a Biodiversity Management Framework will be prepared consistent with the 
requirements of the AE and the GCF. While the project will supp ort forest plantations andwas 
prepared consistent with the requirements of the AE and the GCF . The framework presents the 
approach of the project to prote ct biodiversity resources and m anage and mitigate potential 
impacts associated with the activities. Activities will not be implemented in the core protection 
areas or buffer zones of the Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve. Rest oration activities in river 
systems and in the buffer zones of public and community-managed  forests. These restoration 
activities are expected to generate benefits to the environment  and communities by improving 
connectivity and corridors between  mosaics and habitats, improv ing gene pool, and adaptation. 
While the project will support a groforestry systems, these inte rventions will only be conducted 
on degraded lands, specifically, lands that are not used for ag ricultural purposes and will not 
require deforestation. 	 
36. Involuntary 	resettlement . The result of the environmental and social screening 
conducted for the project indicated that the project would not likely lead to any involuntary 
resettlement or displacement of the affected population. Projec t activities are unlikely to alter 
local people’s access to forest resources on private land. Inve stments in public lands, either non-
forested land or highly degraded forested land will focus on su pporting public land forest users 
to benefit from sustainable management of their forest resource s. The participation of public 
land users will be based on part icipatory processes, voluntary and based on FPIC. Should the 
communities decide to implement protection of degraded areas, w hich may result in restriction 
of access, these will be designed and implemented based on cons ultations with the community 
members and the community-based organizations. The ESMF also re cognized potential conflicts 
that may be borne from disagreem ents over changes to land use b oundaries and land rights. The 
ESMF presents conflict management measures such as ensuring con sents from affected people 
are obtained and broad consultat ions are undertaken, and the ef fective enforcement of 
regulations and policies are conducted.   Measures to restore a ny potential loss of livelihood 
particularly of vulnerable groups, through alternative land use s will be jointly developed. For 
activities on private lands, proof of land ownership must be de monstrated by the beneficiaries, 
and upon establishment, provide  certification for private fores ts following the requirements of 
the Forest Act of 1993. Further due diligence and screening of the activities will be undertaken 
on risks related to physical and economic displacements. As par t of the project’s list of excluded 
activities, the project will not support activities that result  in a negative change to existing 
legitimate tenure rights as well as activities involving involu ntary resettlements of households.   
37. Construction ‐related	environmental 	and	social	impacts.  The project will support the 
construction of small-scale rural infrastructures such as bunds , small water impoundments, 
slope stabilization and other so il and water conservation struc tures. The ESMF provides that the 
project will not support the construction of medium to large in frastructure. Given the likely


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 131 
 
 
scale of such infrastructure, th e risks and impacts from constr uction are expected to be limited 
and temporary. Construction environmental management plans will  be prepared prior to any 
construction works to ensure tha t appropriate mitigation measur es are prepared and 
implemented. 
38. The ESMF includes a list of activities that are excluded from t he project’s support. These 
excluded activities are consider ed to have likely environmental  and social risk factors that may 
raise the overall environmental and social risk profile of the project. Among the activities that 
will not be supported by  the pro ject include those that would:  (1) result in negative change to 
existing legitimate tenure rights ; (2) involve involuntary rese ttlement; (3) support construction 
of medium to large infrastructure; (4) increase greenhouse gas emissions substantially; (5) 
implemented in protected areas; (6) involve direct supply of ag rochemicals; and (7) support 
clearing of native forests and use non-locally adapted species.   
39. The ESMF provided the AE’s screening checklist which will be us ed as the main tool for 
identifying and characterizing t he potential risks and impacts of the project. Further 
assessments, follow-ups and deve loping mitigation measures are provided in the ESMF, 
including the timeframe for unde rtaking these due diligence act ivities.  
40. The AE, together with the executing entity will implement stake holder engagement 
during the implementation of the  project, building on the exten sive consultations that were 
undertaken in the course of preparing the project. Annex 3 pres ents the documentation of the 
stakeholder workshops and consul tations undertaken since 2017. Stakeholder engagement 
measures are integrated into each  activity planned for the BRCR N project and include 
continuing awareness-raising, consultations and workshops at va rious levels, information 
dissemination, and communication  and feedback. Annex 1 of the E SMF includes detailed 
overview of planned stakeholder consultation events and worksho ps. 
41. MoFE will serve as the main executing entity (EE), supported by  FAO. A project steering 
committee, chaired by MoFE, will be formed to provide overall g uidance to project design and 
implementation. The Provincial P roject Management Unit (PPMU), the project management unit 
(PMU) within MoFE, will be forme d and composed of provincial le vel supporting units. The 
PPMU will be hosted in the provincial offices of the Ministries  of Industry, Tourism, Forests and 
Environment. Within the provinc es, provincial coordination unit s will be created that would 
include representatives from various sectors, including relevan t government agencies and civil 
society organizations, including women’s groups, indigenous peo ples organizations and 
federations, and representatives.  
42. A grievance redress mechanism has been developed to receive and  address complaints 
that may arise from the project. This project-level grievance r edress mechanism complements 
the AE’s own institutional mechanism and follows established pr inciples of the UN Guiding 
Principles for Business and Human Rights. The detailed steps an d procedures are outlined in the 
ESMF and identify the various lev els for receiving, resolving, and escalating complaints. 
Traditional or customary dispute management practices are also integrated into the project-
level grievance redress mechanism. 
43. The ESMF provides an ESMF workplan that includes well-defined t asks, progress 
indicators, schedules, responsibility assignments, and costs, i ncluding budget dedicated to both 
the ESMF and the project activities.  
4.2 Gender policy  
44.  The AE has submitted a comprehensive gender assessment; theref ore, it complies with 
the operational guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan. The AE has also provided a 
gender action plan for the project.


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 132 
 
 
45. The gender assessment provides a  comprehensive overview of the gender situation in 
Nepal, particularly of the Churia region. The assessment was co mpleted through a desk review 
and extensive consultations with women’s representatives, CBOs and communities themselves. 
The assessment provides information on the broader gender issue s, the particular issues of the 
region, and the issues that are r elevant to the project objecti ve of enhancing climate resilience 
among communities, with special at tention to women, Dalits and other vulnerable groups. 
46. Nepal has progressively improved its policies to ensure the par ticipation of women in 
politics and decision-making bodies by requiring a minimum 33 p er cent participation in 
parliament and water user associations. However there are still  gaps in ensuring meaningful 
participation of women and vulne rable groups due to persistent time poverty; lack of capacity; 
lack of access to and control ov er resources (e.g. in forestry and agriculture sectors); lack of land 
titles; presence of exclusionary institutions; domination of el ite men in decision-making; and the 
lower level of education prevale nt among women, to name a few. A major challenge to the 
participation of women in decision-making is the issue of time poverty as women often spend 
10.5 to 13 hours a day maintainin g their and their family’s liv elihoods, particularly in rural 
areas such as the Churia region.  Feminization of agriculture wi th increased male migration has 
added to women’s challenges as they face labour shortages to wo rk on agricultural land, forcing 
them to focus on high value and less intensive crops. This cont ributes to an increase in land 
abandonment, which has led to a decline in certain agricultural  activities and food security. 
Agricultural extension services in Nepal are weak, and women do  not get sufficient information 
about extension services or access to labour-saving practices a nd technologies. Female-headed 
households, particularly those le d by women who are widowed or divorced, face additional 
challenges related to access to food, health, nutrition and edu cation due to social discrimination. 
The gender assessment recognizes that women are not a homogenou s group, and it has 
identified additional challenges faced by Dalit women, indigeno us groups and other 
marginalized groups. 
47. The assessment findings and recommendations are included in the  gender action plan, 
with activities designed to help women overcome the barriers th ey face to participate and 
benefit from interventions planned through the project. The gen der action plan therefore 
focuses on activities that: (i) promote the membership of women  in CBOs in order to enhance 
their empowerment through activities, mainstream gender and inc lusion issues in policies and 
regulations, and develop the capacities of different actors; (i i) target women, Dalit women and 
indigenous women to access extension services, make use of effi cient technologies, get access to 
forest and resilient agricultural practices, and engage in lead ership and other trainings; and (iii) 
make sure the rights of vulnerab le and excluded groups are safe guarded through appropriate 
redress mechanisms. The action plan also includes,  as per the gender assessment finding, 
activities aimed at sensitization  of men to better understand a nd support women in the various 
activities, particularly those activities deemed women’s work a nd that are a constant factor for 
the time poverty faced by women. 
48. The proposed action plan has been vetted by the relevant commun ities, and issues that 
address women’s concerns have been incorporated based on the re sults of the gender 
assessment. The gender action plan includes sex disaggregated t argets (also included in the 
logical framework of the funding proposal) and indicators. The gender action plan has also 
included allocated budgets (exclusively for the gender action p lan as well as in the included 
project budget) and timelines for all activities. The gender ac tion plan will establish the baseline 
and confirm targets for groups, including for indigenous women (31 per cent) and Dalits (13 per 
cent), within the monitoring and evaluation framework; it is al ready aspiring to target 50 per 
cent women in all project activi ties. The gender action plan ha s also identified responsible 
persons (a PMU gender and safeguards officer as well as represe ntatives from women’s 
organizations and civil society organizations) for implementati on and monitoring of the 
activities.


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 133 
 
 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall	proposal 	assessment 	(medium 	risk):	
49. GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 39.39 million for pr omoting climate-resilient 
land-use practices, addressing the challenges of deforestation and enhancing the resilience of 
ecosystems in Nepal’s Churia region. The government is providin g co-financing for the project of 
USD 8.04 million; no co-financing will be provided by the AE.  
50. The project will build on experiences from piloted projects in Nepal. One of the lessons 
learned from previous projects i n the targeted region was that land rights and encroachment 
issues need to be handled in a holistic manner. The project wil l place an emphasis on supporting 
community-based organizations and establishing sizable forest p lantations on community land.  
51. Nepal is a least developed country and has experienced several shocks both natural and 
economic, including the earthquake in 2015, and a fuel crisis s ubsequent to the disaster, which 
led to government bu dget constraints.  
4.3.2.  AE/EE	capability 	to	execute	the	current	programme 	(low	risk):		
52. The AE, FAO, has worked in Nepal  since 1951, completing over 40 0 projects. FAO will 
establish a Technical Capacity Development Team in the FAO Nepa l office, which will serve as a 
secondary EE for the execution of technically specialized activ ities such as activities 3.2.1. and 
3.2.3. The funding proposal ment ioned that FAO will ensure the segregation of the functions of 
the AE and EEs for this project; and 
53. The primary EE will be MoFE. The ministry has experience in imp lementing projects 
related to ecosystem restoration and a forest investment progra mme (USD 24 million) funded 
by external donors. According to  a response from the AE, there were some delays in 
implementing other projects/initiatives due to project design i ssues and communication with 
different stakeholders. However, the capacity assessment done b y an external party determined 
that MoFE is a low-risk partner.  
4.3.3.  Project‐specific	execution 	risks	(medium 	risk):	
54. The project involves interventio ns on privately owned lands as well as community 
lands. This requires active engagement by government institutio ns/EEs with the communities 
involved. However, inadequate coordination along with the weak enforcement of regulations 
may lead to implementation challenges. The previous pilot proje cts indicated that  issues related 
to encroachment and land rights were important in this region. To mitigate these issues, the AE 
has proposed to raise awareness and provide capacity-building t raining for the communities 
and government; 
55. Political transitioning: the Government of Nepal is currently d ecentralizing and is 
establishing a new governance str ucture. According to the AE, t he transition is well under way, 
but in practice capacities and institutions are still being bui lt and established. The roles of the 
AE and EEs to build institutional capacity of the new provincia l government ministries will be 
significant to prevent implement ation delays during institution al restructuring; 
56. Finalization of the locations of interventions: the funding pro posal aims to cover large 
geographical areas in 26 different river systems, including 86 upstream locations, dams and 
conservation ponds on 129 sites. However, the specific project sites will be determined 
following a detailed assessment of the needs of each river syst em and the development of 
critical ecosystem restoration pl ans. Based on these plans, the  project will identify priority 
interventions; and


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 134 
 
 
57. Economic and financial viability : as per financial and economic  analysis, it results in 
negative net present value during the project implementation pe riod (seven years) due to its 
non-revenue-generating aspects and long-term impacts, such as t ree planting and long-term 
land-use practices. However, the economic analysis demonstrates  that the project will be 
economically viable over its 20-year lifetime with an external rate of return of 20 per cent. An 
analysis considering the social value of carbon as well as sens itivity analysis (including cost 
increase, benefit reduction, the social value of carbon decreas e as parameters) were performed. 
The project is expected to maintain a positive net present valu e over a 20-year period.  
4.3.4.  Compliance 	risk	(low	risk):	
58. The proposed project does not ra ise major concerns in relation to integrity risks – 
particularly pertaining to money  laundering/terrorist financing  (ML/TF) vulnerabilities. 
However, certain elements of the proposed activities may entail  a heightened exposure to the 
risk of ML/TF. One of these risk factors is the external sourci ng of funds for the community 
forest user group subset of CBOs. Similarly, the provision of b enefits to private land user groups 
could also elevate the likelihood of GCF resources being applie d to support illicitly acquired 
property; 
59. In response to the key risks identified above, the AE has propo sed a mitigation strategy 
which includes ensuring that all donations to CBOs are recorded  and that anonymous donations 
are not accepted by CBOs. In addition, all donations to CBOs ab ove USD 100 will be made 
through the formal banking system, which is subject to anti-mon ey-laundering/countering the 
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT)  regulations. Also, regarding t he CBO beneficiaries, the AE has 
confirmed that although the proj ect will work with some private  forest owners under activity 
1.3.4, it will not work with priv ate land user groups as a CBO subset. Similarly, in relation to the 
extension of private woodlots, the AE will ensure that sites ar e proposed by MoFE after 
consultation with local municipa lities and private forest owner s’ associations, validated by 
MoFE and FAO experts, and finali zed through dialogue with priva te land owners, according to 
the principles of free, prior and informed consent; 
60. Overall, the AE confirms that GCF proceeds will be managed sole ly by MoFE and FAO (as 
primary and secondary EEs, respec tively). The project will also  engage service providers 
through contracts, which constitute procurement actions and are  therefore subject to the 
necessary procurement procedures and controls to ensure complia nce with international 
AML/CFT standards. Furthermore, with regard to capacity to comp ly with AML/CFT standards, 
the AE commissioned a capacity assessment of MoFE by a qualifie d firm, which identified MoFE 
as a low-risk partner overall, a nd specifically with regard to procurement. Nevertheless, the 
FAO technical assistance team will also recruit a qualified pro curement advisory/support 
service to directly support MoFE with its procurement actions u nder this project to ensure 
international standards are adhered to for all procurement acti ons; and 
61. These mitigating factors are expected to significantly decrease  the risk of ML/TF and 
other integrity risks to a low probability. 	
4.3.5.  GCF	portfolio 	concentration 	risk	(low	risk):	
62. Should the Board approve this funding proposal, its impact on t he GCF portfolio 
concentration in terms of results area and single proposal is i mmaterial. 	
4.3.6.  Recommendation: 	
63. It is recommended that the Board  take the above factors into ac count when considering 
this proposal.


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 135 
 
 
	
Summary 	risk	assessment 	
Overall programme 	 Medium 	
Accredited entity (AE)/executi ng entity (EE) capability to 
implement this programme 	Low	
Project-specific execution 	 Medium	
GCF portfolio concentration 	 Low	
Compliance Low 
 
4.4 Fiduciary  
64. For this project, FAO will be the AE while MoFE will be the EE;  an FAO Technical 
Capacity Development Team will su pport execution of the project  as a secondary EE. The 
project includes a grant to fund the enhancement of the climate  resilience of ecosystems and 
vulnerable communities in Nepal´s Churia region through integra ted SNRM approaches.  
65. FAO, as the AE, will be responsible for the overall management of this project and, to 
perform the AE functions, will set up a dedicated FAO-GCF proje ct supervision team comprising 
relevant staff from the FAO Country Office in Nepal, the FAO Re gional Office for Asia and the 
Pacific, and FAO Headquarters.  
66. In its role as AE, FAO (specific ally the FAO-GCF project superv ision team) will oversee 
and supervise the implementation  of this project in accordance with the accreditation master 
agreement signed between FAO and  GCF. According to FAO internal  procedures and the 
operational partners agreement n egotiated with MoFE, FAO will m aintain control over any 
funds related to international t enders, provision of expert adv isory services, and goods or 
equipment for which technical specifications or quality assuran ce is required.  
67. As per the GCF monitoring and a ccountability framework, and in accordance with the 
accreditation master agreement, FAO will provide GCF with an in ception report, annual 
performance reports, an independent midterm evaluation report, a project closure report and 
an independent final evaluation report. FAO will also provide s emi-annual and annual financial 
reports throughout project implementation. 
68. As the AE for the project, FAO will ensure that financial manag ement and procurement 
of goods and services using GCF resources will adhere to intern ational standards and good 
practices. This includes financial management and procurement p erformed by MoFE (as the 
primary EE).  
69. The FAO Technical Capacity Development Team will support execut ion of the project as 
a secondary EE. This team will de liver targeted technical assis tance to support delivery of 
project activities by MoFE (as the primary EE) and maintain res ponsibility and/or controls over 
international tenders and procur ement requiring expert/technica l oversight.  
70. As per the provisions of the FAO Operational Partners Implement ation Modality, the 
FAO-GCF project supervision team will undertake regular supervi sion missions, spot checks and 
audits to ensure financial management and procurement by the PM U and PPMUs are being 
performed in line with agreed standards and practices.


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 136 
 
 
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
71. As a cross-cutting project, the a daptation interv entions of the  investment expect to 
benefit 963,268 direct and 2,252, 980 indirect beneficiaries. Th e project will deliver benefits 
directly to 30 per cent of the t argeted population and indirect ly to 100 per cent of the targeted 
population. Of the targeted popu lation, women comprise 481,634 direct and 1.6 million indirect 
beneficiaries as per the gender-disaggregated metrics for the G CF core indicator. Through 
coverage of approximately 167,63 0 ha under improved management,  the mitigation 
interventions of the investment expect to lead to reductions of  2,336,485 tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq) with a decrease in the cost per tCO 2eq to USD 17.33 per tCO 2eq. 
72.  Overall the funding proposal and logical framework sufficientl y apply GCF Fund-level 
(impact and outcome) results management framework and performan ce measurement 
framework indicators, and the project has built in baselines an d data collection that can inform 
progress reporting on expected re sults. At the project performa nce level, as a technical 
assistance/training-based grant project, measurements for behav ioural change have been 
integrated that are essential to deliver the expected project r esults. 
73. Regarding section H.1 of the funding proposal, overall the logi cal framework complies 
with GCF standards and has been cl eared through Secretariat rev iew.  
74. The funding proposal theory of change would benefit from furthe r details reflecting 
on the causal pathways at the project level and in relation to the climate rationale (which ideally 
are tested in implementation eit her with project performance ma nagement indicators or impact 
data/evidence generated to attribute changes to GCF investment) . 
75. Under section H.2 of the funding proposal, the Secretariat note s the intention for FAO to 
conduct formative/process evaluations to the interim and final evaluation requirements to 
assess the extent of achievement towards the paradigm shift obj ectives. The Secretariat also 
notes application of the intention to conduct mixed-methods dat a collection within the project 
activities to inform the evaluation and try to measure contribu tion/attribution of changes. 
Additionally, in the detailed budget, the AE needs to ensure th at sufficient budget is allocated to 
conduct the data collection/surveys and collect essential proje ct-level data for results reporting 
to enable adaptive management.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
76. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredit ed Entity on 8 June 
2018, and it became effective on 4 October 2018.   
77. The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Nep al, country in which 
GCF is not provided with privile ges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF 
is not protected against litigat ion or expropriation in this co untry, which risks need to be 
further assessed. The Secretariat submitted a revised draft pri vileges and immunities 
agreement to the government of Nepal on 23 May 2019.  
78. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Indepe ndent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed t hat it would not be legally fea sible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immuniti es. Therefore, it is recommende d that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory prote ction against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropr iate privileges and immunities. 
79. In order to mitigate risk, it is  recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 137 
 
 
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substa nce satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from  the date of Board approval; an d  
(b) Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Se cretariat.


---
*Page 138*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 138 
 
 
Independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel’s	assessment 	of	
FP118	
Proposal name: Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRC RN) 
Accredited entity: Food and Agri culture Organization of the Uni ted Nations (FAO) 
Project/programme size: Small 
I. Assessment 	of	the	independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel	
1.1 Impact potential         Scale:	Medium/high  
1. Nepal is a landlocked country in South Asia with an estimated p opulation of 30 million. 
The country lies in the central p art of the Great Himalayas, wi th high mountains, valleys and 
plains. The highland region embr aces the Himalayan range with e levations between 4,877 m 
and 8,848 m, where there are 8 of the 14 highest summits in the  world, including Mount 
Everest. The midland region acco unts for about 64 per cent of t he total land area of the country. 
It is formed by the Mahabharat range, with elevations up to 4,8 77 m, and the lower Churia 
range. The Terai is a lowland ra nge in the southern part of the  country. It is the flat river plain of 
the Ganges River with a belt of marshy grasslands, savannas and  forests. The Terai range 
occupies about 17 per cent of th e total land area of the countr y. 
2. Despite recent economic progress,  the country’s per capita inco me remains as low as 
USD 766 per year, and Nepal is regarded as a least developed co untry. Although tourism 
contributes largely to the country’s economy, agriculture (incl uding livestock) and forestry are 
key economic sectors responsible for a third of the country’s g ross domestic product and 
employing over 70 per cent of the population. This makes the co untry’s economy dependent on 
natural resources as well as stable and predictable climatic co nditions. 
3. The Churia range passes through Nepal from west to east, to Nor th India. It provides 
vital ecosystem functions to the  heavily populated Terai plains  downstream, including 
groundwater regulation, prevention of siltation, flood control,  and livelihood services including 
fuel and construction materials.  In addition, the Terai-Madhesh  area of Nepal is responsible for 
the majority of the country’s agricultural production. Together , the Churia and Terai areas are 
home to about 50 per cent of Nepal’s population. 
4. Nepal has been experiencing significant impacts from climate ch ange. Over the past 40–
60 years, average annual temperatures have increased, with annu al increases of 0.02–0.05 ℃ 
over the past few decades. The a verage number of consecutive dr y days has increased across 
Nepal in the last 40 years, including in the Churia region. Ave rage precipitation during the post-
monsoon and winter seasons decre ased between 1970 and 2012, but  extreme precipitation 
events have become more common over the past 40 years. 
5. These climate change impacts are projected to intensify in the coming decades 
according to various studies and models. Average annual tempera tures could increase by 1.3–
3.8 ℃ by 2060 and 1.8–5.8 ℃ by 2090, compared with 1986–2005. M onsoon precipitation could 
increase by 14–15 per cent by 2021–2050 relative to 1961–1990, while average winter 
precipitation could decrease by a round 10 per cent. The average  number of dry days and 
consecutive dry days is projected to increase further in the co ming decades.


---
*Page 139*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 139 
 
 
6. Communities in the Churia region are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Many 
of them depend on subsistence rain-fed agriculture, so their pr edominant livelihood requires 
stable climatic conditions and a  healthy natural resource base.  The agricultural practices 
broadly observed in the region, such as cultivation on steep sl opes, are not optimal for the local 
terrain, particularly if climate conditions change as anticipat ed. 
7. The Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) project  promotes integrated 
sustainable natural resource management (SNRM) to enhance the r esilience of ecosystems and 
vulnerable communities in the Churia region. The project advanc es climate-resilient land use 
practices, reforestation and maintenance of the forest ecosyste m, and resilience to climate-
induced hazards. The capacity of local government, local commun ities and other stakeholders to 
understand climate change risks is to be strengthened so that t he impacts delivered by the 
project can be sustained and enh anced even after the project’s completion. 
8. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FA O) is the accredited 
entity (AE). The Ministry of For ests and Environment (MoFE) of Nepal acts as the executing 
entity (EE). 
9. The total project cost is estimated to be USD 47.34 million, an d the project requires USD 
39.3 million in grant financing f rom GCF. The GCF grant contrib ution is to be matched with USD 
8.04 million in co-financing from the MoFE.  
10. The project focuses on the central/eastern Churia-Terai region where 26 vulnerable 
river systems cover a combined area of 702,011 ha. These river systems span 121 rural 
municipalities in provinces 1, 2 and 3, where there are over 3. 2 million people, of which 51 per 
cent are women and at least 77 per cent are considered to have experienced intergenerational 
socioeconomic exclusion. The pro ject will work with 750 communi ty-based organizations 
(CBOs). 
11. The project consists of three components. Component 1 (USD 34.1  million) is to support 
activities to scale up proven clim ate-resilient SNRM to strengt hen ecosystem stability and 
resilience in vulnerable river s ystems. It will implement clima te-resilient agricultural practices; 
restoration and sustainable management in ecosystems; and tree planting on non-forested land 
to build resilience and reduce pressure on natural forests, esp ecially in the upstream Terai. This 
support will be delivered to each of the 26 target river system s. 
12. Activities in component 1 include (1) the establishment of 120 farmer field schools 
(FFS) to deliver training on clim ate-resilient farming practice s; (2) improvement of sustainable 
forest management in all forest l and managed by forestry-relate d CBOs to ensure silvicultural 
practices are implemented to maximize ecosystem service provisi on in terms of both climate 
resilience and forest carbon stock enhancement; and (3) creatio n of 52 multipurpose tree 
nurseries to serve the plantation and restoration needs of CBOs  and other forest sector 
stakeholders. 
13. Component 2 (USD 2.2 million) su pports planning and preparation  for the interventions 
proposed in component 1 in the 2 6 target river systems. It aims  to enhance the capacity of 
provincial and local governments  and CBOs to understand and app ly climate-resilient SNRM.  
14. Component 3 (USD 8.0 million) wi ll improve knowledge, awareness  and local capacity 
for climate-resilient SNRM. It w ill enhance FFS, strengthen ext ension services and improve 
information dissemination to sup port awareness-raising and the enhancement of adaptive 
capacity. Under this component, the Churia Knowledge Center (CK C) will be established to 
promote systematic knowledge and information sharing and monito ring concerning climate-
resilient SNRM. 
15. The project aims to improve the resilience of ecosystems and co mmunities in the Churia 
region. Direct beneficiaries incl ude at least 200,681 household s or 963,268 people, equivalent


---
*Page 140*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 140 
 
 
to about 30 per cent of the inhabitants in the project area in the 26 target river systems. The 
project will support the enhanced resilience of ecosystems on 2 70,502 ha of land. This will 
indirectly further reduce vulner ability to climate change relat ed risks for other inhabitants in 
the Churia region. According to the Nepalese Central Bureau of Statistics, 3.2 million people live 
in the project area, of which 31 per cent are indigenous people s and 13 per cent are Dalits. 
16. In addition to its adaptation impacts, the project has an impac t on greenhouse gas 
emissions from the agriculture, forestry and other land use sec tor in Nepal. The project is 
expected to reduce deforestation  and forest degradation and imp rove forest management in the 
project area. Assuming an 80 per cent adoption rate, the projec t is expected to deliver average 
annual emission reductions of 5 74,180 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq) or 11.48 
million tCO 2eq over the 20-year lifetime of the project. The methodology fo r calculating the 
mitigation impact indicators follows the 2006	IPCC	Guidelines 	for	National	Greenhouse 	Gas	
Inventories  principles for land-based accounting.  
17. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) assesses the im pact potential of the 
project as “medium/high”. 	
1.2 Paradigm shift poten tial                 Scale:	Medium  
1.2.1.  Potential 	for	scaling	up	and	replication 	
18. The project is the first ecosyst em-wide initiative in the Churi a region to move beyond 
pilots and institutionalize climate change mitigation and adapt ation objectives into 
multisectoral local de velopment planning pro cesses. It enhances  the planning and capacity of 
CBOs to scale up climate-resilient SNRM approaches and practice s. As a part of the project, CBOs 
will receive support for the development of “critical ecosystem  restoration plans”, the 
enhancement of CBO management plans, training on climate-resili ent SNRM, and the 
strengthening of forest managemen t operational plans. The exten sion system will be enhanced 
in order to ensure local communities’ access to the latest know ledge and informat ion critical to 
continue applying climate-resilient SNRM measures. The establis hment of the CKC also plays a 
key role in ensuring that the extension system has access to th e latest data and information 
about climate change a nd natural resources. 
19. The project integrates a range of aspects of climate vulnerabil ity and adaptive capacity, 
rural livelihoods, and national/ subnational governance for enha ncing climate resilience in the 
Churia region. The project proposal describes the financial, so cial and environmental benefits to 
be accrued by communities, local  government and other stakehold ers that adopt climate-
resilient SNRM at scale to address critical climate change chal lenges. 
20. The project is aligned with existing government strategies and is complementary to 
other ongoing initiatives in the  agriculture and forest sectors  in Nepal. The project will assist 
government entities to strengthen their planning and capacity t o continue to support and 
promote climate-resilient SNRM b eyond project closure. Close co ordination and collaboration 
with national and subnational (local and provincial) entities i s promoted so that local 
ownership and sustainability are ensured.  
1.2.2.  Potential 	for	knowledge 	and	learning 	
21. Under the project, provincial an d local government authorities will be trained in 
climate-resilient land-use planning and practices, which includ es job support to identify critical 
hotspots and conduct a mapping act ivity in each river system. S uch knowledge and learning are 
essential and will be effective, given the new roles that provi ncial and local governments 
assume in natural resource management.


---
*Page 141*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 141 
 
 
22. The project aims to organize workshops where at least 750 local  CBOs will be able to 
raise awareness of climate change risks and climate-resilient l and use practices appropriate to 
their local contexts and priorit ies. By participating in the wo rkshops, communities will be 
trained in climate change risks in their region, risk-reduction  measures, and available routes to 
continue to update knowledge and seek technical support, such a s CKC, local extension agents 
and radio programmes. Extension s upport materials and FFS will disseminate knowledge on 
adaptation in water, agriculture  and forests, which will consol idate local and indigenous 
knowledge and experience. Trainers (including women, indigenous  peoples, Dalits and 
Madheshi people) will be trained and equipped to apply the know ledge in the field. 
1.2.3.  Contribution 	to	the	creation 	of	an	enabling 	environment 	
23. The project will establish an institutional and planning framew ork conducive to 
implementing its activities. Giv en the Government’s decision to  hand over forest and 
agricultural resources to the provincial and local levels, it i s essential and effective to support 
the capacity-building of local and provincial authorities on cl imate-resilient planning, disaster 
risk reduction and SNRM. Strong provincial and local frameworks  and strategies on climate-
resilient land use will enhance th e Government’s commitment and  promote climate-resilient 
land use planning with an integra ted approach for upstream and downstream management. The 
capacities of civil society organ izations, CBOs and other stake holders will also be strengthened 
to ensure the adoption and scaling up of climate-resilient prac tices at the household level. 
24. The project ensures that locally  adapted practices are promoted  in knowledge-
generation and dissemination activities, which can further enha nce the enabling environment 
after project completion. 
1.2.4.  Contribution 	to	the	regulatory 	framework 	and	policies	
25. The project will promote the integration of climate-resilient S NRM into provincial 
strategies and river system action plans. This will enable the Government to orient investments 
and priorities toward climate-resilient land use practices and to encourage local governments to 
implement climate-resilient land use planning aligned with prov incial strategies and river 
system action plans. The project ’s efforts to build the capacit y of local and provincial authorities 
will contribute to the enhancement of the regulatory framework and policies. The project and 
measures to be promoted will contribute to the implementation o f Nepal’s nationally 
determined contribution (NDC) as  well as various national polic ies and plans, including the 
President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Management Maste r Plan, the Forest Sector 
Strategy and the Agriculture Sector Strategy.  
26. The project will promote the implementation of an integrated cl imate-resilient SNRM 
approach to all areas, from upst ream, hilly terrain to the down stream, upper Terai region in 
Nepal. The iTAP considers that the approach can be considered i nnovative.  
27. The project expects the climate-resilient SNRM approach to be a dopted and to continue 
to be implemented after project  closure. The project will estab lish 120 FFS and the CKC, and will 
enhance extension services – all of which are critical for the sustainability of the project impacts 
after project closure. As per the AE analysis, additional fundi ng is not required, because the 
incremental costs required to implement the measures promoted b y the project are modest and 
therefore manageable for the communities. The communities will be better off both 
economically and socially if they adopt those approaches. Howev er, the iTAP still views the 
sustainability of the project impacts after project closure as uncertain, in the absence of a 
dedicated funding arrangement.  
28. Accordingly, the iTAP regards the  paradigm shift potential of t he project as “medium.”


---
*Page 142*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 142 
 
 
1.3 Sustainable development pote ntial                         Scale:		High  
1.3.1.  Economic 	co‐benefits	
29. The project will realize economic co-benefits by increasing agr icultural production and 
income for households through its support for climate-resilient  agricultural practices that 
improve soil quality and water a vailability, and reduce land de gradation. The project-supported 
practices strengthen the natural resource base on which product ive agriculture depends. The 
benefits will be notable among t he poor and vulnerable househol ds and communities targeted 
by the project in the Churia region, where agriculture is the b ackbone of economic activity. 
30. The project will mitigate risks that can have negative impacts on economic development 
in the Churia region. The adopti on of climate-resilient land-us e practices, as well as measures 
for ecosystem restoration, water conservation, gully stabilizat ion and riverbank stabilization, 
reduce the risk and impact of cl imate-induced hazards. This wil l bring important economic 
savings for governments, communities and households that can be  invested in local economic 
development.  
1.3.2.  Social	co‐benefits	
31. The project aims to deliver social co-benefits, such as the red uction of waterborne 
diseases as a result of better managed water conservation ponds  and the reduction of collection 
distances for fuel wood, water a nd fodder. The frequency of suc h activities, primarily 
undertaken by women, has increased because of climate change an d unsustainable resource 
use. 
32. The project aims to achieve proportional representation of indi genous peoples (at least 
31 per cent of direct beneficiaries are indigenous peoples) and  to ensure that they are 
empowered and that their rights are safeguarded. Further, the p roject aims to enhance social 
inclusion and empower marginalized households, thus improving t heir capacity to adapt to 
climate change. 
33. The project will empower women and promote their equality throu gh targeted 
measures (e.g. training sessions on business literacy for women ’s groups, ensuring 
representation of women trainers). At least 50 per cent of dire ct beneficiaries will be women, of 
which proportional representation  of indigenous women, Dalit wo men, and other marginalized 
groups will be ensured.  
34. The iTAP considers the sustainabl e development potential of the  project to be “high”. 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                         Scale:	High  
1.4.1.  Vulnerability 	of	the	country	
35. Communities in the Churia region are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Many 
of them depend on subsistence rain-fed agriculture and have lit tle capacity to manage risks and 
mitigate negative impacts. The 26 vulnerable river systems wher e the project will be 
implemented are home to more than 3.2 million inhabitants, of w hich 51 per cent are women 
and 77 per cent are considered to have experienced intergenerat ional socioeconomic exclusion. 
The project will work with 750 CB Os comprising approximately 20 0,681 member households or 
963,268 people, of which women make up 51 per cent. At least 31  per cent of the project’s 
beneficiaries are indigenous peoples and 13 per cent Dalits. 	
1.4.2.  Vulnerable 	groups	and	gender	aspects


---
*Page 143*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 143 
 
 
36. Nepal is regarded as a least developed country with a per capit a income of only USD 
766. The population in the project area is over 3.2 million, re presenting 11 per cent of the 
national population. Diverse cultural, ethnic and caste groups inhabit the project area. At least 
77 per cent of the inhabitants wi thin the area are considered t o have experienced 
intergenerational socioeconomic exclusion. 
1.4.3.  Absence 	of	alternative 	sources	of	financing 	
37. The total project cost of USD 47.34 million is to be financed b y a USD 39.3 million grant 
from GCF and USD 8.04 million in co-financing from the EE. 
38. GCF is requested to provide fund ing to the project in the absen ce of alternative sources 
of financing. Nepal is a low-inc ome country, and the Government , with its limited financial 
budget, lacks the financial resources to direct to climate chan ge adaptation efforts. The 
communities in the target regions are poor and predominantly su bsistence households. As the 
project and its activities are not revenue generating, private sector funding cannot be expected. 
1.4.4.  The	need	for	strengthening 	institutions 	and	implementation 	capacity 	
39. Following the Government’s decision to hand over forest and agr icultural resources to 
the provincial and local levels, capacity to adapt to climate c hange and climate-resilient 
development needs to be enhanced at the provincial and local le vels. Additional technical and 
financial support is required to support these institutions in building individual and 
institutional capacity. 
40. CBOs have demonstrated their ability to responsibly manage natu ral resources. 
However, many are not yet aware of climate change threats and l ocal-level vulnerability. Thus, 
capacity-building and technical support for CBOs is needed for them to understand climate risks 
at the local level as well as low-carbon and climate-resilient land use management practices and 
disaster risk reduction measures.  
41. The iTAP considers the project “high” against this criterion. 	
1.5 Country ownership     Scale:	High  
1.5.1.  Alignment 	with	national 	climate	strategy 	
42. The NDC of 2016 highlighted the country’s vulnerability to clim ate change, water- 
induced disasters and extreme hydro-meteorological events such as droughts, storms, floods, 
inundation, landslides, debris flow, soil erosion and avalanche s. The NDC describes adaptation 
priorities, which include climate-resilient sustainable land an d forest management, ecosystem 
rehabilitation and restoration, strengthened community-based na tural resource management, 
and improved agricultural techni ques. It also includes institut ional strengthening and 
knowledge management as key activities to address climate chang e. 
43. The National Adaptation Programme of Action of 2010 identifies nine priority actions 
for adaptation, which include (1 ) promoting community-based ada ptation through the 
integrated management of the agriculture, water, forest and bio diversity sectors; (2) building 
and enhancing the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities t hrough improved systems and 
access to services related to agriculture development; and (3) forest and ecosystem 
management for supporting climate-led adaptation innovations. 
1.5.2.  Coherence 	with	existing	policies


---
*Page 144*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 144 
 
 
44. The President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Management M aster Plan (2017) 
provides the strategic direction  for conservation of the Churia  area. Its key objectives include 
mitigation of damage likely to be caused by climate change and natural disasters through the 
sustainable management of the na tural resources (land, water, v egetation, and biodiversity) of 
the Chure hills and Bhavar region. 
45. The Fourteenth Development Plan (2017) of Nepal recognizes the role of forests in 
contributing to both climate chan ge adaptation and mitigation e fforts and calls for the 
conservation and sustainable management and use of forests. It further notes the challenges 
faced by the Churia region and the risks posed to downstream co mmunities as a result of 
unsustainable land use and the fragility of the ecosystem. It p romotes the implementation of 
integrated conservation activiti es within river systems, with a n emphasis on planning, 
considering the interconnectedne ss of upstream and downstream n atural resource 
management. 
46. The project is closely aligned with the country’s national poli cies and existing plans 
applicable for the region and sectors. 
1.5.3.  Capacity 	of	accredited 	entities	or	executing 	entities	to	deliver	
47.  The AE supports climate adaptation and mitigation projects wor ldwide. In Nepal, the AE 
has provided technical assistance to the agriculture and forest ry sector since 1951. From 2013–
2017, one of the four main priori ty areas of the country progra mming framework of the AE in 
Nepal was natural resource conservation and utilization, which included measures to enhance 
sustainable production and land use practices such as climate-r esilient agriculture, sustainable 
forest and watershed management, institutional capacity-buildin g for climate change 
adaptation in the land use sector, and climate-resilient value chains. 
48. The EE is responsible for the conservation, development, use an d sustainable 
management of forests in Nepal. It has supported the implementa tion of SNRM in the Churia 
and Terai regions. The AE has managed bilateral and multilatera l funds for projects within the 
land use sector. The independent assessment undertaken by the A E concluded that the EE has 
sufficient capacity and experienc e to manage and implement the project. 
49. The AE mobilizes the FAO Technical Capacity Development team as  a co-EE dedicated to 
providing the EE with technical  capacity development services t o be implemented by the AE. 
The iTAP considers the AE and EE to have sufficient capacity an d experience to deliver the 
project as presented. 
1.5.4.  Engagement 	with	civil	society	organizations 	and	other	relevant 	stakeholders 	
50. Since May 2017, the AE has held five bilateral meetings with th e Ministry of Finance, the 
national designated authority (NDA) of Nepal, to discuss the de velopment of the project. Five 
technical committee meetings were held between June 2017 and Ma y 2018 and attended by 
government representatives from several sectors, including the NDA and MoFE, to provide 
feedback on the project concept and proposal. Non-governmental experts were also invited to 
the meetings. 
51. In addition to the consultations with government authorities, t he project was presented 
to diverse stakeholders in consul tations to solicit feedback. O ver 420 people were consulted 
through various workshops at the  national and district levels, through bilateral meetings with 
non-governmental organizations a t both the national and local l evels, and through engagement 
with local CBOs and communities in the project area. The proces s included the participation of 
diverse stakeholders, including women, indigenous peoples, Dali ts and other marginalized 
minority groups.


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 145 
 
 
52. The project intends to maintain regular stakeholder consultatio ns during 
implementation with the engagement of representatives from nati onal, provincial and local 
governments, CSOs (including women’s organizations, indigenous people’s federations and 
organizations, and Dalit organiz ations), CBOs and the private s ector.  
53. The provision of USD 8.04 million  co-financing by MoFE indicate s the Government’s 
support and commitment to the p roject and its approaches. 
54. A no-objection letter was issued  by the NDA and is attached to the funding proposal.  
55. The iTAP considers the country ownership of the project to be “ high.”	
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness       Scale:	Medium/high  
1.6.1.  Cost‐effectiveness 	and	efficiency 	regarding 	financial 	and	non‐financial 	aspects		
56. The total project cost is estimated at USD 47.34 million to be financed with a USD 39.3 
million grant from GCF and USD 8. 04 million in co-financing fro m the EE.  
57. The GCF contribution in the form of a grant can be justified gi ven the fact that Nepal is a 
least developed country and the project’s major beneficiaries a re poor communities in the 
regions most vulnerable to climat e change. The activities that will be implemented by the 
project are not revenue generating. 
58. The AE estimates that the project will directly benefit at leas t 200,681 households or 
963,268 people. This corresponds to a cost of about USD 49 per direct beneficiary and can be 
considered a competitive cost-per -beneficiary ratio. In additio n to the adaptation benefits, the 
project will deliver mitigation benefits. 
59. The project will also contribute to the reduction of greenhouse  gas emissions from the 
agriculture, forestry and other land use sector in Nepal. Based  on the total project costs, the 
estimated cost per tCO 2eq is USD 4.13, which equates to USD 3.43 per tCO 2eq for the GCF 
financial contribution. 
1.6.2.  Amount	of	co‐financing 		
60. The EE will provide USD 8.04 milli on in co-financing for the pr oject, which represents 
about 17 per cent of the total p roject cost. GCF will therefore  achieve a co-financing ratio of 0.2 
against its contribution. 
61. During and after the implementation, the project expects additi onal in-kind 
contributions from far mers and project participants to manage a gricultural and forestry 
interventions.  
1.6.3.  Programme/project 	financial 	viability 	and	other	financial 	indicators 		
62. As per the AE analysis, the financial viability of the climate- resilient agriculture and 
forestry models implemented by the project is assessed as “high er” and therefore more 
profitable than existing practices. This could justify the adop tion of the project-supported 
models by the communities.  
63. Although the economic return of the project is negative in abso lute terms after seven 
years, the incremental economic rate of return (ERR) (i.e. abso lute project cash flows minus 
baseline project cash flows) is positive, with an ERR of 97 per  cent. The project’s incremental 
benefits outweigh the costs in the long run, achieving an incre mental ERR of 114 per cent after 
10 years and 115 per cent after 20 years.


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 146 
 
 
1.6.4.  Industry 	best	practices 		
64. The technologies and practices pr omoted within the framework of  the project have been 
effectively implemented and can be regarded as good practices. The measures in component 1 
have all been already piloted in the Churia region within the c ontext of diverse development 
projects (Terai Arc Landscape Programme, Hariyo Ban Program) as  well as through district-
level governments, especially those related to water management , forestry, and agriculture and 
soil conservation.  
65. The project creates an enabling environment to support the upta ke of proven climate-
resilient land use practices. It helps fill information gaps an d improve the consolidation of 
relevant information on climate-resilient land use planning and  management while also 
improving extension services and training and information disse mination. 
66. The iTAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness of the proje ct as “medium/high.” 
II. Overall	remarks 	from	the	independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel	
67. The iTAP recommends the Board a pprove the proposed project as p resented. 
68. The project strengthens the ability of local communities and ec osystems to adapt to 
climate change and reduce emissions from deforestation and fore st degradation through an 
integrated climate-resilient SNRM approach to all areas, from u pstream, hilly terrain to the 
downstream, upper Terai region. The project is congruent with e xisting government strategies 
and is complementary to other on going initiatives in the agricu lture and forest sectors in Nepal. 
The project will further promote the generation and disseminati on of knowledge that can be 
adapted at the local level to assist the communities and govern ment to promote and 
mainstream climate-resilient SNRM approaches to development pla ns and strategies.


---
*Page 147*
---

  
		 	 	 	 	 	 GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 	
Page 147 
 
 
 
 Response 	from	the	accredited 	entity	to	the	independent 	Technical 	
Advisory 	Panel’s	assessment 	(FP118) 	
Proposal name: Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRC RN) 
Accredited entity: Food and Agri culture Organizat ion of the Uni ted Nations (FAO) 
	
Impact	potential  
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Paradigm 	shift	potential 	
FAO takes note of the assessment. FAO would like to reconfirm t hat the Project is fully aligned 
with existing government strategies and complementary to other ongoing initiatives. Close 
coordination and collaboration with national, provincial and lo cal entities is promoted to 
ensure local ownership and susta inability. The Project impact, after project closure,  is 
ensured through: i) the support for viable, cost-effective and climate-resilient measures; ii) 
the government co-financing that focuses on institutionalisatio n of extension and impact 
monitoring; and iii) the size  sca le of finance required for re plication and continuation of 
project activities is within the current annual budget ceiling of the President’s Churia 
Conservation Master Plan, and the project approach is therefore  envisaged as a template for 
allocation of domestic finance. 
Sustainable 	development 	potential  
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Needs	of	the	recipient  
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Country	ownership 	
FAO acknowledges iTAP comment that the Project is closely align ed with the country’s 
national policies and existing plans applicable for the region and sectors. 
Efficiency 	and	effectiveness  
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Overall	remarks 	from	the	independent 	Technical 	Advisory 	Panel:	
 
FAO thanks the iTAP for its review of the proposal.


---
*Page 148*
---

1 The lead authors are Laura Kiff, Matthias Seebauer, Dr. Jochen Statz (UNIQUE forestry and land use GmbH), Dr. Jiban 
P
audel (SEEPORT), and Aimee Mori (FAO). Additional contributions were made by Resham Dangi (FAO), Ramu Subedi 
(SEEPORT), Ashwin Dhakal (SEEPORT), Ishwor Neupane (SEEPORT), Arjun Dhakal (SEEPORT), Ganga Dahal 
(Independent Consultant), Janet Zhe Yuan (FAO) and Ben Vickers (FAO). Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal
Gender Assessment & Gender Action Plan 
Accredited Entity: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations1 
Gender documentation for FP118


---
*Page 149*
---

Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN ii 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Table of Contents ................................. ................................................... ...................................... ii 
List of Tables .................................... ................................................... .......................................... iii 
List of Figures ................................... ................................................... ..........................................iv 
List of Abbreviations ............................. ................................................... ...................................... v 
1 Gender Assessment ............................... ................................................... ............................. 1 
1.1 Vulnerability of communities in Churia ........ ................................................... .............. 1 
 Background ....................................... ................................................... .................. 1 
 Project description .............................. ................................................... ............... 3 
 Gender assessment ................................ ................................................... ............ 4 
1.2 Gender inequality in Nepal .................... ................................................... .................... 5 
1.3 Legal and administrative framework protecting w omen and promoting gender 
equality .......................................... ................................................... ....................................... 15 
1.4 Gender issues in building a resilient Churia re gion in Nepal...................................... . 17 
1.5 Gender Assessment Recommendations ............. ................................................... ..... 26 
2 Gender Action Plan (GAP) ........................ ................................................... ........................ 35 
Reference list .................................... ................................................... ........................................ 42 
Appendices ........................................ ................................................... ....................................... 45


---
*Page 150*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  iii  
 LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Overview of challenges for engaging women in sustainable natural resource 
management and climate change mitigation and adapta tion .............................................. ...... 20 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal ´ ProjectGender 
Action Plan ....................................... ................................................... ........................................ 36


---
*Page 151*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  iv  
 LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1: Overview of a) landslide susceptible area s and b) flood susceptible areas in the Churia 
region of Nepal ................................... ................................................... ........................................ 1 
Figure 2: Maps demonstrating a) human sensitivity t o climate change, b) temperature and 
rainfall risk, c) ecological risk, d) flood risk, e ) drought risk, and f) combined risk. ............. ......... 2 
Figure 3: Project implementation area ............. ................................................... ......................... 4 
Figure 4: Women graduates (% of total) by level of education from 1991-2011 in Nepal ........... 7 
Figure 5: a) Adult (15+) female literacy, and b) fe male-male literacy ratio in Nepal in 2011 ....... 8  
Figure 6: Literacy in Nepal in 2011 ............... ................................................... .............................. 9 
Figure 7: Ratio of girls to boy in school level edu cation ............................................ ................... 9 
Figure 8: Number of NGOs providing support services  for gender based violence (per district)15 
Figure 9: Overall illustration of the vulnerability  of the project region with multiple climate and 
human induced disasters in view of climate change c ausing cascading impacts ....................... 18


---
*Page 152*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  v 
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
BAU Business as Usual 
BPfA Beijing Platform for Action 
BRCRN Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal 
CFUG  Community Forest User Group  
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discr imination Against 
Women 
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction 
ESMF Environmental and Social Management Framework 
EWS  Early Warning Systems  
GAP Gender Action Plan 
GCF Green Climate Fund 
GEM Gender Empowerment Measurement 
GESI Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 
GII Gender Inequality Index 
HDI Human Development Index 
LDC Least Developed Country 
MPI Multi-dimensional Poverty Index 
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 
NRM Natural Resource management 
NTFP Non-Timber Forest Product 
SDG 
SLC Sustainable Development Goal 
School Leaving Certificate 
SNRM Sustainable Natural Resource Management 
WUA Water User Association


---
*Page 153*
---

Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 1
 1 GENDER ASSESSMENT 
1.1  Vulnerability of communities in Churia 
 Background 
1.  The Churia hills are located between the mid hill a reas to the north and the plains in the south of 
Nepal (Terai), where the Churia hills perform criti cal ecological and socio-cultural functions both 
upstream and downstream. With more than 50% of its area under forests and riverine areas, the 
Churia hills render hydrological services such as r egulating surface water flows and recharging 
groundwater. All major river systems in Nepal pass through the Churia hills before reaching the 
densely populated alluvial plains in the Terai and northern India.  
2.  Men and women living in the Churia are highly depen dent on natural resources to maintain their 
livelihood. Agriculture is the main form of employm ent in the region, with 74% of the economically 
active population involved in the sector. 2 Forests are an essential resource and safety net f or 
communities. In addition to providing key ecosystem  and cultural services, forests provide diverse 
products including timber for construction, fuelwoo d, and other non-timber forest product (NTFPs) 
including plants for fodder, subsistence and medici nal plants. The Churia hills and Bhavar regions 
are an important area for ground water recharge. Th us, households in the Churia region are directly 
dependent on the health of Churia ecosystems to ens ure their food, water and energy security. 
3.  The region is naturally in a more vulnerable situat ion, with friable soils, high exposure to flash 
flooding and landslides in the monsoon season, and frequently changing watercourses (Figure 1). 
Climate change coupled with unsustainable natural r esource management (NRM) in the region is 
increasing the vulnerability of communities and eco systems to landslides, flooding and erosion, 
extreme heat, water scarcity and forest fires among  other climate-induced natural disasters (Figure 
2). 3 In 2017, flooding in Nepal from January to Septemb er resulted in the destruction of 43,400 
houses, 191,700 partially damaged houses, the displ acement of 20,900 families, and the death of 
at least 160 people.4 In addition, the loss to agriculture production due  to floods in 2017 was 
estimated at over US$5.74 million, which has a majo r impact only rural livelihoods and food 
security. 5 
 
Figure 1: Overview of a) landslide susceptible area s and b) flood susceptible areas in the Churia regi on of 
Nepal 
Source: PCTMCDB 2017 
                                                             
2 UN Women 2016 
3 Yohe et al. 2007 
4 UN Office of the Resident Coordinator Nepal 2017 
5 Ibid.


---
*Page 154*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  2 
  
Figure 2: Maps demonstrating a) human sensitivity t o climate change, b) temperature and rainfall risk,  c) 
ecological risk, d) flood risk, e) drought risk, an d f) combined risk.  
Source: MoE 2010 
 
4.  Without significant landscape level investments in restoring natural capital and promoting climate-
resilient land use practices, livelihoods and adapt ive capacities, the impacts of climate change will 
further exacerbate environmental degradation, and t hereby aggravate rural poverty, as well as 
food, water and energy insecurity in the Churia and  in downstream regions. For the Churia region 
in particular, therefore, an approach of climate-re silient Sustainable Natural Resource Management 
(SNRM) is crucial for long-term environmental and s ocial stability.


---
*Page 155*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  3 
 
 Project description 
5.  The overarching objective of the proposed GCF proje ct is to enhance the climate resilience of 
ecosystems and vulnerable communities in the Churia  region through integrated sustainable rural 
development and natural resource management approac hes, including the following: 
 Strengthening capacities of local and provincial go vernment officials on climate change, 
climate-resilient land use planning, SNRM and disas ter risk reduction (DRR). 
 Strengthening the capacities of at least 750 local community-based organizations/ user 
groups 6 on recognizing climate threats, climate-resilient land use planning and sustainable 
natural resource management, and supporting them to  implement climate-resilient land use 
interventions; 
 Large-scale adoption and promotion of climate-resil ient land and forestry management 
practices on at least 512,499 ha, which specificall y respond to climate-related threats, 
including landscape-scale restoration of critical e cosystems in vulnerable river systems; 7 
 Reducing the incidence of sedimentary and flash flo oding by improving soil and water 
conservation, and constructing small-scale infrastr ucture (stone walls, contour bunds, check 
dams, among others);  
 Reducing deforestation and forest degradation throu gh the implementation of sustainable 
natural resource management (SNRM) practices and ot her measures that address the direct 
and underlying drivers of deforestation and forest degradation; 
 Improving water recharge systems by reducing surfac e run-off water through the adoption of 
water conservation and water management practices/ technologies;  
 Diversifying livelihoods and enhancing incomes of l ocal communities through the 
strengthening and promotion of climate-resilient va lue chains;  
 Strengthening capacities for adaptation, including to scale up DRR measures; 
 Improving information consolidation, dissemination and monitoring to raise awareness on 
climate change and climate resilient land use pract ices, and strengthen the utilization of 
climate information in decision making and planning  processes.  
6.  More detailed project information on the specific a ctivities can be found in the BRCRN project 
funding proposal. 
7.  Project implementation will occur in 26 of the most  vulnerable river systems in Nepal, 8 with a focus 
on the Central and Eastern Region (Figure 3). BRCRN  project activities will directly benefit 750 local  
community-based organizations/ user groups, contain ing at least 200,681 households with approx. 
963,268 people (at least 50% of which are women, of  which 77% are from groups that have 
experienced inter-generational socio-economic exclu sion 9). Together with reduced deforestation 
                                                             
6 Including community-forest user groups, leasehold forestry, private forest users and public forest us er groups, water user 
groups, among others. 
7 Note: some activities may be implemented on overlap ping parcels of land (e.g. measures to reduce defor estation such as 
controlled grazing, with sustainable forest managem ent practices).   
8 A more detailed description of the vulnerability a ssessment can be found in the project feasibility s tudy and the project 
funding proposal.  
9 Vulnerable groups are defined as “… groups of people whose disadvantage is situational rather than structural. Their 
depravations are as a result of a particular situat ion (in some cases only temporarily) that has reduc ed their ability to 
withstand shocks rather than their more deeply embe dded social identity ” (GESI Working Group 2017). While all project 
beneficiaries are considered vulnerable to climate change, since they live in highly and moderately vu lnerable river systems, 
there is differentiated vulnerability within with r iver systems, where some inhabitants are considered  more vulnerable due 
to their socio-economic situation, location of sett lement (e.g. in high risk areas for flooding or lan dslides), or due to inter-
generational exclusion/ marginalization (see follow ing note on excluded groups), among other factors. Excluded groups are 
defined as “… those who have experienced inter-generational discr imination and have been systematically excluded due  to 
economic [situation], caste, ethnicity, gender, dis ability, sexual orientation, and geographical reaso ns ” (GESI Working Group 
2017). This includes groups including women, poor p eople, Dalits, Adivasi/ Janajati, Madheshis, Muslim s, people with


---
*Page 156*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  4 
 and forest degradation resulting from project activ ities, the BRCRN project will result in lifetime 
emission reductions that exceed 11.48 million tCO 2eq. Over 206,277 ha of critical ecosystems 
(forests, wetlands and grasslands) will be restored  through project implementation. In total, over 
3.2 million inhabitants (51% women) of the BRCRN pr oject area will indirectly benefit from 
improved institutional capacities and strategic pla nning to support the scaling up of climate-
resilient land use practices within the project are a.  
 
 
Figure 3: Project implementation area  
*Note: The red boundary shows the core BRCRN interv ention zone within the river systems including the Churia hills, Bhavar, 
Dun and upstream Terai.  
 
 Gender assessment 
8.  This Gender Assessment aims to provide an overview of the gender-context in Nepal, with a focus 
on gender issues that are relevant for the proposed  project ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in 
Nepal ´ (BRCRN). Specifically, this assessment aims to in form project design to ensure that key 
gender considerations have been effectively mainstr eamed throughout the project proposal.  
9.  The assessment has been conducted based on availabl e data from studies conducted by the 
Government of Nepal, donor agencies, civil society organizations and other stakeholders. Various 
consultations were held from November 2017 to March  2018 with diverse actors, 10 including 
women’s associations and organizations at the natio nal and local level (e.g. Feminist Dalit 
Organization (FEDO), National Indigenous Women’s Fe deration (NIWF), the Himalayan Grassroots 
                                                             
disabilities, third-gender and people living in rem ote areas. Socially-excluded groups comprise over 7 7% of the project 
population (including Indigenous Peoples 31%, Terai -Madhesi 28%, Dalits 13% and Muslims 5%, among othe rs; CBS 2014).  
10 The annex of the project´s Environmental and Social  Management Framework (ESMF) contains a detailed li st of the 
consultations conducted for the elaboration of the GCF proposal. It further includes meeting minutes a nd organizations 
consulted, along with other pertinent information.


---
*Page 157*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  5 
 Women´s Natural Resource Management Association (HI MAWANTI), and the Community-based 
Forestry Supporters´ Network (COFSUN), among others ), to provide direct feedback on the current 
context and barriers, as well as gender-responsive measures and related monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) considerations. At the local level, 268 local  people living within the project area were 
consulted, of which 40% were women. A targeted gend er workshop with key actors was held in 
Kathmandu on February 21, 2018 to further discuss t he preliminary findings from the consultations 
and gender analysis, and to provide feedback and ke y insights into the elaboration of a gender 
action plan. In total, 420 people were consulted in  the preparation of the feasibility study, gender 
assessment and gender action plan. Detailed meeting  summaries and attendance sheets can be 
found in Annex 3 of the BRCRN project´s Environment  and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
10.  The following sections will focus on the status of gender inequality in Nepal, and the identification 
of challenges, barriers and opportunities for empow ering women and promoting their equality 
within the agriculture and forestry sectors. They w ill develop concrete recommendations to support 
the mainstreaming of gender in the BRCRN project, e nsuring gender-sensitive measures that 
overcome key barriers and a gender-responsive monit oring and evaluation (M&E) framework, 
which closely monitors the impacts of the project o n both men and women, as well as inter-sectoral 
dimensions of inequality including age, caste, soci al status and inter-generational exclusion, among 
other factors.  
1.2  Gender inequality in Nepal 
11.  The population of Nepal in 2016 was just under 30 m illion people, of which 52% are women. 11 While 
Nepal has made substantial progress in enhancing ge nder equality in the last three decades, gender 
discrimination and inequality are still major probl ems faced by the country. Inequality among 
women remains a challenge as well, where there are differences in equality based on age, position 
in the family, marital status, religion, caste and ethnicity, among other factors.  
12.  The following sub-sections will provide an overview  of the main challenges for achieving gender 
equality in Nepal, zooming in where possible on the  dynamics and trends experienced in the BRCRN 
project area.  
Poverty & Income 
13.  Nepal is one of the world’s least developed countri es (LDC) with a per capita income of $766. 12  In 
2014, Nepal achieved a score of 0.116 according to the multidimensional poverty index  (MPI),  13  
with an estimated 26.9% of the country´s population  affected by multidimensional poverty, 
equivalent to around 7.5 million people. 14  Focusing on income-related poverty, approximately 15% 
of the population is considered to be living below the poverty line of $1.99 per day. 15  
14.  The country has experienced rapid development in th e last two decades and the government has 
made substantial progress in working toward its goa l to graduate from LDC to developing countries 
status by 2022. The government is committed to tack ling poverty, and has been committed to the 
implementation of measures to meet the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in addition to 
                                                             
11 World Bank 2016 
12  MoF 2016 
13 MPI considers three core dimensions as a measure of  poverty: i) health (nutrition, child mortality), i i) education (years of 
schooling, children enrolled) and iii) standard of living (e.g. cooking fuel, toilet, water, electrici ty, floor, assets). Additional 
information can be found at: http://hdr.undp.org/en /content/multidimensional-poverty-index-mpi 
14  UNDP 2016 
15 Ibid.


---
*Page 158*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  6 
 national targets. Nepal has made large strides in a ddressing poverty at the national level; the 
country´s Human Development Index (HDI) 16  value has improved from 0.476 to 0.558 from 2005 t o 
2015. 17  
15.  While Nepal has made substantial efforts to advance  gender equality and empowerment in the 
country, it is still a major challenge for the coun try to eradicate poverty and promote equality. 
Women´s HDI values (0.538) continue to lag behind m en’s (0.582).18  Another challenge remains to 
address poverty and inequality within ethnic minori ty and other excluded groups. 19 In 2015, 
indigenous peoples (Janajatis/ Adivasi, 0.482), Dal its (0.434), and Muslims (0.422) experienced 
lower HDI values in comparison to other high-caste groups such as Brahmins (0.538) and Chhetri 
(0.538). 20 While the general trend of inequality is decreasing  in the country, it remains a challenge 
to be addressed.  
16.  The Churia Terai-Madhesh region faces unique povert y related obstacles. HDI values for groups in 
the Terai-Madhesh region (0.454) are lower than mou ntain and hill groups (0.511). 21  Many poor 
households sell firewood and other forest products in order to supplement their income from other 
sources for meeting their subsistence requirements,  and some work for the rich timber traders who 
might be harvesting (formally or informally/illicit ly) timber and other products from Churia. 22 Thus, 
forests serve as a safety net for many communities in the Churia Terai-Madhesh region.  
17.  Female-headed households make up around 20% of hous eholds in the project area, lower-than the 
national average of 26%. 23 An analysis of a 1991 Agricultural Credit Survey showed the incidence of 
poverty in female-headed households (FHH) compared to male-headed households was 50.7 
percent to 47.2 percent, respectively. 24 However, there is a need to disaggregate female-hea ded 
households between those households that are female -headed due to male migration for 
employment, in which the sending of remittances pre vents the household from entering poverty, 
versus households that are female-headed due to wid owing, divorce or unmarried.  Considering 
the second group of female-headed households, a muc h larger proportion of FHH fall below the 
poverty line due to gender discrimination in access  to and control over productive resources and 
other economic and political opportunities. 25 The disadvantaged position of female-headed 
households can be seen by the fact that landholding s of FHH are consistently and substantially 
lower in all regions; e.g. in 1991 more than 13% of  households were female-headed but only 6% of 
farms were owned by women (more information below i n the Section on resource access). 26  Expert 
analysis also shows that female-headed households o ften have lower literacy and educational 
rates, high dependency ratios and greater lack of a ccess to information and media. 27 Thus, barriers 
                                                             
16 HDI takes into account three dimensions to provide an estimation of to assess the development of a cou ntry. It is based on 
three dimensions: long and healthy life (life expec tancy at birth, knowledge (expected ears of schooli ng, mean years of 
schooling), a decent standard of living (GNI per ca pita). Additional information can be found at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-in dex-hdi 
17 UNDP 2014 
18  UNDP 2016 
19 Excluded groups are those who have experienced inte r-generational discrimination and have been systema tically excluded 
due to economic, caste, ethnicity, gender, disabili ty, sexual orientation and geographical reasons. Su ch groups include 
women, poor, Dalit, Adivasi/Janajati, Madhesi, Musl ims, people with disabilities (PwD), third gender &  people living in remote 
areas, among others (GESI Working Group 2017) 
20  UNDP 2014 in UNDP 2016 
21 UNDP 2014 
22 Chhetri 2004 
23  CBS 2014; Based on district averages. 
24  ADB 1999 
25 JICA 2017 
26  ADB 1999 
27  JICA, 2017.


---
*Page 159*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  7 
 facing female headed households come in terms of wo rkload and the impacts of social 
discrimination on access to food, health, nutrition  and education. 
Gender Inequality Index (GII) 
18.  Nepal´s Gender Inequality Index (GII) for 2015 was 0.497, with an overall ranking of 115 out of 159 
countries ranked. 28 While still lagging internationally, gender empower ment has improved 
substantially from 2001 to 2011 when considering th e improvement in the Gender Empowerment 
Measure (GEM) 29  from 0.361 to 0.564, due to increased political tr action and the strengthening of 
policy frameworks related to gender and social incl usion. 30  
Education 
19.  Gender gaps in the education sector continue to per sist, where girls and women tend to have lower 
levels of education, especially in rural areas. The  percentage of women participating in primary 
education has increased substantially in the last t wo decades, where the number of women 
completing 12 grades rose from 21% to 42% (Figure 4 ). 31  Nonetheless, equality can still be 
promoted in terms of access to education, especiall y in rural areas where studies have found that 
girls´ education often remains a lower priority. 32  
 
 
Figure 4: Women graduates (% of total) by level of education from 1991-2011 in Nepal 
Source: UN Women (2016) 
 
20.  Boys´ education is often prioritized over girls’ ed ucation in many rural communities in Nepal. 33 Girls 
are often taken out of school to support with the m aintenance of the family and farm and the 
collection of natural resources (e.g. water, livest ock feed, firewood, etc.). Women further 
experience higher dropout rates due to marriage and  pregnancy. While there has been a trend 
improving access to education for girls and women, the country still lags behind. In 2011, national 
                                                             
28  UNDP 2016; Additional information can be found at:  http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII 
29  GEM assesses equality based on three main dimensio ns: i) public participation and decision-making, ii ) economic 
participation and decision making and (iii) power o ver economic resources. Additional information can be found at: 
http://www.gaportal.org/global-indicators/gender-em powerment-measure 
30  Adhikary 2017 
31 CBS 2014; UNDP 2014; UN Women 2016  
32 CARE 2008 
33 CARE 2008


---
*Page 160*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  8 
 literacy rates for women were only 57%, whereas 75%  of men were considered literate. 34 Dalit 
women, especially Dalit women living in the Terai, and Muslim women have literacy rates that are 
substantially below the national average (Figure 5) . 
 
 
Figure 5: a) Adult (15+) female literacy, and b) fe male-male literacy ratio in Nepal in 2011 
Source: Gurung and Tamang 2014 in UN Women 2016 
 
21.  In the BRCRN project area, similar trends are obser ved where women are often required to leave 
their schooling early to support with the maintenan ce of their household and livelihoods. Education 
rates lag behind the national average, especially f or women, who are more likely to be illiterate.35 
Based on district averages, around 45% of women in the project area are unable to read or write 
(Figure 6). 36  Often there is a lack of leadership and empowermen t of women, which is reinforced 
through limited/ lower quality education provided t o girls (Figure 7). 37  This has been identified as a 
barrier to sustainable development in the region, a s they may not have the capacities to actively 
participate in decision making platforms. 38  A CFUG member in a study by Lama et al. (2017) gav e 
the following statement highlighting the gender-spe cific challenges faced by CFUGs: 
22.  “… even if you put women in the committee, if they hav e to be sent to some other place for training 
they will not be able to speak and write in front o f others. Due to the lack of education they will no t 
take advantage of the opportunities that come to th em ” (p.257).  
23.  Thus, education not only has a major impact on capa city building for sustainable development and 
livelihood improvements, but also in women’s engage ment in decision making and planning 
processes.  
                                                             
34  UN Women 2016 
35  Shrestha 2015 
36  CBS 2011 
37  CARE 2008 
38  Lama et al. 2017 
a b


---
*Page 161*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  9 
  
Figure 6: Literacy in Nepal in 2011 
Source: CBS 2011; http://cbs.gov.np/index.php?route =information/gis_maps  
 
 
Figure 7: Ratio of girls to boy in school level edu cation 
Source: CBS 2011; http://cbs.gov.np/index.php?route =information/gis_maps  
 
Health 
24.  As with other sectors covered, major improvements i n improving gender-equality have been 
observed in Nepal´s health sector, where it has bee n noted that significant improvements have


---
*Page 162*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  10  
 been made in improving maternal and children´s heal th in Nepal in the last two decades. During 
the period from 1996 to 2013, the country´s materna l mortality rate declined from 539 to 170, 
women´s life expectancy rose from 55.5 to 70 years,  and the total fertility rate also declined from 
4.6 to 2.6. 39  
25.  Nonetheless, rural areas continue to lag behind the  progress made in urban areas. Rural 
communities in Nepal often have limited access to h ealth services, largely due to poor 
infrastructure, limited access to qualified profess ionals and other socio-economic and cultural 
barriers, such as limited economic rights of women,  lack of empowerment of women, gender and 
caste-based discrimination, poor education of girls , among others. 40  Women from poor households 
and marginalized minority groups, especially Dalits  and Muslims, often experience additional 
discrimination in accessing health care. 41  
26.  In the BRCRN project area, many communities have li mited access to clean water, especially in dry 
seasons, when water scarcity becomes a major challe nge for many. 42  As a result, many communities 
rely on contaminated water sources for some parts o f the year. 43 Other gender-related health issues 
identified by focus groups included goiters, bone a nd joint issues associated with heavy lifting of 
water jugs, firewood collection, among other physic al tasks. With climate change and increasing 
resource degradation, increasing water and natural resource scarcity could exacerbate these health 
impacts through reducing the abundance of safe wate r resources and by increasing collection time 
(e.g. greater distances), which disproportionately affects women. 44 Dalits and other ethnic groups 
may experience additional challenges. Cases of disc rimination have been reported at village wells, 
where Dalits were forced to wait until all other ca stes had filled their water collection vessels firs t. 45  
27.  The burning of fuelwood and cow dung, the main sour ces of energy in the Churia and Terai regions 
respectively, have major impacts on human health. W omen are especially exposed to negative 
impacts as they are responsible for cooking for the ir family and inhale the harmful fumes.  
Political Participation & Decision Making 
28.  At the household level, women are often in charge o f domestic tasks, and in general have less power 
over decision making within households. Variations in control over decision making exist related to 
regional location, education, employment, region, s ocio-cultural background and ethnicity, among 
other factors. 46  There is a great range of variation in the involvem ent of women in decisions 
regarding economic activities between ethnic groups  and types of household economic activities.  
For example, within Gurung communities, a study fou nd that in 43% of households both men and 
women jointly decided the allocation of family labo ur to on-farm and marketing activities, but in 
Tharu communities this percentage was higher at 90 percent. 47   In general, women’s autonomy in 
household decision making is still disadvantaged du e to lack of awareness of opportunities and 
rights.  Nonetheless, when it comes to family well-being rel ated activities such as health and 
education, women are generally found to be more act ively involved within many ethnic groups.  
                                                             
39  UN Women 2016 
40 CARE 2008; Adhikary 2017 
41  UN Women 2016 
42  Karn 2007; President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservat ion Development Board 2017 
43  Singh Danuwar 2008; Rai et al. 2012 
44  President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Develop ment Board 2017 
45  CARE 2012 
46  Devkota et al. 1999; Archarya et al. 2010 
47  Devkota et al. 1999


---
*Page 163*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  11  
 29.  Since 2001, women have experienced increased access  to economic resources, property and micro-
credit and the percentage of households in which wo men own land has considerably increased. 48  
Women access and control over economic resources pl ays a critical role in their access to education 
and health and provide the foundation for empowerme nt and equality.  However, although the 
slight increased ownership of land gives women some  leverage in terms household decisions 
regarding property, several barriers still remain. Barriers of limited access to credit and support 
services, curtailed mobility due to threat of viole nce, perhaps both in the private and public sphere,  
and the lack of recognition by the rest of the comm unity of their potential economic role continue 
to restrict women’s roles in decision making proces ses. 49  Regional differences have been found with 
women in male-headed households within the hills ha ving more freedom of mobility and access to 
household financial resources than women in the Ter ai. 50   
30.  While policies have become increasingly advanced in  mandating the participation of women in 
political spaces and other decision making bodies, a major gap remains in ensuring meaningful 
participation. The 2015 constitution states that 33 % of parliamentary seats in government must be 
filled by women (Article 84, 8), and similar provis ions are in place to ensure women´s participation 
in village assemblies and other formal decision mak ing bodies (including within user groups).  
31.  At the village level, while Water User Associations  require least 33% participation by women and 
CFUGs 50%, it has been highlighted that often women ´s full participation is limited due to the 
persistence of barriers such as time-poverty, 51 lack of capacities, exclusionary institutions and t he 
domination of elite men in decision making spheres.52  Other concerns raised in the consultations 
included that when women are able to participate th ey are often from elite groups, and that 
marginalized women face more barriers in accessing meaningful decision making platforms within 
user groups. 
32.  Time-poverty in Nepal, especially in the Churia, is  a major barrier to the participation of women in 
decision making, as many women spend between 10.5 t o 13 hours a day on maintaining their 
livelihoods. The Churia experiences high migration of men for work, 53 leading to exacerbated time-
poverty, as women need to compensate for the absenc e of men in their households by taking on 
their chores and responsibilities. 54  On the other hand, studies have found that women w ith migrant 
husbands often have greater autonomy and decision-m aking authority at the household level. 55  
33.  Closely linked to time-poverty is the fact that wom en in the Churia have less access to quality 
education and are more likely to be illiterate. Thi s has greatly limited their capacities to participa te 
in such fora, and to make decisions on sustainable natural resource management. A study by Lama 
et al. (2017) noted that this was further exacerbat ed by exclusionary institutions, where illiteracy, 
low self-esteem and lack of capacities were major b arriers for women’s effective and full 
participation in forest user groups´ executive comm ittees. It should be noted that these barriers 
are not only experienced by women, but also impact the participation of indigenous groups and 
ethnic minorities in the BRCRN project area. Execut ive committees in community forest user groups 
                                                             
48 UN Women 2016  
49  Ibid. 
50 Ibid.  
51 Defined as having over 10.5 hours per day dedicated  to maintaining one’s livelihood (e.g. income gener ation, family care, 
etc.). 
52 Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in Ag riculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
53 Shrestha 2015; USAID 2016 
54  Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in A griculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
55 Kaspar 2006 and Yabiku et al. 2010 in Lama et al. 2 017


---
*Page 164*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  12  
 have a history of being dominated by men from advan taged castes, limiting the participation of 
women, indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities in decision making processes. 56  
34.  Thus, while it has been an important first step to provide women with the legal basis to become 
engaged in decision making structures and committee s within community-based organizations (e.g. 
establishing requirements such as 50% female member ship and requiring representation on 
executive committees within community forestry user  groups), additional policies, incentives and 
measures are required to empower women, including w omen from marginalized communities, and 
ensure they have the capacities, time and platform to effectively participate and contribute to 
decision making. Champions are needed to support wo men in becoming increasingly engaged in 
decision making. 57  
Resource Use, Income & Labor Force 
35.  Access to and control over resources, especially in  the forestry and agriculture sectors, remains a 
major barrier for women’s empowerment and gender eq uality in Nepal. 58  This challenge is further 
exacerbated when looking at women from different ca stes/ ethnicities, single women, widowed 
women and disabled women.  
36.  Women often do not hold land titles, due to customa ry and statuary laws that have limited land 
ownership in the past. This has created major obsta cles for women to access credit, technical 
support and other support services. 59  In 2011, female-headed households (FHH) represente d 19.7 
percent of the total agricultural landholders in Ne pal, representing a 9.7% increase since the last 
decade. 60  The disadvantaged position of FHHs can be seen by the fact that landholdings of FHH are 
consistently and substantially lower in all regions ; in 1991 more than 13% of households were 
female-headed but only 6% of farms were owned by wo men. 61  
37.  Women are highly engaged in the agricultural sector , including in crop production and raising 
livestock. In 2017, it was estimated that 84.3% of women were engaged in agricultural activities, in 
comparison to only 62.2% of men. 62  An ongoing trend towards the ´ feminization ´ of agriculture can 
be observed in rural areas in Nepal, due to men obt aining off-farm work or migrating to urban areas 
or foreign countries for work. 63  As a result, women are increasingly responsible fo r activities that 
were formerly performed by men, such as ploughing o r other activities associated with more 
strenuous physical labor, in addition to their norm al activities tending to crops and livestock. This 
trend is extremely pronounced in Nepal, where the n umber of female headed households has more 
than doubled in the last decade. 64 
38.  Livestock is kept as an asset as well as for manure  and draft usage. In rural area, by generating bio-
gas from dung, livestock also serves as a source of  energy for lighting as well as cooking. 65  With 
regards to livestock, women contribute nearly 70% o f the work for livestock reading, especially 
related to forage collection, cleaning stalls, and feeding animals. 66 Practices are often time-
intensive, and women spend substantial time cutting  grass, collecting fodder and taking animals to 
                                                             
56  Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in A griculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
57  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Nat ural Resource Management 2017 
58  UN Women 2016; USAID 2016; Adhikary 2017; Lama et al. 2017 
59  UN Women 2016 
60  CBS 2014 
61  ADB 1999 
62  ILO 2017 
63  Ibid.  
64  CBS 2014b in Adhikary 2017 
65  Adhikary 2017 
66  Adhikary 2017


---
*Page 165*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  13  
 pasture or forested land. Men are more often respon sible for milking animals, and 
commercialization aspects (e.g. selling milk and ot her livestock products). 67  Men are more often 
responsible for larger animals (cows, buffalos), wh ereas women have more responsibilities over 
smaller ruminants and animals. 68 While women are considered “resource poor in terms of raising 
and trading livestock”, Adhikary 2017 notes that pr ograms adopting gender-responsive budgets 
have increased women’s participation in agricultura l development programs, and livestock rearing. 
Time-saving activities, including integration of fo dder with crops, agroforestry systems, and 
improved housing 69  are often not adopted due to the lack of finance/c redit, and lack of awareness 
and capacities.  
39.  A recent study by World Bank and FAO (2018) found t hat women in Nepal have” high control over 
agricultural income”, including women from househol ds with men who have migrated for work 
elsewhere as well as women in households where the men have not migrated. They found that 
women in non-migrant households have higher control  of non-agricultural income, however they 
are also more likely to engage in off-farm work as well as they often receive remittances and have 
less time-poverty.  
40.  The ´feminization´ of agriculture as such has led t o numerous environmental, social and economic 
challenges. Women in rural areas are often ´time po or´, with women working over 10 hours more 
per week on average than men when taking unpaid lab or into account. 70  However, in agricultural 
communities in the Churia and Terai regions, there are cases of women working up to 12 or 13 
hours a day on average. 71 Labor shortages are a major challenge for the agric ultural sector, and 
have led women to focus on high-value and less labo r intensive crops. Increasing land abandonment 
has also been associated with high levels of male m igration, the feminization of agriculture and the 
resulting challenges such as time-poverty. Such tre nds have led to a decline in certain agricultural 
activities that has contributed to food insecurity in some communities. Social impacts include 
increased family stress for both female household h eads and their family, as well as health impacts 
due to hard labor and exhaustion due to their house hold responsibilities (paid and unpaid labor). 72 
There is a need to promote time-saving land use pra ctices and technologies, however extension 
services in Nepal are weak, and women do not have s ufficient information about and access to 
labor-saving practices technologies (see Feasibilit y Study for more detailed information on 
extension services). 73 Increasingly women are joining community-based orga nizations, which can 
support them through collective action, investments  and ultimately help overcome some of the 
barriers faced by women (e.g. access to knowledge, credit, inputs/ tools, among others). CBOs often 
dedicate a certain percentage of their funds (e.g. CFUGs dedicate at least 35%) to pro-poor 
programs that are dedicated to support the most vul nerable households within CBOs. World Bank 
and FAO (2018) noted that over 56% of women from mi grant households (i.e. households with at 
least one family member who has migrated) are membe rs of an agricultural, financial, social and or 
religious groups, compared to 47% of women from non -migrant households. 
41.  Rural communities are also highly dependent on loca l forest resources to maintain their livelihoods. 
Men are often engaged in timber collection, making fire lines, fencing and forest patrolling, 
however, this means that they do not necessarily vi sit the forest on a daily basis. 74 Women on the 
                                                             
67  Adhikary 2017 
68  Adhikary 2017 
69  FAO 2015 
70  Adhikary 2017 
71  USAID 2016 
72  Adhikary 2017 
73  World Bank and FAO 2018 
74  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Nat ural Resource Management 2017


---
*Page 166*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  14  
 other hand often have better knowledge about the st ate of forest resources as they are responsible 
for collecting fodder, firewood, leaf litter and NT FPs from the forest on a daily basis. 75 Women’s 
tasks are often unpaid or poorly paid, whereas men are more engaged in forest-activities that are 
paid either by the community or through the commerc ialization of timber and other forest 
products. 76 Given the challenges faced by women to participate in decision making and trainings, 
women often have minimal input in forest-related de cision making, despite their daily interactions 
and knowledge of the forest. 
42.  Forest sector CBOs aim to improve women´s participa tion in forest-related decision making, and 
have emerged as a key mechanism for enhancing the s ocio-economic and political status of women 
and disadvantaged groups in rural Nepal. 77  Majority of research focuses on Community-forestry  
User Groups (CFUGs), who have developed gender-sens itive guidelines that aim to empower and 
engage women through their institutional structures  (described below in the institutional and policy 
chapter), ensuring women´s representation on CFUG e xecutive committees and promoting 
inclusive benefit sharing. Women-led CFUGs have als o been promoted (i.e. CFUGs with all-women 
executive committees), and in 2012 there were 1,035  women-led CFUGs. 78  Research has found that 
these CFUGs have strong results in improving forest  cover, maintaining transparency, and ensuring 
financial accountability. Furthermore, women-led CF UGs also create an empowering environment 
for women, which increases the participation and en gagement of women within CFUGs. Women´s 
participation in executive committees has also incr eased, although this is largely attributed to 
positive discrimination policies. Nonetheless, CBOs  still can improve in terms of gender-equality 
and –sensitization, as well as social inclusion and  benefit sharing and several organizations have 
developed best practices and recommendations to con tinue to promote GESI within these 
institutions (see Chapter 1.5 and 2 below).  
Gender Violence 
43.  Violence against women and girls has been identifie d as one of the main barriers that Nepal faces 
towards reaching substantive equality. 79 Approximately 22% of rural women reported having be en 
subjected to physical violence, in comparison to 19 % of women living in urban areas. 80  The 
´Domestic Violence and Punishment Law ´ was enacted in 2009. However, the actual socializ ation 
and enforcement of the law is said to be limited, w here violent incidences are often not reported 
or investigated. 81  
44.  Such trends are also evident in the BRCRN project a rea, where interviews with women’s groups 
confirmed the persistence of gender violence in the  region. Women’s lower access to education 
and health care, limited economic rights, lack of e mpowerment and gender and caste-based 
discrimination are said to contribute to the preval ence of violence against women in rural areas, 
among other factors. 82  
45.  In 2017 the Government of Nepal set up a hotline fo r reporting gender based violence, and 
established a network of service providers (includi ng local NGOs and CSOs) to support gender-based 
violence victims, and prevention. This has improved  reporting of GBV, and has improved 
                                                             
75  Ibid.  
76  Ibid. 
77  However, various studies have noted that more can be done to improve benefit sharing, social inclusio n and gender equality 
within CFUGs. 
78  RECOFT and FAO 2015 
79  UN Women 2016; Adhikary 2017 
80  UN Women 2016 
81  UN Women 2016; Adhikary 2017 
82  CARE 2008; UN Women 2016


---
*Page 167*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  15  
 information dissemination on legal protections, and  support services. Within the project´s districts, 
there are a number of NGOs working in awareness rai sing, advocacy and support services. 83  Various 
working on gender in Nepal have noted the importanc e of engaging both men and women in gender 
sensitization and social inclusion, including promo ting male and female role models, leaders and 
trainers within projects and communities. 84  
 
 
Figure 8: Number of NGOs providing support services  for gender based violence (per district) 
Source: Asia Foundation, 2010 
1.3  Legal and administrative framework protecting women  and 
promoting gender equality 
46.  In Nepal, women’s participation in various stages o f decision making processes was not 
fundamentally accepted until the 20 th  century. However, the government of Nepal initiate d the 
concept of women in development in national policy since the 1980s by the 6 th  Five Year Plan, which 
adopted the policy of enhancing the efficiency of w omen and recognizing the role of women in 
development.  
47.  The Local Self-Governance Act, 1999 is the first ac t which made the provision of 20% representation 
of women on village and ward-level development comm ittees. This was the first step in which 
women’s representation was formally recognized by t he government. Currently, this number 
stands at 25% at ward levels, and at least one posi tion (mayor and deputy-mayor) must be filled by 
a woman.  
                                                             
83 The Asia Foundation´s 2010 Publication “Preliminary  Mapping of Gender Based Violence” provides maps wi th an overview 
of local entities providing support services. For m ore information refer to: 
https://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GBVMappin gNepal.pdf  
84 This was discussed within stakeholder consultations  for the gender assessment and GAP with representat ives from various 
organizations including the Gender Focal Point of M oFE  HIMAWANTI, FEDO, and Forest Action Nepal, amon g others.


---
*Page 168*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  16  
 48.  The Constitution of Nepal 2015 also makes special l egal provision to women in national, state and 
local legislatives, which secures 33% women’s repre sentation in national and state legislatives. The 
irrigation policy (2003) makes the legal provision of 33% representation of women in Water User 
Associations (WUA). Community Forest Guidelines (20 15) made mandatory provision of 50% 
representation of women in the executive committee and guarantees that at least one major 
position (president or secretary) should be filled by a woman. 85 While setting such targets has 
greatly increased the participation of women in mee tings and groups, women’s participation in 
decision making often remains limited due to a patr iarchal value system, barriers in accessing 
education and skill training, and time-poverty, amo ng other factors. 86  
49.  The Legal Code (the Muluki Ain ) 1845 is the main document regarding the partition  of ancestral 
property. This act was not free from bias against w omen until 2014. In that year, the government 
passed a bill making amendments to the legal code, giving equal inheritance rights to daughters 
and sons on parental property regardless of their m arital status. While this marks a major 
advancement for women’s rights on parental property , it is often not practiced in reality.  
50.  The issue of gender equality has been greatly stren gthened within Nepalese policy since the 
adoption of the Interim Constitution in 2007 and th e promulgated 2015 constitution. 87 The interim 
constitution from 2007 made several gender-friendly  provisions and socially inclusive laws, 
including guaranteeing the rights of Nepalese women  to freedom, equality and social justice. It 
further prohibited the discrimination of people on the basis of gender and banned violence against 
women, amongst other major milestones that strength ened human rights in the country. In sum, 
there are three dimensions of social inclusion in g overnment policies and plans: i) access to 
resources, services and opportunities, ii) empowerm ent, identity assertions and capacity building, 
and iii) planning, implementation, monitoring and e valuation based on policies, laws, values and 
structures.   
51.  Since then, policies across sectors have increasing ly included provisions designed to empower 
women and promote gender equality through improving  access to sector resources and 
engagement in official fora at the national, provin cial and local levels. For instance, in 2008 the 
Ministry of Forest and Soil Conservation (MoFSC) ad opted an official Gender Equality and Social 
Inclusion (GESI) strategy. The MoFSC GESI strategy aims of to assist government, non-government, 
donor and private sector bodies working in the fore stry sector to institutionalize gender and social 
inclusion within their organizations, projects and programs. Furthermore, the strategy aims to 
guide all organizations working in the forestry sec tor to be responsive and inclusive through 
identifying and addressing four key thematic areas including: i) GESI sensitive policies and 
strategies, ii) good governance and inclusive insti tutional development, iii) GESI-sensitive 
budgeting, programming and monitoring, and iv) equi table access to resources and benefits. 
MoFSC´s guideline has helped mainstream GESI in the  forestry sector through the promotion and 
implementation of gender-sensitive and –responsive policy at the national, regional and local level. 
Nonetheless, the implementation of GESI in communit y forestry at the local level in practice is still 
challenging due to poor linkage between policy and its implementation in the field due to 
institutional and socio-cultural barriers.  
52.  At the international level, Nepal is a signatory to  various conventions that aim to support the 
empowerment of women and gender equality in general . Nepal is a signatory member of the 
                                                             
85 Guideline of Community Forestry Development Prog ram 2015 
86 Adhikary et al. 2017; Lama et al. 2017; Women Or ganizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Reso urce Management 
2017 
87 UN Women 2016


---
*Page 169*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  17  
 Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discr imination against Women (CEDAW), and the 
Beijing Platform for Action (BpfA), among others. N epal is further committed to the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), of which goal  number 5 aims to achieve gender equality 
and empower all women and girls. 88  
53.  In conclusion, Nepal is continuously strengthening its legal framework to increasingly promote 
women’s empowerment and gender equality. However, a wareness, implementation and 
enforcement of gender-specific provisions in the le gal framework are often not fully realized, 
especially in rural areas. Furthermore, despite hav ing clear targets to ensure the engagement of 
women, the persistence of a patriarchal value syste m continues to limit the scope of the 
participation and contribution of women to user gro ups and other public fora. 89 Trainings are 
needed to build capacities on SNRM, climate change and DRR, to build adaptive capacities of the 
most vulnerable communities, and to build leadershi p skills so that women can take on key 
leadership and decision making roles within such pl atforms and/or decision making bodies. 
Champions are further needed to help support women in taking on new roles and building their 
leadership capacities and skills. 90  
 
1.4  Gender issues in building a resilient Churia region in Nepal 
Link between Climate Change and Unsustainable Land Use and Gender in the project area 
54.  Men and women living in the BRCRN project area are highly dependent on natural resources to 
maintain their livelihoods. Agriculture is the main  form of employment in the area, for both 
commercial and subsistence purposes. Forests are im portant for communities as a source of timber 
for their houses and for energy consumption; fuelwo od remains the main source of energy in the 
Churia region and cow dung in the Terai. Forests al so provide local people with NTFPs including 
plants for fodder, medicinal plants, food and other  products, as well as other key ecological and 
cultural services. Forests in the Terai have been l argely cleared, and thus many of the people living 
in the Terai source timber and NTFPs from forests i n the Churia hills and Bhavar regions.  
55.  Women and men in the BRCRN project area have cited various causes of degradation and 
deforestation in the Churia hills and Bhavar region , including: illegal harvesting, landslides and 
uncontrolled livestock grazing, among others. These  drivers have had differing impacts on men and 
women. Women are especially vulnerable to the impac ts of unsustainable resource management 
due to the nature of their responsibilities, includ ing both paid and unpaid labor. For example, forest  
quantity, quality and accessibility has a major imp act on fodder and firewood availability. Women 
in the project area reported that walking distances  to collect firewood and fodder have increased, 
along with decline of fodder, grasses and firewood.  For instance, women in the Bakraha River 
watershed of Morang reported that they used to coll ect a load of dried firewood within 5-10 
minutes over the last 10 years, but now the same ta sk takes them over than 3 hours. In the Mahuli 
community of Saptari, women reported that it takes about 4 hours to collect a load of ground 
grasses from the forest, however the same task took  less than 2.5 hours in the past. The collection 
of NTFPs has also been limited due to over-harvesti ng, degradation and changes in climatic 
                                                             
88  For more information refer to: https://sustaina bledevelopment.un.org/sdg5 
89 Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in  Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
90 Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and N atural Resource Management 2017


---
*Page 170*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  18  
 conditions, ultimately leading to declining incomes . The degradation of agricultural soils also leads 
to productivity losses, which can jeopardize food s ecurity and family nutrition.  
56.  Deforestation and land degradation can increase the  risk of natural disasters, erosion and other 
negative environmental impacts, which can create fu rther challenges for local men and women to 
sustain their livelihoods. Inhabitants of the proje ct area are exposed to extreme heat, water 
scarcity, wildfires, landslides and flooding, among  other trends. Climate change is expected to result  
in increasing temperatures during the dry season an d precipitation in the monsoon season, 
increasing exposure to the aforementioned hazards. Unsustainable natural resource management 
further exacerbates the impacts and exposure to cli mate change (Figure 9).  
 
 
 
Figure 9: Overall illustration of the vulnerability  of the project region with multiple climate and hu man 
induced disasters in view of climate change causing  cascading impacts 
 
57.  Climate change further poses a major risk to the li velihoods of women and men living in the BRCRN 
project area. Inhabitants have noted changes in tem perature, increased uncertainty of rainfall 
patterns, and the drying-up of seasonal springs, am ong other changes. Unsustainable natural 
resource management (NRM) will exacerbate climate r isks and impacts, having major impacts on 
the overall food, energy and water security of comm unities living in the region. Many provinces do 
not have DRR plans, and thus are often ill-prepared  and vulnerable to natural disasters. Often those 
living in the most vulnerable ´at-risk´ areas (espe cially in zones that are highly susceptible to flas h 
flooding and landslides), are poor and marginalized  communities, with low adaptive capacities and 
a high-dependence on natural resources to maintain their livelihoods. Gender-based violence 
(domestic violence and sexual violence) often incre ases following natural disasters, especially 
affecting displaced and highly vulnerable women. 91  
                                                             
91  UNDP 2013; International Federation of Red Cross a nd Red Crescent Societies 2015


---
*Page 171*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  19  
 58.  Ground water recharge has greatly declined in many communities in the BRCRN project area, where 
many communities have noticed the depletion of such  resources. Such a trend has major impacts 
on the water, food security and income of many comm unities. Women are more vulnerable to such 
trends, as women are responsible for the collection  of water. While seasonal changes in water 
availability is not new to the region, the decline of rainfall combined with ground water depletion 
is making women and girls travel longer distances f or its collection. For girls, this means there is a  
higher chance they will need to miss school to coll ect water, whereas for women, it leads to 
increased time poverty, where women in the Churia T erai-Madhesh region may work up to 12-13 
hours a day. 92  Women in migrant households (where household membe rs have migrated elsewhere 
for work), single-mothers, divorced women and widow s are more likely to suffer from time poverty. 
59.  While women and men living in the BRCRN project are a are vulnerable to the impacts of 
unsustainable natural resource use and climate chan ge, women, especially women from 
marginalized minority communities, are even more vu lnerable. Women comprise 51% of the 3.2 
million inhabitants of the BRCRN project area, of w hich 77% are from marginalized/ excluded 
groups. 93  
60.  Four core barriers were identified that women face in adopting sustainable land use practices (Table 
1): 
 Gender gap in access to resources and land 
 Gap in mainstreaming gender into climate change and  land use planning processes and 
policies, and raising awareness on topics related t o GESI, 
 Gender and social inclusion gaps in education, skil ls and leadership, and 
 Gender gap in disproportionate roles and responsibi lities in households and communities. 
Gender gap in access to resources and land  
61.  A major takeaway from a discussion with women worki ng in the field of women’s rights and other 
women in the Churia area was that the patriarchal v alues system is seen as rooted in a society. This 
is perceived as the main obstacle for women to thei r empowerment and restricts their access to 
resources (financial, physical, administrative, etc .). Such barriers ultimately limit the participatio n 
of women in SNRM, climate change and in decision ma king processes. Some women in the 
consultations noted that their husbands were not su pportive of them attending trainings on 
alternative livelihood opportunities, which greatly  limited the participation of women in such 
trainings. One participant noted that many men beli eve that “ training is not for women, but for 
men ”, highlighting that women are still marginalized i n the Churia and Terai region, and that 
gender-sensitization is needed for both men and wom en. Extension services also need to be made 
more “gender-friendly”, including mainstreaming GES I into training modules, training extension 
staff on GESI, and hiring more women extension staf f. 94  Decision making at the local level remains 
largely dominated by men, with limited decision mak ing and engagement of women. CBOs are 
increasingly developing policies and initiatives to  strengthen the engagement of women, however 
it is an ongoing process that it not without its ch allenges.   
 
                                                             
92  USAID 2016 
93 Including: Indigenous Peoples 31%, Terai-Madhesi ca ste 28%, Dalits 13% and Muslims 5%, among others; C BS 2014. 
94 World Bank and FAO 2018


---
*Page 172*
---

Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 20 
 Table 1: Overview of challenges for engaging women in sustainable natural resource management and clim ate change mitigation and adaptation Root causes Gender gap in access to resources and land 
due to a patriarchal value system that is 
reinforced through cultural and legal 
measures.  Poor awareness, implementation and 
enforcement of gender equality and social 
inclusion (GESI) and policy and legislation.  
Policy gaps in promoting climate chan ge, DRR, and 
gender-sensitive development, especially in local 
land use planning practices.  Gender and social inclusion gap in education, skill s and 
leadership.  Traditional gendered distribution of roles 
and responsibilities in the household 
which affects women and girls 
disproportionately.  Causes Unequal access, control over and 
management of land, which limits womens’ 
ability to invest in appropriate measures to 
improve the resilience of communities 
through SNRM, climate-smart agriculture 
and DRR measures. 
Limited access to technical assistance 
programs/ livelihood support programs and 
formal credit means many women cannot 
register businesses. 
Marginalized minority groups and women 
within them, including indigenous peoples, 
Dalits among others, may experience 
additional barriers due to inter-generational 
discrimination. While policies and initiatives 
are increasingly promoting their inclusion, 
they are still considered marginalized groups.  
 Low participation in technical trainings and limite d 
bargaining power in decision making processes 
related to user groups, including measures to 
strengthen climate change adaptation and 
mitigation and DRR. 
Minimal consideration of SNRM and climate 
change in land use planning. 
Marginalized minority groups inc luding indigenous 
peoples, Dalits among others, may experience 
additional barriers due to inter-generational 
discrimination. While policies and initiatives are 
increasingly promoting their inclusion, they are 
still considered marginalized groups.  
 In gene ral, women and girls´ education is lower priority, 
which limits their ability to learn and become engag ed on 
topics such as SNRM, climate change and DRR. 
Girls are regularly taken out of school to support w ith the 
collection of water, fodder and fuelwood, especiall y in 
absentee households. This limits their ability to le arn and 
become engaged on topics such as SNRM, climate chan ge 
and DRR. Ethnic minorities and other groups of 
disadvantaged women face further barriers in access ing 
education. 
In some instances, the knowledge of Nepali language  is a 
barrier for some people, especially women and 
marginalized minority groups living in the Terai. 
Time poverty is a major barrier which limits women a nd 
girls to participate in education and skill trainin g 
opportunities. Women and girls in the BRCRN project  
area experience time poverty, which is exacerbated b y 
current migration trends where around a quarter of 
households have absentee household members. Majorit y 
of migrants are male, leaving women and girls in ch arge 
of not only their previous tasks but also those of t heir 
absentee household members. Single-mothers, divorce d 
women, and widows are also often experiencing time 
poverty.  
 Many women experience time poverty, 
and thus have limited time to even 
maintain past land use activities, let 
alone invest in new practices. This 
further limits women´s availability to 
attend capacity building trainings, or 
participate in user group meetings. 
 
PROBLEM STATEMENT: Women in the Eastern Churia and Terai region are vulnerable to natural disasters an d climate change, and face food, water 
and energy insecurity which is further exacerbated through unstainable natural resource use in the reg ion.


---
*Page 173*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  21  
 
Immediate effect Limited awareness and uptake or gender -
sensitive SNRM95 and climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, and DRR 
practices. 
Unsustainable natural resource management 
(NRM), leading to land and natural resource 
degradation 
Subsistence farming / low productivity and 
food insecurity  Limited awareness and uptake of gender -sensitive 
SNRM practices, climate-resilient agriculture, soil  
conservation and DRR measures.  
Unsustainable NRM leading to land and natural 
resource degradation 
High vulnerability to climate change  
Marginalization risk and weak mainstreaming of 
GESI 
Elite capture in resource management decisions,  
Low agricultural yields 
Low participation of women, esp. poor women 
and ethnic minorities, in decision making fora Limited awareness and uptake of gender -sensitive SNRM 
practices, climate change adaptation and mitigation  and 
DRR measures.  
Land and natural resource degradation 
Low agricultural yields, food insecurity 
Low participation of women, esp. poor women and eth nic 
minorities, in trainings and decision making  
Marginalization and domestic violence risk Limited awareness and uptake or 
gender-sensitive SNRM and climate 
change adaptation and mitigation, and 
DRR practices. 
Time poverty for women to be 
exacerbated by unsustainable NRM and 
climate change. 
Unsustainable use of natural resource, 
high vulnerability to climate change 
Low agricultural yields, food insecurity 
Land and natural resource degradation Effect Low adaptive capacities 
Increased carbon emissions 
Low incomes, informal work and limited 
social security 
Food, water and energy insecurity 
Loss of biodiversity  
Vulnerable to natural disasters and climate 
change Low adaptive capacities 
Low incomes, informal work and limited social 
security 
Food, water and energy insecurity 
Loss of Agro-biodiversity 
Increased carbon emissions  
Vulnerable to natural disasters and climate 
change Low adaptive capacities 
Low incomes and informal work 
Food, water and energy insecurity 
Vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change 
 Food, water and energy insecurity 
Increased work burden for women and 
girls 
Low adaptive capacities 
Low incomes 
Health problems (stress, malnutrition, 
physical exhaustion etc.) 
Vulnerable to natural disasters and 
climate change 
                                                             
95 Gender-sensitive sustainable natural resource ma nagement focuses on sustainable natural resource ma nagement (that balances environment, economy and soc ial elements), whilst 
considering the potential contribution of women and  men to societal changes, as well as methods and to ols that can be used to: promote gender equity, redu ce gender disparities, and measure 
the impact of natural resource management and clima te change on men and women.  
Gender-sensitive SNRM is at the core of the project ´s approach. It aims to: 
1.  Apply best practices in SNRM for the positive discri mination and engagement of women of all backgrounds , including Dalit women, indigenous women and other s. Best practices have been 
identified based on past project experiences and le ssons learned from FAO, the Government of Nepal and  other institutions/ organizations, as well as thro ugh stakeholder consultations, 
targeted workshops, and through expert interviews ( a list of consultations and meetings is provided in  ESMF Annex 3)  
2.  Awareness raising and GESI sensitization are cross- cutting throughout project activities. More targete d interventions are described in the GAP.  
3.  A gender-responsive M&E framework for the project a nd GAP have been designed to actively monitor the pr oject´s impact on men and women, ensuring active ma nagement and enabling 
learning on the impacts of SNRM and climate change on men and women


---
*Page 174*
---

Gender Action Plan BRCRN  22  
 62.  Many people residing in the Churia region do not ha ve secure land tenure96 and only ~25% 
of women have land entitlements in the Churia regio n.97 They have been residing and 
cultivating ailani land (non-registered) for decades. Few women in the  Eastern Churia and 
Terai region hold formal land titles. Those who hav e access to formal land titles have often 
received land as an inheritance or gift ( daijo ) from their parents, especially in households 
without sons, or through the purchase of land in th e name of wives by absentee husbands 
who are working abroad. 98  
63.  Lack of secure access to land and tenure security a nd the limited control over land use 
decisions and resources limit women’s ability to ad apt to climate change, implement 
sustainable natural resource management, and ultima tely to improve their livelihoods. 
Women noted that without statutory property rights that they cannot access loans to 
support value adding processes, form businesses or invest in sustainable or improved land 
use practices (e.g. improved plant varieties, anima l breeds, etc.). 99  Tenure insecurity prevents 
women from making medium- to long-term investments in more sustainable and improved 
practices. It is clear that incentives need to be p rovided to both men and women to support 
women’s empowerment and gender equality.  
64.  Despite these challenges, some programs have found ways to develop incentives that 
encourage men to support women, including Dalits an d indigenous peoples, to access 
trainings, and support women’s empowerment in decis ion making processes and in the 
formal access of resources and land In Nepal, the g overnment initiated tax exemption in land 
registration for women since the Fiscal Year 2008/0 9. In 2016, they provided a discount of 
25-50% in the cost of land registration for women. Daughters and granddaughters now 
receive 50% tax discounts in land registration, whi ch is 35% for a single woman (especially 
widows), and 25% for other women.100   
65.  CBOs have emerged as a key institution for promote collective action, enabling: improved 
information sharing, promoting time saving activiti es and pooling resources, 101  increased 
access to capacity building and extension, strength ened negotiation power, improved access 
to technology, and access to finance, among other b enefits. On their own, many households, 
especially women-headed households and landless hou seholds, may not be financially and 
technically ready/ able to adopt climate-resilient SNRM due to the lack of capacities, 
awareness and finance. CBOs thus can help them to p ool their resources and overcome many 
of these barriers. As described above, many organiz ed user groups have increasingly 
developed GESI policies, e.g. including mandatory m inimum participation quotas of women, 
and promoting proportional representation of margin alized groups and equitable benefit 
                                                             
96  During consultations with local communities in Kud unabari & Danabari of the Kankai River Watershed, K erabari of 
Bakraha River Watershed and Bishnupaduka and Baghak hola of the Pathanli River Watershed, they reported  that 
they did not have an official land certificate, alth ough they have been living there for more than three  decades. 
97 CBS 2012  
98  Field consultations in the project area (conducted  from December 21-28, 2017) 
99  Demetriades & Esplan 2010 
100  USAID 2016; MoF 2016 
101  Consulted communities often discussed the positive  environmental, social and economic benefits from j oint 
investments, including the alleviation of time-pove rty. For example, several communities discussed that  community 
water ponds have extremely positive benefits, reduci ng time poverty for women (less time collecting fuel wood, 
NTFPs, etc.), and increasing participation of girls  in school (before they often had to walk several ho urs in the dry 
season to collect water). Additional health benefit s, including reduction in waterborne diseases, were  also identified.


---
*Page 175*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  23  
 sharing. CFUGs also increasingly involve and suppor t landless and poor households, giving 
such groups an opportunity to benefit from the sust ainable management of community-
managed natural resources. 102  CFUGs dedicate at least 35% of their funds to pro- poor 
programs, supporting highly vulnerable and excluded  households within the CFUG. Thus, 
such local community-based user groups, especially CFUGs, represent an important entry-
point for promoting gender equitable and inclusive climate-resilient SNRM. 
66.  The project will also improve the access and owners hip of natural resources through 
investments in “Public Land Forest User Groups”, wh ich will be primarily composed of 
marginalized households. Management plans for all C BOs will be developed in a participatory 
manner with such user groups, combined with ongoing  technical support.  
Gaps in mainstreaming gender in climate change poli cy and land use planning 
practices 
67.  While Nepal´s legal framework related to gender has  become strengthened in recent years, 
there is poor awareness of key policies related to gender, and implementation and 
enforcement of policies tend to lag behind, especia lly in rural areas. 103  Policies also may not 
be fully implemented at the local level. For instan ce, in CFUGs there is a legal requirement 
that at least 50% of the members are women, and at least one woman must sit on the 
decision making committee (i.e. either president or  secretary). Many people consulted in 
rural communities highlighted the challenges of ope rationalizing such policies, and noted 
that many women in the committee attend the meeting s but do not fully participate. This is 
due to a myriad of factors linked to education, tim e poverty, patriarchal values system, 
inability to participate in trainings, among other reasons. Studies have found CFUGs with 
higher representation of women on executive committ ees may create an enabling 
environment for women´s participation (speaking up at meetings, attendance at meetings 
and participation in executive committees), 104  noting the importance of supporting women 
to develop leadership skills. 
68.  Gender-mainstreaming in climate policies remains li mited in the country. 105  Climate change 
has different impacts on women and men, where women  are particularly vulnerable in the 
BRCRN project region. Nonetheless, many policies do  not take into account differing 
dynamics and the impacts on men and women, and many  policies are not designed in a 
gender-sensitive or gender-responsive manner, ensur ing the engagement of women on 
topics that are critical for their livelihoods. Thi s goes beyond simply policies, and also 
manifests in land use planning at the local level, where women are largely excluded from 
planning processes in general. Women are greatly in volved in the management of forest and 
agricultural resources, with in-depth knowledge abo ut their utilization and status, however 
they have yet to be fully engaged in decision makin g and planning processes in many user 
groups and communities. Gender must be mainstreamed  into climate change and DRR 
policies, as well as in land use planning processes  at the local level, to ensure that a gender-
sensitive and –responsive approach is adopted with the potential to address the specific 
                                                             
102  Regmi et al. 2015 
103  UN Women 2016 ; USAID 2016 ; Adhikary 2017 
104  Agrawal 2010 ; Leone 2013 ; FAO and RECOFT 2015  
105  Adhikary 2017


---
*Page 176*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  24  
 vulnerabilities and necessities of women and men, t aking into account differing dynamics 
and impacts.  
69.  Nepal is currently undergoing a political transitio n from a constitutional monarchy to a 
federal democratic republic, involving major restru cturing of local level institutions – 
including the establishment of seven provinces and the devolution of power over natural 
resource management to the local level. At the loca l level, there are the mayor and deputy-
mayor, as well as 5 elected members (one chairperso n, two women –of which one position 
is reserved for Dalits- and two others) from each w ard, who are each elected for five years.  
70.  The Constitution of Nepal (2015) and Local Governme nt Operational Act (LGOA, 2017) state 
that municipalities shall make necessary rules unde r its defined domains or jurisdictions to 
operate the given responsibilities and to regulate its procedure. However, while these rules 
shall be under the domains of municipalities, they must be consistent with provincial and 
national laws. Thus, the LGOA indicates that local government can effectively implement 
climate change mainstreaming into local plans, incl uding GESI, and build institutional 
capacities through the elaboration of operational g uidelines, procedures and criteria. Given 
the diverse impacts of climate change across sector s (including agriculture, health, etc.), 
there is a need for a holistic and coordinated appr oach for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation. 106  Single institutions (in this case, the local gover nment) cannot fight against 
climate change without effective coordination with diverse line agencies, as well as with 
provincial and national governments.  
Gender and social inclusion gap in education, skill s and leadership 
71.  Women’s participation in formal decision making bod ies, but also trainings, schools and 
other learning platforms has been relatively limite d due to numerous reasons discussed in 
more detail within previous sections (e.g. time pov erty, socio-cultural barriers, among 
others). The lack of engagement of women on educati onal topics related to SNRM, climate 
change and DRR means that a major segment of the po pulation, which is particularly 
vulnerable to climate risks, cannot access knowledg e and learning opportunities. This 
ultimately creates a major gap in adaptive capaciti es and awareness of SRNM, climate change 
and risk-reduction practices. Further gaps are noti ceable among women of different groups. 
Women from ethnic minorities, widows and other disa dvantaged women experience greater 
inequality and additional barriers to participate i n such trainings or knowledge sharing 
platforms. In some communities in the Terai it was noted that some community members, 
especially women and marginalized minority groups, may have limited knowledge of the 
Nepali language. 107  Thus, such groups of women often have lower adapti ve capacities.  
72.  Many communities consulted noted that while people may understand that the climate is 
changing, people are largely unaware of risk reduct ion measures. However, some 
communities are piloting their own adaptation measu res based on their own observations of 
the changing climate. For example, the Lepach peopl e in the Mechi River watershed noted 
                                                             
106  Paudel 2013 
107  For instance, in  Rampatti village, a settlement of Terai origin peop le of the Balan River System, we began to discuss 
with them in Nepali language. Most of the women pre sent in the consultation could not understand Nepal i. Upon 
realizing this we held the discussion in local lang uage which facilitated their participation. Thus it  is important to also 
have local people who are able to disseminate infor mation and support local capacity building and exten sion in such 
communities. Such language-related challenges are m ore common in the Terai than in hill origin ethnic groups.


---
*Page 177*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  25  
 that they have begun to grow akabare khorsani  (a local variety of chili), and oranges at higher 
altitudes, which has only become possible due to ch anging climatic patterns. Such 
experiences with local knowledge and the piloting o f local solutions are key to strengthening 
adaptive capacities and reducing the vulnerability of communities to climate change. 
However there is currently no effective knowledge h ub or network which allows 
communities to share local knowledge, nor access in formation about climate change, DRR, 
or SNRM within the BRCRN project area. While substa ntial measures have been piloted, there 
is a major gap in disseminating lessons learned, be st practices and other key experiences to 
communities.  
73.  Measures are needed to encourage the full engagemen t of women in knowledge platforms, 
especially at the local and provincial levels, and strengthen the capacities of women on 
SNRM, climate change and disaster risk reduction. W omen and girls´ education is not 
prioritized, meaning that many women may not have t he capacity to take on formal 
leadership roles or to participate in technical tra inings. Extension services need to be made 
more ´gender-friendly´ and accessible to women, 108  Trainings on SNRM, climate change and 
DRR need to ensure that they are targeted for women  given their educational backgrounds 
and typical land use responsibilities and activitie s, and that they also further promote skill 
building on topics related to education, decision m aking and leadership. Such trainings need 
to be designed in an inclusive manner, ensuring the  engagement of women from different 
groups (e.g. ethnic backgrounds, ages, marital stat us, etc.). It is further important that local 
resource persons and trainers include women and peo ple who are familiar with the cultural 
and local language, to facilitate information disse mination and ensure the full engagement 
of women and other marginalized minority groups. Th e accessibility of trainings for women 
needs to be improved, as women will often not trave l long-distances to attend a training. 
Gender-sensitization of men and women also should b e further strengthened, noting the 
benefits associated with training women.  
Gender gap in terms of disproportionate roles and r esponsibilities in households and 
communities 
74.  Women in the Churia and Terai region are often face d with time-poverty, where women are 
working up to 13 hours a day, taking care of their household and livelihoods, considering 
both paid and unpaid labor. 109  Men tend to be in charge of cash crops, commercial ization of 
agricultural and forest products and staple cereal crops, whereas women are often involved 
in crops for household subsistence, livestock, the collection of NTFPs, fuelwood, fodder, 
grasses and water. Women are further responsible fo r the maintenance of the household 
(cleaning, cooking, caring for the elderly, among o ther tasks), in addition to supporting the 
aforementioned tasks. As the Churia and Terai regio ns are experiencing strong migration 
patterns of men to urban areas or foreign countries , women´s time poverty is becoming more 
critical, as women are taking on additional respons ibilities while not being fully empowered 
to make decisions on their own. 
75.  Thus, in addition to the other barriers previously discussed, time poverty, compounded by 
lack of confidence and lower levels of literacy, is  a major barrier to engage women in trainings 
                                                             
108  World Bank and FAO 2018 
109  USAID 2016


---
*Page 178*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  26  
 on SNRM or climate change, as many women may not ha ve the time to participate in 
trainings, user group meetings, etc. Women have lit tle awareness of time-saving land use 
practices, and limited access to time-saving techno logies.  
76.  Also, for women to adopt improved land use practice s, often it may require more time, 
especially if they include new practices. Limited a wareness and knowledge may result in 
additional time needed to pilot such practices, how ever limited time availability may 
negatively impact the adoption of such practices. A gain, such a barrier may be even greater 
for women from more marginalized communities, where  financial and time poverty limit 
their engagement in potential trainings, practices and other activities. Support is needed to 
improve the awareness and adoption of time-saving S NRM practices and technologies that 
not only promote low-carbon and climate resilient d evelopment, but also provide social, 
environmental and economic benefits to women, whils t also reducing time poverty. This 
includes providing technical and financial support in an accessible and culturally-appropriate, 
gender equitable and socially inclusive manner.  
1.5  Gender Assessment Recommendations 
77.  The gender assessment has provided insight into gen der challenges in Nepal, zooming in on 
the specific context of the BRCRN project area, ben eficiaries and interventions. The 
assessment has combined the recollection of informa tion from diverse studies and literature 
as well as with stakeholder consultations on gender  in Kathmandu as well as in the project 
area. The findings of this analysis have been descr ibed in the sections above, and have helped 
identify opportunities and challenges to empower wo men and promote gender-equality in 
the BRCRN project. The results from this assessment  will help form the basis of the GAP, 
where clear and feasible recommendations will be in tegrated into the plan to ensure that 
the project empowers women and helps to overcome ge nder-specific barriers through the 
promotion of gender-sensitive measures and a gender -responsive M&E framework.  
Summary of Recommendations from Stakeholder Consult ations 
78.  Stakeholder consultations during project developmen t were designed to engage diverse 
actors, where gender was viewed as a cross-cutting topic. Women’s organizations, including 
organizations for indigenous women and ethnic minor ities, were engaged early on to provide 
insight into the gender-specific challenges faced i n the BRCRN project area as well as 
feedback into the proposed project activities to st rengthen gender empowerment and 
equality. Meetings have been conducted both at the national level with key stakeholders in 
the capital (including FEDO, NIWF, HIMAWANTI, Nepal  Federation of Indigenous Nationalities 
(NEFIN), Federation of Community Forestry Users,  a mong others), as well as with women in 
the project area (see ESMF Appendix 3 for meeting s ummaries and attendance sheets). Key 
issues highlighted by the consultations include: 
 Gender needs to be better mainstreamed into climate  change and local land use 
planning at the local level, where women’s knowledg e needs to be taken into 
consideration and their voices considered in decisi on making and land use planning 
processes 
 Many women, especially Dalit women, don´t have acce ss to formal property rights or 
land use rights, despite their key role in managing  the agricultural land, primarily due to


---
*Page 179*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  27  
 a patriarchal value system. This is a major barrier  for women to invest in long term SNRM 
as it is extremely difficult for women to access cr edit, trainings and additional support 
without formal land tenure. Community-based user gr oups can support women to 
develop skills, manage natural resources and develo p business models, as there are 
provisions to support landless families and poor ho useholds within user group 
guidelines and policies. Additional measures could focus on improving business literacy 
and incentivizing women to form cooperatives or wom en’s groups to help access finance 
and develop sustainable businesses on topics relate d to climate-resilient value chains.  
 Access and quality of forest and water resources is  negatively impacted by climate 
change and unsustainable NRM. Villagers noted that the time needed to collect 
resources (water, firewood, fodder, NTFPs, etc.) is  increasing, ultimately increasing time 
poverty for women and girls, and limiting education al opportunities for girls.  
 Women´s participation in decision making is often l imited, although this depends on the 
community. There is a need for additional training to support women to take on 
leadership roles and to raise awareness and capacit ies on climate change and 
sustainable natural resource management. It was men tioned that awareness raising 
should not only be targeted at women but also girls  to help them develop capacities at 
a young age. 
 Gender-sensitive trainings are not only needed for women, but also for men to 
encourage men/ boys to encourage women to become em powered and take on 
leadership roles and to build their capacities.  
 Engagement of boys and girls in schools on topics r elated to climate change and SNRM, 
but also on topics related to gender. Schools repre sent an important platform to engage 
the youth. 
 There is a need for targeted support to help women develop skills related to alternate 
livelihoods, business development and income genera ting activities to strengthen their 
income and livelihoods. Support is needed along ent ire value chains (not just 
production/ harvesting, but also business administr ation, marketing and 
commercialization). Additional support is required to help strengthen women´s income 
and improve their livelihoods. 
79.  A gender-specific workshop in Kathmandu was conduct ed on February 21, 2018 to 
validate the gender assessment and receive early fe edback on the proposed gender 
action plan. Stakeholder comments from the workshop  have been integrated into 
the final version of this assessment and the GAP. I n general the GAP was well 
received, noting the importance of providing target ed measures for women within 
the project, and ensuring that differentiated vulne rabilities and contexts are taken 
into account. The Gender Action Plan was presented at the BRCRN Validation 
workshop on March 25, 2018, where the project was v alidated by diverse 
stakeholders from the public sector, CSOs and priva te sector.  
Recommendations for Project Design and Implementati on 
80.  The BRCRN project aims to  enhance the climate resilience of ecosystems and vu lnerable men 
and women in the Churia region through integrated s ustainable rural development and 
natural resource management approaches. It is recom mended that the project design takes 
into account the following recommendations to help overcome existing gender gaps, while 
promoting gender-sensitive and equitable developmen t:


---
*Page 180*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  28  
 81.  Promote membership in CBOs, and empower women to ac tively participate and take on 
leadership roles, and strengthen access to and cont rol over resources 
 Work with community-based organizations (CBOs) as a  main beneficiary for the project, 
as they are a proven model in Nepal for social enga gement and empowerment, and 
sustainable natural resource management (see Feasib ility Study for additional 
information).  
 Disseminate information on benefits for women assoc iated with CBOs, include (a more 
comprehensive list of the social, environmental and  economic benefits is provided in 
the Feasibility study): 
- Improve environmental conditions to reduce exposure  to extreme weather events 
and hazards, improve agricultural productivity (red uced land degradation), and 
improve biodiversity and seasonal water availabilit y. This will also contribute to 
strengthened resilience to climate change, especial ly for rural vulnerable and 
excluded men and women. Reduced vulnerability to ex treme weather events and 
hazards can also reduce the vulnerability to gender -based violence, which often 
increases with natural hazards (taking advantage of  hazard-affected women). 110   
- Enhance opportunities for social empowerment and po litical engagement through 
CBO management structures (targets for membership a nd participation in plenary 
meetings, and mandatory. 111  
- Alleviate time poverty by supporting an improved na tural resource base (e.g. time 
spent collecting grasses, fodder, NTFPs, firewood, and water), and through 
promoting collective action and pooling of resource s.112 CBOs can also help 
women access gender-sensitive technical assistance,  knowledge and credit. 113  
- Improve access to technical assistance, finance/ cr edit, market information and 
knowledge 
- Support measures to increase incomes of the rural p oor, women and Dalits 114  
- Provide targeted livelihood support for vulnerable households from CBOs pro-poor 
programs 115  
 Advocate for an approach that promotes gender equal ity and is socially inclusive, taking 
into account the differentiated vulnerability of wo men and men from diverse socio-
economic and cultural backgrounds. Women should mak e up at least 50% of project 
                                                             
110  World Health Organization 2005; International Fede ration of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 2015  
111  E.g. CFUGs require 50% membership of women, and ha ve further provisions related to ensure women occup y 
leadership positions. Studies have shown that socia l inclusion and empowerment should still be improve d in CBOs, 
with recommendations to promote leadership and GESI  (see following recommendations). 
112  One case study found that women saved 2.5 hours a d ay by joining a CFUG and reducing the collection time  for 
various forest products. They also found that cash-i ncomes rose by 24% in a 3 year period.  FAO and IFAD  2015 
113  IFAD 2001 in FAO  
114  FERN 2015; FAO and IFAD 2015. Recommendations from  stakeholder consultations noted the importance of the 
following measures for Dalit women: disaster risk r eduction, climate change and food security support ( technical 
support, capacity development, financial support), e ducation and capacity development, economic empower ment 
and access to resources, leadership training, and i ncreasing access to government services (including extension 
services). 
115  Many CBOs, including CFUGs, require that at least 3 5% of the CBO´s funds are used for pro-poor program s targeting 
vulnerable households.


---
*Page 181*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  29  
 beneficiaries, 116  with proportional participation of indigenous peop les, Dalits and other 
excluded and/or marginalized groups. 117   
 Strengthen access to and control over resources thr ough the establishment of public 
land forest user groups, especially engaging and em powering marginalized households, 
including Dalit women and landless women, and imple ment trainings to build skills along 
key value chains (esp. those with high potential to  support women), including improved 
production practices, trainings on climate change, SNRM and DRR, and trainings on 
business literacy, including trainings targeted tow ards women and women’s groups. 
USAID and IFAD have successfully implemented busine ss literacy trainings in the Churia, 
which have further been mainstreamed into Nepal´s E mission´s Reduction Program for 
the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility. Public land  forest user groups will help improve 
access to land and control over resources for vulne rable, excluded and marginalized 
households.  
82.  Mainstream GESI in policy, regulatory and instituti onal frameworks, and strengthen 
institutional and individual capacities on GESI 
 Ensure all project management staff and project par tners (including extension agents 
are trained on GESI in the context of the BRCRN pro ject. This will include training on 
gender-responsive and –sensitive planning, M&E and mainstreaming GESI into land use 
planning and local policies.  
 Institutionalize gender-responsive measures and soc ial Inclusion in the forest and 
agricultural sector by ensuring that the processes,  policies and activities are sensitive to 
gender-considerations, are socially inclusive and t ake into consideration potential social 
and environmental impacts. 
 Develop a strategy and action plan to promote mains treaming of climate resilient land 
use planning into river-system and local planning p rocesses, ensuring that GESI 
considerations are mainstreamed, including the link  between GESI and climate change. 
 Strengthen the institutional capacities of local co mmunity based organizations/ users 
groups to sustainably plan and manage their resourc es, as well as to integrate GESI into 
planning processes and empower women members, inclu ding indigenous women, Dalit 
women and other marginalized minority groups, withi n these organizations. In trainings 
and workshops, information should be provided on co mplementary government 
services and initiatives, including, for example, t he Government´s hotline to report 
gender-based violence incidences, among other GESI initiatives.  
83.  Build the capacity of women, especially Dalit women , indigenous women and women from 
vulnerable and/or excluded households, and enable t hem to fully benefit from project 
activities 
                                                             
116  The 50% participation of women target was selected  for the following reasons: 
Nepal´s CFUG guidelines state that 50% of CFUG memb ers should be women 
Women make up over 50% of the population in the pro ject area. Women are active members of organized gr oups, 
and stakeholder consultations with women’s groups, CBOs, government officials, and other institutions found the 
50% target to be a realistic and suitable target fo r the project. 
117  In terms of targets, the project aims to have 50% of the beneficiaries within CBOs as women. Proporti onal 
representation of Dalits and IPs is also encouraged , however the specific targets will be established during the FPIC 
process. While in the project area IPs form 31% of the population and Dalits 13%, there are substantia l differences 
between districts, and also geographically in the Ch uria hills and Terai. Thus, for now “proportional r epresentation” 
is applied, however once the specific CBOs and loca tions are selected, specific targets will be set.


---
*Page 182*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  30  
  Adopt strategies and incentives to target the full participation and engagement of 
women, ensuring the inclusion of women from indigen ous groups, Dalits, and other 
´excluded ´/ marginalized groups.  
 Conduct leadership trainings for men and women in u ser groups, with a focus on how 
to promote leadership that enables GESI – ultimatel y empowering women, including 
indigenous peoples, ethnic minorities and other mar ginalized or historically excluded 
groups. The trainings also aim to identify and buil d capacities of ´ champions ´ and local 
resource persons within user groups, communities, c ivil society and government to 
advocate for the engagement of women in decision ma king processes, and to actively 
support the empowerment and capacity building of wo men, including landless women, 
indigenous women, Dalit women, among others, to tak e on leadership roles and 
become increasingly engaged in SNRM, climate change  adaptation and mitigation and 
DRR. 118  Encourage women to actively participate in CBO ple nary meetings and executive 
committees to place women’s-issues on the agenda, i ncluding key issues such as time-
poverty.  
 Improve extension services including providing tail ored extension services to female 
farmers. Improve access to extension services and t raining, mainstream GESI in training 
modules, train trainers and extension agents on GES I (including key issues such as time 
poverty and the identification of time saving activ ities), and hire more female extension 
agents (including Dalit and indigenous women, among  others). 
 Trainings designed explicitly to strengthen partici pation of women in decision making, 
land use planning, SNRM, DRR, climate change mitiga tion and adaptation, and income-
generating activities along key value chains. Such trainings should:  
- Ensure the utilization of different learning tools,  taking into consideration that many 
women may not have as much formal education as men.119  User-friendly extension 
picture books could be utilized, along with videos,  manuals and guidelines, among 
other approaches (refer to the Feasibility Study fo r more detailed information).  
-  Mainstream GESI into training modules and material s (considering time-poverty, 
women’s roles and responsibilities, and other gende r-considerations) 
- Train extension staff and trainers on GESI.  
- Improve the accessibility of women to trainings, in cluding local trainings, 
transportation, and coordination with CBOs and wome n on suitable training times.  
- Hire and train female extension staff, including in digenous and Dalit women 
- Support the sensitization of men and women on gende r issues, including raising 
awareness about the importance of training and educ ating women. This should 
highlight that training and educating women represe nts a key strategy to build the 
capacity of communities in the long-term. 120  
 Support the elaboration of guidelines and consolida tion of practices on climate-resilient 
land use practices, ensuring that local knowledge a nd women’s priorities and 
experiences are taken into consideration for the el aboration of such guidelines 
(mainstreaming GESI into training modules). Ensure that key information is 
disseminated to women. This should further build on  the existing work of local 
                                                             
118  FERN 2015; FAO and IFAD 2015.  
119  E.g. they may have limited supporting knowledge, are  more likely to be illiterate 
120  Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Nat ural Resource Management (2017)


---
*Page 183*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  31  
 organizations, including women’s groups, to ensure that women are aware of climate 
change risks and practices to reduce risks and impr ove their adaptive capacities (see the 
following recommendation on communication and knowl edge dissemination).  
 
84.  Improve communication and knowledge dissemination 
 Improve knowledge sharing and data collection on cl imate change, NRM and DRR in the 
BRCRN project area through the establishment of a c limate knowledge center (CKC). 
Ensure the integration of knowledge from diverse gr oups of people, including women, 
ethnic minorities, indigenous peoples and marginali zed groups. Promote the use of 
traditional knowledge (see IPPF for more detailed i nformation). Ensure local resource 
persons who manage the Churia knowledge center incl ude women, indigenous peoples, 
Dalit and other marginalized minority groups. Women  should be engaged in the 
monitoring, analysis and dissemination of key data and information.  
 Knowledge dissemination should take into considerat ion the variation in literacy rates, 
where certain groups of women within the project ar ea, especially Terai-Dalits and 
Muslims, have literacy rates below the national ave rage. Thus, it is important to engage 
local resource persons and trainers with a strong u nderstanding of local communities 
and cultures, and ensuring trainings are available in local languages and in a variety of 
formats (i.e. not only written documents).  
 Ensure regular communication between CBOs and suppo rting entities (government, civil 
society) to ensure that continuous support and comm unication channels are 
maintained. Awareness raising and information disse mination on such practices should 
clearly communicate to women additional benefits to  adopting such activities (e.g. 
improved health, education, reduced time-poverty, w ater/energy/food security, among 
other factors). 
 Develop and coordinate partnerships and collaborati ve mechanisms amongst 
governments, civil society organizations, and priva te sector and donor partners to 
respond to GESI needs in the land use sector and cl imate change aspects, including 
knowledge sharing, trainings, implementation suppor t, etc. 
 
85.  Enable participatory processes and ensure flexibili ty to identify suitable activities 
 Implement activities that improve the food, water a nd energy security of communities, 
that are jeopardized under current business as usua l (BAU) practices in the context of 
unsustainable NRM and climate change.  
 Ensure the flexibility for CBOs and their members t o decide what activities they want to 
adopt: The project´s approach of promoting a ´menu´  of SNRM activities is a positive 
approach, which allows CBOs and their members to se lect the most suitable activities 
for their context (priorities, resources, time avai lability, etc.). Extension agents, 
informative materials and training modules should c ommunicate potential risks 
associated with technologies and practices, as well  as gender-implications. If a potential 
activity could exacerbate time-poverty it should be  clearly communicated, and 
discussed how this can be mitigated (creating clear  plans with responsibilities for various 
people in the household, pooling resources and resp onsibilities with other CBO 
members, etc.).  
 Provide targeted technical and financial support to  promote the adoption of measures 
to increase the resilience of local communities to climate change, and/or that will 
mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. The project shou ld especially promote time-saving


---
*Page 184*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  32  
 practices and technologies (related to GESI mainstr eaming in training modules, and 
training extension trainers on GESI). This should i nclude measures such as (see Appendix 
1 for more detailed information on the gender benef its, challenges and targeted 
measures): 
- Climate-resilient agriculture practices, such as re duced impact tillage, improved 
varieties, organic inputs, among other activities.1 21 Livestock activities 
including integrating fodder production in cropping  systems, agroforestry 
systems with fodder, and improved housing may allev iate time poverty, 
whereas other activities including intensive stall feeding could increase time 
poverty if clear roles and responsibilities of wome n and other household 
members are not discussed. It is thus important tha t extension agents are 
trained in GESI, and that GESI issues are mainstrea med into training materials 
and guidelines. In addition, to the greatest extent  possible, extension agents 
and project staff will look to pool resources, prom ote discussions on sharing 
responsibilities between men and women (using cultu rally appropriate 
approaches), and identify potential ways to promote  cooperation and collective 
action within CBOs to reduce time-poverty.  
- Promotion of biogas, which can reduce fuelwood coll ection by women and 
alleviate time poverty, in addition to other benefi ts (see Feasibility study for 
more detailed information)  
- Restoration and sustainable management of degraded natural forests, critical 
river systems and wetlands to avoid emissions to re store forest quality and 
improve the provision of key ecosystem services 
- Tree planting on private, public and community land s to reduce pressure on 
natural forests for fuelwood, timber and forage. If  activities such as free grazing 
will be limited, sustainable alternatives that are accessible to all beneficiaries 
should be established, based on a participatory and  inclusive decision making 
process.  
- On-farm planting of fodder, fuelwood and food-produ cing tree and grass 
species to reduce time spent by women in off-farm f odder collection. 
 
86.  Safeguard the rights of vulnerable and excluded gro ups 
 Ensure that vulnerable and excluded groups are not ´taken advantage of´. Participation 
in the project is voluntary and based on the princi ples of free, prior and informed 
consent (the project´s ESMF provides a detailed des cription of the FPIC process). It is 
further recommended to: 
- Clearly communicate the rights of beneficiaries thr oughout project implementation 
- Hire project gender and safeguard specialists to ov ersee project monitoring and 
address related issues/ concerns and complaints 
                                                             
121 For a full-list of activities please refer to t he feasibility study and project funding proposal. Co mpared to the 
baseline scenario in Nepal, many conservation agricu lture practices can be time saving and provide addi tional benefits 
to women, such as increased productivity, diversifi ed income streams, improved soil fertility and reduc ed erosion, 
among others. E.g. FAO 2015


---
*Page 185*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  33  
 - Designate local resource persons within communities , including men and women 
from different socio-cultural backgrounds to suppor t information dissemination and 
improve communication 
- Support leadership training and capacity developing , whilst ensuring the 
participation of women, including indigenous and Da lit women, landless women, 
poor women, among others. 
- Conduct GESI training for all project staff and par tners. 
- Where necessary, ensure information is disseminated  using local languages and 
culturally appropriate formats 
- Utilize a gender-responsive M&E framework to suppor t active management, regular 
monitoring and improved learning (including gender disaggregated data) 
 Ensure the gender redress mechanism is known, acces sed and trusted by women, 
including indigenous and Dalit women, as well as wo men from other excluded or 
marginalized groups. The project´s grievance redres s mechanism has been designed to 
ensure that no individual or group are financially impacted by making a grievance or a 
complaint (see the project´s ESMF for a more detail ed description of the grievance 
redress mechanism). 
 Communicate and distribute Information regarding th e project´s grievance mechanism 
to all stakeholders via : 
- The inception workshops for the BRCRN project at th e national and provincial levels 
- FPIC meetings 
- Information sessions and community meetings, includ ing the provision of 
information both orally and through hard copies 
- Brochures regarding the projects grievance redress mechanism (produced in Nepali 
and local languages) will also be distributed to di verse stakeholders, including local 
and provincial CSOs (including FEDO, NEFIN and NIWF , as well as other organizations 
representing Dalit people, indigenous people, and o ther stakeholders).  
- FAO Nepal Webpage, and 
- Included as part of any other communication materia l that is designed and 
distributed during project implementation.  
 
87.  Develop a Gender-Responsive and Socially Inclusive Monitoring and Evaluation System 
 Design a gender-responsive M&E system to monitor th e impacts from the project on 
women, and to support the achievement and monitorin g of gender-specific targets. 
Include the collection of gender disaggregated data , including quantitative and 
qualitative data. 
 Develop a gender action plan, based on stakeholder input, to help overcome gender-
barriers, empower women and to strengthen the adapt ive capacity of men and women. 
The GAP should include detailed indicators to monit or the implementation of gender-
related measures within the BRCRN project, which wi ll be integrated into the project´s 
M&E. 
 Within the PMSU, the project´s gender and safeguard s specialists will be responsible for 
overseeing the implementation of the Gender Action Plan, ensuring regular monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting. The gender officer from M oFE will serve as the gender focal


---
*Page 186*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  34  
 point within the Project Steering Committee, and wi ll provide support as needed for the 
implementation of the GAP. They will maintain close  communication with the 
monitoring and reporting specialist and the nationa l project director. 
 A baseline to support the monitoring and evaluation  of the proposed project will be 
established, which will be designed in a gender-res ponsive manner, ensuring that 
gender-specific and disaggregated statistics are in cluded within the M&E framework.


---
*Page 187*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  35  
 2 GENDER ACTION PLAN (GAP) 
88.  This Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been elaborated t o mainstream gender-related measures 
into the BRCRN, ensuring that gender-related risks are avoided or mitigated, and to maximize 
climate and development co-benefits. It pays specia l attention to women, considering that 
women are not a homogenous group, and the additiona l challenges that women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste and other mar ginalized groups may face. It further has 
identified gender-performance indicators and sex-di saggregated targets to be integrated 
into the project´s gender-responsive results framew ork. 
89.  This GAP is informed by the Gender Assessment condu cted for the BRCRN project, available 
literature on gender-assessments of related project s and activities in the Churia region of 
Nepal, interviews with key experts and stakeholders  working on gender empowerment in the 
Churia region of Nepal, and stakeholder consultatio ns with local communities, community-
based organizations and local women’s groups in the  proposed project area. In addition, a 
gender workshop was held in Kathmandu on February 2 1, 2018 to discuss and validate the 
results of the gender assessment and GAP. Feedback from this workshop and from other 
stakeholder consultations has been integrated into this document. Meeting minutes and 
attendance sheets for the consultations are availab le in Annex 3 of the project´s ESMF.


---
*Page 188*
---

Gender Action Plan BRCRN  36  
 Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal ´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity GAP Activity Indicator Targets Year 1 Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Year 7  Responsibility   
 Project component 1 – Scaling up climate-resilient su stainable natural resources management (SNRM) 
 Expected contribution of gender activities to result s under the component: Component 1 focuses on implementing and scaling up of climate-resilient SNRM practices to increase the  resilience of ecosystems and local households with in 26 climate vulnerable river 
systems. Gender activities under this component wil l ensure that (i) women from diverse social-cultura l background (including indigenous women’s groups a nd Dalit women’s groups, among others) duly partici pate in the Project activities (trainings, Farmer F ileld 
Schools,  implementation of climate resilient SNRM practices) benefit from them; and (ii) the climate- resilient SNRM practices (sustainable land use, cli mate resilient agriculture, restoration and sustain able management of forests, watersheds and wetlands , etc.) 
are gender inclusive and gender sensitive, ensuring  women’s role, capacity and leadership; improving t heir access and right (to information, to land) and  that the practices take due consideration of speci fic challenges women face in the Churia region such  as  time 
poverty and domestic violence. As the ultimate aim of Component 1 is to increase resilience of local h ouseholds, increasing resilience of women is critic al and the Project tackles this through women’s par ticipation, capacity and leadership to build their own 
resilience, resilience of their family and communit y.
 
 
PMC Ensure training and engagement of women in adopting climate-resilient land use practices. Time and locate trainings taking into account women’s work schedules and accessibility to ensure maximum participation and outreach, coordinate with local women’s organizations to build on existing networks and best practices for outreach Percentage of women extension  staff and women beneficiaries participate in training and are able to access extension services  At least 50% of beneficiaries are women*  At least 50 % extension staff are women* 
                           
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 87,312  87,312  
1.1.1-1.13 Women adopt and benefit from climate-resilient agricultural practices. Number of CBOs and CBO Beneficiaries adopt climate-resilient agricultural practices At least 250 CBOs  50% of beneficiaries are women* 
                            PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 1,463,760  2,927,520  
1.2.1-1.2.2 Women adopt and benefit from restoration and sustainable management of degraded natural forests, critical watersheds and wetlands to avoid emissions, enhance sequestration and improve other ecosystem services (incl. biodiversity conservation). Areas of land (ha),  and number of CBOs  with restoration activities implemented  206,227 ha  at least 750 CBOs   at least 50% of beneficiaries will be women* 
                            
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 2,143,804  4,287,608  
1.3.2 Women benefit from tree planting on private and public lands to release pressure on natural forests for fuelwood, timber and forage Number of forests owned by women registered by local government  Percentage of public forests registered by women user groups* At least 50 private forests owned by women registered  At least 100 public land forests registered, of which 50% are established 
                            
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 5,608  11,215,633


---
*Page 189*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  37  
 Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal ´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity GAP Activity Indicator Targets Year 1 Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Year 7  Responsibility   
 Areas (ha) plantation forests established and percentage of beneficiaries are women* by women user groups*  24,958 ha of plantation forests established, where at least 50% of beneficiaries are women*  
 
Project Component 2 – Strengthening institutions and  planning for climate-resilient SNRM 
 Expected contrition of gender activities to results under the component:  Component 2 is designed as a precursor for the inve stments in Component 1, and will support the necess ary planning for interventions within each of the 2 6 targeted river systems while 
equipping government officials and CBO members with  the capacities to understand and apply climate-res ilient land use. Gender activities will ensure that  capacity (in the form of assigned gender focal poi nt) exists within the institutional structure to ma instream 
gender in the planning process, development of stra tegies and action plans and  in awareness raising a nd building capacity on climate-resilient SNRM and agriculture at all level, from federal to CBOs and for multi-stakeholders. Ultimately, the Project wil l raise 
awareness on gender related drivers of climate vuln erability and risk and build capacities to integrat e this knowledge in strategies and plans for climat e change adaptation and mitigation including throug h partipcation of the women’s organizations.  
PMC Gender focal points assigned in multi-stakeholder project coordination entities Number of coordination entities with assigned Gender Focal Point      Gender Focal Point assigned at least in PSC and PCU 
                            National 
Project 
Director (NPD) 
in coordination 
with gender 
focal point 
from Ministry 
of Forests and 
Environment 
(MoFE) and 
federal and 
PPMU 
safeguard 
officers 1,070  21,400  
PMC Invitation of CSOs representing women (including indigenous women’s groups and Dalit women’s groups, among others) to participate on PCUs Number of  women´s groups participate in provincial PCU*  At least one women´s group participates in each provincial PCU*
                             
PMU Gender 
and Safeguard 
Officer 1,070  23,112  
2.1.2 Engagement of women and women’s organizations in identifying vulnerable areas, critical ecosystems and integration of women's issues in sub-river system level SNRM planning; Number of multi-stakeholder workshops on GESI topics   Number of women’s organizations attend the workshops At least 26 multi-stakeholder workshops  At least one women’s organization participate in each workshop 
                             
PMU Gender 
and Safeguard 
Officer 21,347  408,633  
2.1.2 Identification of female beneficiaries who are Number of female beneficiaries  
                            PMU Gender 
and Safeguard 21,347  408,633


---
*Page 190*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  38  
 Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal ´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity GAP Activity Indicator Targets Year 1 Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Year 7  Responsibility   
working with existing SNRM projects and / or those who are interested in introducing SNRM and DRR practices as ´ champions ´ 
 identified as champions for SNRM Female beneficiaries as champions for SNRM identified for activity 2.2 and  Outputs 1 and 3 (exact number will be determined upon identification of Project beneficiaries) 
 Officer with 
support from 
representatives 
from women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
2.1.2 Provincial climate-resilient land use planning strategies and river-system level action plans include a sub-section on gender Gender included in the climate-resilient land use planning strategies and river-system level action plans 3 provincial strategies and 26 action plans include sub-section on gender 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 5,500  54,998  
2.2.2 Strengthen outreach to women, including women from indigenous nationalities and marginalized groups.  Number of Project trainings targeted for women* 10 trainings on leadership, rights, climate risks and climate-resilient land use planning targeted for women 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 6,420  374,500  
2.2.2 Mainstreaming adaptation and mitigation measures at the community level, with a focus on forests, water and land management  practices/ operation guidelines through active participation of women, indigenous peoples and marginalized groups; Level of participation of women, indigenous peoples and marginalized groups in Project training on adaptation and mitigation measures  At least 50% of participants of trainings for 750 community based management organization are women* 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 187,250  374,500  
Project Component 3 – Improving knowledge, awaress and  local capacity for climate-resilient SNRM 
 Expected contribution from gender activities to resu lts under the component: Component 3 aims to establish a systematic knowledg e and information sharing and monitoring mechanism concerning climate-resilient SNRM: The Churia Knowl edge Centre (CKC). 
CKC will serve as a comprehensive resource includin g a database of natural resources – including soil,  water, ecosystems and forests – to support informe d policy-/decision-making and planning, and knowled ge-sharing mechanisms. The CKC will play a crucial role 
in enabling local stakeholders to continue deliveri ng (and even scale up) climate-informed extension s ervices to farmers and other land users after proje ct closure, and in areas in Provinces 1, 2 and 3 th at are beyond the Project Area. Within this aim, ge nder 
activities will ensure the respect to and documenta tion of local knowledge, including from women from indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other ma rginalized groups, the engagement of women groups a nd women networks in knowledge consolidation and 
dissemination and monitoring and evaluation as well  as the inclusion of gender-specific initiatives. C apacity building to ensure the appropriate number o f local women trainers and resource perrsons will b e vital for sustainaing the gender sensitive approa ch in 
climate-resilient SNRM in Churia.  
 
3.1.1 Respect and document local knowledge from women, including women from indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups  Number of women’s organizations invited to Project workshops Women organizations invited to at least 6 provincial consultation workshops and validation workshops 
                            
PMU M&R 
specialist 4,815  142,711


---
*Page 191*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  39  
 Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal ´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity GAP Activity Indicator Targets Year 1 Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Year 7  Responsibility   
3.1.1 Respect and document local knowledge from women, including women from indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups  Percentage of women participants including women from indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste and other marginalized groups in Project consultations At least 50% of 
people consulted in 
Project 78 
community 
consultations (~3 per 
river system) should 
be women* 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 69,550  142,711  
3.1.2 User group associations as well as women’s groups, indigenous peoples, Dalits, marginalized minority organizations engaged in info documentation, and dissemination (networks). Women’s networks support awareness raising campaigns to engage women. Number of broadcasts regarding Churia Conservation related news and views, with engagement/support of women’s groups and women’s networks 125 broadcasts including broadcasts in local languages disseminated 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 346,145  346,145  
3.2.2 Trainers trained on GESI within the context of the BRCRN project, and measures to improve the engagement of women, indigenous peoples and marginalized groups in knowledge consolidation, dissemination and extension.  Trainings on GESI include measures to improve the engagement of women indigenous peoples and marginalized groups   Availability of translation services for trainings or consultations in local languages.   At least 80% of Project trainings on GESI  100% local (CBOs and CBO Beneficiaries) trainings and consultations are in local languages.  
                            
PMU M&R 
specialist 22,727  227,268  
3.1.2 Support establishment of 
130 eco-clubs, with 
participation from boys and girls to become engaged on topics related to climate change and climate-resilient land use Number of eco-clubs established and percentage of girls participation 130 eco-clubs 
established, with 
50% girls 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 80,250  160,500  
3.2.2 Trainers should include people from diverse socio-cultural backgrounds, and translation services should be available for trainings or consultations in local languages.  Number of trainers as women and from diverse socio-cultural background  At least 50% of trainers should be women* 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 113,634  227,268  
3.2.1 Training modules and guidelines for extension Number of training modules include sub-10 training modules 
                             PMU M&R 
specialist 20,330  95,765


---
*Page 192*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  40  
 Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal ´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity GAP Activity Indicator Targets Year 1 Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Year 7  Responsibility   
and technical assistance to be designed taking into account GESI. Extension modules each include a section on i) gender and ii) social inclusion sections on i) gender and ii) social inclusion 
3.1.2 Exposure visits for trainers and government staff include participation of women Number of women in visits for trainers and government staff 50% of beneficiaries 
should be women* 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 7,244  14,488  
3.2.3 Engagement of women in the design and operation of the Churia Knowledge Center  Number of  Women’s organizations invited to workshops on the CKC Women organizations participate in at least 3 CKC workshops 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 10,700  88,275  
3.2.3 Engage women in monitoring and knowledge management activities Percentage of women engaged in the monitoring of environmental and social characteristics in the BRCRN project area At least 50% of resource persons trained are women* 
                            
PMU M&R 
specialist 8,828  88,275  
3.2.3 Integrate information on GESI into CKC knowledge, and communicate gender-related issues linked to climate change and unsustainable natural resource management Availability of GESI materials GESI portal established within online CKC, and GESI materials available in regional hubs 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 8,828  88,275  
3.2.3 Engage youth, boys and girls, in learning opportunities related to climate change, SNRM, and DRR through the Churia Knowledge Center Number of eco-clubs in schools receiving learning opportunities and percentage of girls participation CKC presented to 
130  eco-clubs in 
schools, with 50% participation of girls in clubs                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 16,050  160,500  
3.1.2 Raise awareness of women in vulnerable communities about climate-induced disasters and risks and the link with unsustainable NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR measures Number of awareness raising events for community women    At least one awareness raising event specifically targeting community women in each of the 26 vulnerable river systems 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 175,266  175,266  
2.1.3 Engage women including indigenous peoples and marginalized groups in the development of provincial DRR plans.  Number of workshops for provincial DRR plans with women’s 3 consultation workshops and 3 validation workshops 
                             CSOs to 
support 
participation of 
women in 
consultation 10,700  175,266


---
*Page 193*
---

 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN  41  
 Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´ Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal ´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity GAP Activity Indicator Targets Year 1 Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Year 7  Responsibility   
organizations invited/participated workshops 
(awareness 
raising). 
2.1.3 Integrate women´s, including, indigenous peoples and marginalized minority groups, priorities´ into disaster risk management plans and guideline development through consultations with women in local-community based organizations, and through engaging with local networks Gender included in the Provincial DRR plans   Provincial DRR plan (03) includes a section on i) gender and on ii) social inclusion 
                             
PMU M&R 
specialist 7,565  75,649  
*promoting proportional representation of highly vu lnerable groups including indigenous women (31%) an d Dalits (13%)


---
*Page 194*
---

 REFERENCE LIST 
ADB, Asian Development Bank. 1999. Country Briefing  Paper: Women in Nepal.  
ADB. 2014. Real-Time Evaluation of ADS’s Initiative s to Support Access to Climate Finance. 
Linked Document 4c: ADB Support for Climate change Adaptation and Mitigation in Nepal. 
Thematic Evaluation Study, Manila, Philippines.  
Adhikary, M. 2017. Country Gender Assessment, Agric ulture and Rural Development in Nepal. 
FAO Report [unpublished], Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Archarya, D., Bell, J., Simkhada, P., Teiljingen, E ., Regmi, P. 2010. Women’s autonomy in 
household decision-making: a demographic study in N epal. Reproductive Health. 7:15. 
CARE. 2008. Empowering women in the Churia to impro ve their livelihoods: SHAKTI. 1 st  Interim 
Report, CARE Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
CARE. 2012. Women Empowerment for Transformation in  the Churia Area SAKCHAM II (2010-
2012). Final Evaluation Report, Kathmandu, Nepal. 
CBS. 2012. Population Monograph of Nepal. Kathmandu , Nepal. 
CBS. 2014. Population Monograph of Nepal. Vol. II ( Social Demography). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Chhetri, R. B. 2004. Relationship between Income Ge nerating Activities: Conservation of Forest 
Resources: A Study in the Churia Forest Development  Project Area. A Report submitted to 
Churia Forest Devlopment Project, Kathmandu. 
Demetriades J. and Esplen E. 2010. Gender Dimension  of Poverty and Climate change 
Adaptation. In R. Mearns and A. Norton (Eds), Socia l Dimension of Climate Change: Equity 
and Vulnerability in a Warming World: World Bank, W ashington DC 
Devkota, D., Rauniyar, G.P., Parker, W. J. 1999. Th e role of gender and ethnicity in household 
decision-making Evidence from rural Nepal. Annual Conference of the Australian Agricultural 
and Resource Economics Society. Christchurch, New Zealand.  
DFRS/FRA. 2015. State of Nepal's Forests. Forest Re source Assessment (FRA) Nepal, Department 
of Forest Research and Survey (DFRS). Kathmandu, Ne pal. 
FAO and RECOFT. 2015. Understanding Women´s Partici pation in Forestry in Nepal. Policy Brief. 
Bangkok, Thailand.  
FAO. 2015. Running out of time, the reduction of wo men´s work burden in agricultural 
procution. Rome, Italy.  
IFAD and FAO. 2015. Regenerating Forests and Liveli hoods in Nepal. Rome, Italy. 
GESI Working Group. 2017. A Common Framework for Ge nder Equality and Social Inclusion. 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Working Group,  International Development Partners 
Group, Nepal.  
Gurung, O., Tamang, M.S. 2014. Poverty and Exclusio n in Nepal. Central Department of Sociology 
and Antrhopology. Tribhuwan University, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Cresc ent Societies. 2015. Unseen, unheard: 
Gender-based violence in disasters. Retrieved from:  
https://www.ifrc.org/Global/Documents/Secretariat/2 01511/1297700_GBV_in_Disasters_E 
N_LR2.pdf


---
*Page 195*
---

 
 ILO, International Labour Organization. 2017. Nepal  Labour Market Update. ILO Country Office 
for Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Leone, M. 2013. Women as Decision Makers in Communi ty Forest Management: Evidence from 
Nepal. Retrieved from: https://www.uab.cat/Document /658/267/Leone_JMP.pdf  
Karn, P.K. 2007. A Study Report on Economic Valuati on of the Churia Region. Published by IUCN.  
Kühhas, B., Silawal-Giri, B., Barton, T. 2016. SAKC HAM and Women Empowerment in Nepal: 
Stories and strategies – lessons and guidelines. CA RE Nepal and CARE Austria.  
Lama, A.S., Kharel, S., Ghale, T. 2017. When the me n are away: Migration and women´s 
participation in Nepal´s community forestry. Mounta in Research and Development, 37(3): 
263-270 
Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Government. 2 017. Local Government Operational Act, 
2017 . Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoE, Ministry of Environment. 2010. Climate Change Vulnerability Mapping for Nepal. Ministry 
of Environment. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoF, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey – F iscal Year 2011/12. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoF. 2016. Economic Survey—Fiscal Year 2015/16. Kat hmandu, Nepal. 
Paudel N S. 2013. Integrating climate change adapta tion with local development: Exploring 
Institutional options. Journal of Forest and Livelihood , 11(1): 1-13 
PCTMCDB, President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation  Development Board. 2017. President 
Chure- Satyal Pravat, P., Humphreys, D. 2013. Using  a multilevel approach to analyse the case 
of forest conflicts in the Terai, Nepal. Forest Pol icy and Economics, 33: 47-55. 
President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Developm ent Board. 2017. President Chure-Tarai 
Madhesh Conservation and Management Master Plan. Ka thmandu, Nepal 
Rai, S.K., Ono, K., Yanagida, J.I., Ishiyama-Imura,  S., Kurokawa, M., Rai, C.K. 2012. A large-scale 
study of bacterial contamination of drinking water and its public health impact in Nepal. 
Nepal Med. Coll. J., 14(13): 234-240. 
Regmi, U., Bhusal, P., Bhandari, K., Karki, J., Pau del, N.S. 2015. Landlessness and Forest 
Management: What can Community Forestry Offer? Fore st Action, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Shrestha, S.K. 2015. Chura Forest Management. MA Di ssertation, Tribhuwan University, Nepal.  
Singh Danuwar, B.K. 2008. Inclusion/ Exclusion of R iver-Affected People in Conservation and 
Management of Watershed and Natural Resources in Ch uria Hills. Kathmandu, Nepal.  
UN SDG Website. 2017. Progress of Goal 5 in 2017. R etrieved from: 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg5  
UN Women. 2016. Progress of Women in Nepal (1995-20 15). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
UNDP. 2013. Overview of linkages between gender and  climate change. Retrieved from: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/gende r/Gender%20and%20Environment 
/TM1_AsiaPacific_Capacity.pdf 
UNDP, United Nations Development Programme. 2014. N epal Human Development Report 
2014: Beyond Geography: Unlocking Human Potential. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
UNDP. 2016. Human Development Report 2016. New York , USA.


---
*Page 196*
---

 
 UNDP. N.d. Gender empowerment Measure Website. Gove rnance Assessment Portal. Retrieved 
from: http://www.gaportal.org/global-indicators/gen der-empowerment-measure 
United Nations Office of the Resident Coordinator N epal. 2017. Nepal: Flood 2017. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
USAID. 2016. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessmen t Report: Developing a Demonstration Site 
in Nepal on Community Forestry, Gender and Climate Change Adaptation. Kathmandu, Nepal 
WHO. 2005. Violence and Disasters. Retrieved from: 
https://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/publ ications/violence/violence_disasters. 
pdf  
Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natu ral Resource Management. 2017. Gender 
Integration in REDD+ and the ERPD in Nepal: Assessm ent Report and Gender Action Plan. 
Report for the FCPF, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
World Bank and FAO. 2018. Male outmigration and wom en´s work empowerment in agriculture. 
The case of Nepal and Senegal. Retrieved from: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/653481530 195848293/pdf/Male-
outmigration-and-womens-work-and-empowerment-in-agr iculture-the-case-of-Nepal-and-
Senegal.pdf   
World Bank, 2012. Climate Risk and Adaptation Count ry Profile: Vulnerability, Risk Reduction, 
and Adaptation to Climate Change Nepal.  
World Bank. 2016. World Bank Data 2016. Retrieved f rom: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL.FE .IN?locations=NP


---
*Page 197*
---

 
 APPENDICES 
Appendix 1: Gender challenges and benefits of speci fic project investments 
In the project region, women are highly engaged in land use activities, as described in the 
previous chapters. The feasibility study provides a  detailed description of the different activities 
within Component 1 (Annex 2), including the detaile d actions, and benefits associated with each 
of the measures.   
 
The following paragraphs summarize the gender benef its and challenges, as well as the project´s 
targeted measures associated with the main investme nts: 
 
Farmer Field Schools 
Current situation: Women are less likely to partici pate in FFS than men. 
 
Expected situation: Women participate in FFS and bu ild their capacities on climate-resilient 
SNRM. 
 
Gender-benefits:  
1.  Strengthened capacities and awareness for implement ing climate-resilient SNRM 
2.  Improved access to information  (production informa tion, marketing information) 
3.  Empowerment of women 
4.  Engagement of women in higher earning livelihood ac tivities 
5.  Improved mainstreaming of gender-issues in extensio n and effective targeting of 
women in extension. 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
1.  Lack of extension services tailored to women (criti cal due to the feminization of 
agriculture) – lack of access, lack of female exten sion workers 
2.  Women are often less educated than men (lack of com plementary knowledge) 
3.  Extension services have insufficient budget to main tain a field presence, and women are 
often unable to travel long distances to access suc h services 
4.  Women´s productive work is not targeted by extensio n services 
5.  Time poverty 
 
How the project addresses this: 
1.  Awareness raising for extension services, targeting  women 
2.  Mainstreaming GESI in all trainings 
3.  Hiring and training of female extension agents, inc luding Dalit women, indigenous 
women, among others 
4.  Training all extension workers on GESI, and key iss ues related to many women (e.g. time 
poverty)


---
*Page 198*
---

 
 5.  Supporting extension services to extend their reach  (need for capacity building) 
6.  Designating local resource people (men and women) t o encourage women´s 
engagement in climate-resilient SNRM and FFS 
7.  Taking into account suitable times and locations fo r trainings, taking into account 
women’s work schedules and accessibility to ensure maximum participation and 
outreach, coordinate with local women’s organizatio ns to build on existing networks 
and best practices for outreach 
8.  Respecting and documenting local knowledge from wom en, including women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other ma rginalized groups 
 
Climate-resilient agricultural Practices 
Current situation: Men and women do not adopt clima te-resilient agricultural practices. 
Feminization trends in the agricultural sector incr ease time poverty for women and has resulted 
in the abandonment of some areas where there was in sufficient labor.  
 
Expected situation: Men and women adopt climate-res ilient agricultural practices, with multiple 
social, environmental and economic benefits. 
 
Gender-benefits:  
9.  Strengthened capacities and awareness for implement ing climate-resilient SNRM 
10.  Improved access to information  (production informa tion, marketing information) 
11.  Empowerment of women, engagement of women in higher  earning activities 
12.  Improved resilience of ecosystems and local people to climate change (see Feasibility 
study) 
13.  Increased productivity, livelihood diversification (e.g. agroforestry), economic benefits 
14.  Improved supply of different products (fuelwood, fr uit, NTFPs, etc.), which can 
substitute supplies that are over-used, degraded or  critical habitat (e.g. agroforestry). 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
1.  Challenges associated with FFS (see above) 
2.  Lack of awareness of climate-resilient farming best  practices (including time-saving 
practices and activities) 
3.  Physical challenges (with heavy lifting, use of too ls) 
4.  Inability to invest in inputs (seeds, materials) 
5.  Lack of awareness of marketing/ value adding opport unities 
6.  Lack of land (landless households) 
7.  Commercialization activities often overseen by men (esp. cattle, cash crops) 
8.  Time poverty could be exacerbated by some activitie s, especially if roles are not clearly 
divided between men and women 
 
How the project addresses this:


---
*Page 199*
---

 
 9.  Developing CBO management plans in a participatory manner for shared community 
resources, ensuring the active engagement of women 
10.  Promoting membership in CBOs to improve the managem ent of shared resources (e.g. 
forests), with additional benefits (incl. time-savi ng benefits, e.g. reduced time spent by 
women and girls to collect natural resources (e.g. fuelwood, fodder, NTFPs, ) 
11.  Improving accessibility and targeting of extension for women (see above) 
12.  Promoting climate-resilient SNRM (reduced tillage, etc.), with a focus on time-saving 
practices and activities.  
13.  Providing a flexible ´menu´ of climate resilient SN RM options, allowing the selection of 
practices that are suitable for the local context –  supported by extension agents trained on 
GESI and best practices for climate-resilient SNRM 
14.  Promoting smart investments in suitable equipment ( e.g. hand tools), practices and activities 
that can benefit CBO users 
15.  Establishing public land forest user groups that im prove access to. and use of land for highly 
vulnerable and marginalized households 
16.  Implementing gender sensitization training for men and women in CBOs, including 
information on time poverty (sharing roles and resp onsibilities) 
17.  Mainstreaming GESIin all training modules and FFS, all project staff and partners trained on 
GESI 
18.  Designating local resource people (men and women) t o encourage women´s engagement in 
climate-resilient SNRM and FFS 
19.  Ensuring that the time and location of trainings co nsider women’s work schedules and 
accessibility to ensure maximum participation and o utreach, coordinate with local women’s 
organizations to build on existing networks and bes t practices for outreach 
20.  Respecting and documenting local knowledge from wom en, including women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other ma rginalized groups 
21.  Raising awareness on climate-induced disasters and risks and the link with unsustainable 
NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR measures 
 
Restoration, maintenance and sustainable management  of natural forest ecosystems 
Current situation: Deforestation and forest degrada tion is accelerating in natural forest 
ecosystems.  
 
Expected situation: Forest ecosystems are better ma intained and protected resulting in reduced 
emissions from degradation and deforestation and in creased resilience to climate change. 
Women adopt and benefit from restoration and sustai nable management of degraded natural 
forests, critical watersheds and wetlands to avoid emissions, enhance sequestration and 
improve other ecosystem services (incl. biodiversit y conservation). 
 
Gender-benefits:  
22.  Strengthened capacities and awareness for implement ing climate-resilient SNRM 
23.  Improved access to information  (production informa tion, marketing information)


---
*Page 200*
---

 
 24.  Empowerment of women 
25.  Engagement of women in higher earning activities 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
26.  Challenges associated with FFS (see above) 
27.  Lack of awareness of climate change and lack of inf ormation on alternative land use 
systems: Lack of alternative sources of forest prod ucts, lack of alternative livestock 
systems 
28.  Inability to invest in inputs (seeds, materials, fe ncing) 
29.  Lack of land (landless households) 
30.  Insufficient tree nurseries to support restoration needs (in highly degraded areas) 
31.  Time poverty 
 
How the project addresses this: 
32.  Developing CBO management plans in a participatory manner for shared community 
resources, ensuring the active engagement of women 
33.  Promoting membership in CBOs to improve the managem ent of shared resources (e.g. 
forests), with additional benefits (incl. time-savi ng benefits, e.g. reduced time spent by 
women and girls to collect natural resources (e.g. fuelwood, fodder, NTFPs, ) 
34.  Promoting climate-resilient SNRM (reduced tillage, etc.), with a focus on time-saving 
practices and activities.  
35.  Providing a flexible ´menu´ of climate resilient SN RM options, allowing the selection of 
practices that are suitable for the local context –  supported by extension agents trained on 
GESI and best practices for climate-resilient SNRM 
36.  Improving accessibility and targeting of extension for women (see above) 
37.  Promoting smart investments in suitable equipment ( e.g. hand tools), practices and activities 
that can benefit CBO users 
38.  Establishing public land forest user groups that im prove access to. and use of land for highly 
vulnerable and marginalized households 
39.  Implementing gender sensitization training for men and women in CBOs, including 
information on time poverty (sharing roles and resp onsibilities) 
40.  Mainstreaming GESI in all training modules and FFS,  all project staff and partners trained on 
GESI 
41.  Designating local resource people (men and women) t o encourage women´s engagement in 
climate-resilient SNRM and FFS 
42.  Ensuring that the time and location of trainings co nsider women’s work schedules and 
accessibility to ensure maximum participation and o utreach, coordinate with local women’s 
organizations to build on existing networks and bes t practices for outreach 
43.  Respecting and documenting local knowledge from wom en, including women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other ma rginalized groups


---
*Page 201*
---

 
 44.  Raising awareness on climate-induced disasters and risks and the link with unsustainable 
NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR measures 
 
 
Establishment and operation of multi-purpose tree n urseries  
Current situation: Insufficient nurseries (in terms  of production and quality) to support forest 
restoration, and other forest sector investments in  woodlots, agroforestry, horticulture  
 
Expected situation: Establishment and operation of multi-purpose tree nurseries. 
 
Gender-benefits:  
45.  Strengthened capacities, preparation of high qualit y seedlings 
46.  Improved seed quality, yields/ promoted qualities t hat can in turn support men and 
women to reduce the reliance on forests and/or supp ort forest restoration that in turn 
increases their resilience to climate change 
47.  Empowerment of women 
48.  Employment in nurseries 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
49.  Challenges associated with FFS (see above) 
50.  Time poverty 
 
How the project addresses this: 
51.  Hiring women in nurseries 
52.  Mainstreaming GESI in nursery guidelines and protoc ols 
53.  Ensuring gender-responsive monitoring and evaluatio n 
 
Investments in soil and water conservation 
Current situation: Many river systems, and the comm unities living within them, are vulnerable 
to climate-induced erosion, sedimentation and flood ing risks.  
 
Expected situation: Investments in soil and water c onservation enhance the resilience of 
ecosystems and local men and women to climate-induc ed erosion, sedimentation and flooding 
risks.  
 
Gender-benefits:  
54.  Strengthened capacities on climate-resilient land u se planning, ecosystem-based 
adaptation, and soil and water conservation 
55.  Increased resilience to climate-induced erosion, se dimentation and flooding risks, which 
in turn reduces damages, safeguards land/ infrastru cture, and even reduces the risk of 
GBV due to displacements/ damaged infrastructure as sociated with natural disasters 
and hazards


---
*Page 202*
---

G
ender-specific Challenges: 
56. Challenges associated with FFS (see above)
5
7. Time poverty
H
ow the project addresses this: 
58. Developing river system-level action plans to improv e coordination of upstream and
downstream investments through participatory processes that engage women, ensuring
GESI is mainstreamed in each action plan.
59. Engaging women and women’s organizations in identify ing vulnerable areas, critical
ecosystems and integration of women's issues in sub-river system level SNRM planning; CBO
management of shared resources (e.g. water conservation ponds, check dams, etc.) can
reduce the burden of maintenance, labor, etc.
60. Developing provincial disaster risk reduction plans,  ensuring GESI is mainstreamed
61. Applying participatory land use planning processes t o develop CBO management plans,
ensuring the engagement of women
62. Improving accessibility and targeting of extension f or women (see above)
63. Conducting gender sensitization trainings
6
4. Mainstreaming GESI in all training modules and FFS,
6
5. Training all project staff and partners on GESI
6
6. Designating local resource people (men and women) to  support communication, knowledge
dissemination and encourage women´s engagement in climate-resilient SNRM and FFS
67. Respect and document local knowledge from women, inc luding women from indigenous
nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups
68. Supporting awareness raising for women in vulnerable  communities about climate-induced
disasters and risks and the link with unsustainable NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR measures.
Engage women including indigenous peoples and marginalized groups in the development
of provincial DRR plan
____________