=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20180927160841+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 18.11.20063
/ModDate: D:20180927231308+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 18.11.20063
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  XXI 
Funding proposal package for FP0 99 
 GCF/B. 21/10/Add. 21/Rev.01  
27 September 2018  Meeting of the Board  
17– 20 October  201 8 
Manama, Bahrain  
Provisional Agenda Item  17 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following  three  parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Climate Investor One” submitted by 
Nederlandse Financierings -Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO)  
b) No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorities or focal points; and  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure ; 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Climate Investor One” 
submitted by Nederlandse Financierings -Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslan den N.V. 
(FMO) ; is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and 
Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged 
or commercially sensitive information of the entity.  
The funding prop osal package for FP0 99 is being submitted for the first time for the Board's 
consideration at its twenty -first meeting.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.21/10/Add.21/Rev.01  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                                                   1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorities or focal points                                             94 
Environmental and social re port(s) disclosure                                                                                                               108


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Project/Programme Title:  Climate Investor One  
Country/Region:  Burundi, Cameroon, Djibouti, Indonesia,  Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, 
Madagascar, Mongolia, Morocco,  Nigeria  
Accredited Entity: FMO  
Date of Submission:  13 February 2017 –  26 September  2018


---
*Page 4*
---

Contents
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
S
ection B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATIO N
S
ection C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
S
ection D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
S
ection E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
S
ection G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
S
ection H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
Section I AN NEXES
Note to accredited entities on the use of the  funding proposal template  
•Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents
such  as project appraisal document.
•The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
P
lease submit the completed form to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
P
lease use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[CIO ]-[FMO ]-[Date ]-[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

PR
OJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 93 A
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Climate Investor One  
A.1.2. Project or programme programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egionBurundi, Cameroon , Indone sia,  Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Madagascar, Mongolia, 
Djibouti, Morocco, Nigeria  
A.1.4. National designated
authority (ies)Burundi
Ministry of Finances and Development Planning  
Cameroon
Ministry of Environment, Protection of Nature a nd Sustainable Development 
(MINEPDED)  
Uganda
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
Kenya
The National Treasury  
Malawi
Environmental Affairs Department 
Mongolia
Ministry of Environment, Green Development and Tourism  
Madagascar
Ministry of Environment, Ecology, Sea and Forests 
Djibouti
Ministry of Housing, Urban Development and Environment 
Morocco
Ministry of Energy, Mining and Environment 
Nigeri a
Federal Ministry of Environment  
Indonesia
Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance  
A.1.5. Accredited entity Nederlandse Financierings -Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO)
A.1.5 .a. Access modality ☐Direct ☒International
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiaryExecuting Entity:  
1.COÖPERATIEF CLIMATE FUND MANAGERS U.A . , a cooperative with
excluded liability (coöperatie met uitgesloten aansprakelijkheid) incorporat ed
under
 the laws of the Netherlands having its registered offices at (2514 EM) ‘s -
Gravenhage, the Netherlands, Kneuterdijk 13.
CFM is the fund manager of the Stichting Development Fund and the Coöperatief  
Construction Equity Fund U.A, which together form Climate Investor One. It is an


---
*Page 6*
---

PRO
JECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 93 A
equal -joint venture between FMO and Sanlam InfraWorks with both parties 
holding a 50% equity interest in CFM.  
2. ST
ICHTING DEVELOPMENT FUND, a foundation (stichting) established under
the laws of the Netherlands having its registered offices at (2593 HW) 's -
Gravenhage, the Netherlands, Anna van Saksenlaan 71.
3. COÖP ERATIEF CONSTRUCTION EQUITY FUND U.A. , a cooperative with
excluded liability (coöperatie met uitgesloten aansprakelijkheid) incorporated
under the laws of the Netherlands having its registered offices at (2514 EM) ‘s -
Gravenhage, the Netherlands, Kneuterdijk 13.
The Development Fund and the Construction Equity Fund are referred to 
collectively as Climate Investor One (CIO) throughout this Funding Proposal.  
4. Nederlandse Financierings - Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden
N.V.(FMO)
FMO (the Accredited Entity) is The Netherlands Development Finance Company,
or Dutch development  bank , a bilateral private- sector international financial
institution founded in 1970  having its registered offices at (2593 HW) Anna van
Saksenlaan 71, Den Haag, the Netherlands. It is also an Executing Entity by virtueof being the sole board member of the Development Fund  and exercising certain
rights and obligations in respect of the GCF funding.
Ben
eficiaries:
Climate Investor One, which comprises of the Development Fund and the 
Construction Equity Fund, managed by Climate Fund Managers,  seeks to benefit 
the peoples of 11 countries: Burundi, Cameroon, Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, 
Madagascar, Mongolia, Djibouti, Morocco, Nigeria and Indonesia. In addition to  
these countries , significant and extensive engagements have been had with the 
NDA’s of Tanzania, Vietnam, Nepal , Mauritius  and the Philippines. We expect 
these efforts to result into additional NOLs post submission of this FP. All of 
countries that already submitted NOL’s are low -income or lower -middle income 
economies, with relatively low levels of electrification and existing renewable 
energy capacity.  
Aside from GCF funding, which alongside other donors will be invested in these 11 countries, CFM is a global asset mana
ger with a mandate to invest in 
developing countries in climate related themes. A more detailed description of 
CIO’s investment geography is provided in section A.2. A portion of CIO’s funding 
from investors other than GCF will be invested into other developing countries.  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total
investment, million USD)☐Micro (≤10)
☐Medium (50<x≤250)☐Small (10<x≤50)
☒Large (>250)
A.1.8 . Mitigation / adaptation f ocus ☒Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting
A.1.9. Date of submission 13 February 2017 - 26 September  2018 
A.1.1 0.
Project
contact
detailsContact person, 
position  Mr. Idsert Boersma – Director, Funds, Syndications & Value Creation, FMO  
Organization  FMO  
Email address  
Telephone number


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 93 
 
 
 A 
Mailing address  Nederlandse Financierings -Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V.  
Anna van Saksenlaan 71  
2593 HW The Hague | NL P.O. Box 93060  
The Netherlands  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, 
position  Mr. Georges Beukering,  
Director - Head Capital Raising  & Business Development  
Organization  Climate Fund Managers  
Email address   
Telephone number   
Mailing address  Coöperatief  Climate Fund Managers U.A.  
Kneuterdijk 13 
2514 EM The Hague  
+31 (0) 70 204 52 05  
2593 HW The Hague | NL P.O. Box 93060  
   
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high- speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
 
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –  diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐ 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in Section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in Section C. 
 
This section will cover the Executive Summary  and a more comprehensive overview of the CIO  facility , including (A) How 
it Works?  (B) Why CIO is an Important Initiative , and (C) CIO’s Composition & Structure.  
 
Executive Summary 
 
Climate Investor One (CIO) is a blended finance facility  managed by  Climate Fund Managers (CFM). CIO is  mandated 
with delivering renewable energy at affordable prices in developing markets through its financial contribution to the early -


---
*Page 8*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 4 OF 93 
 
 
 A 
stage development, construction, and ope rational phases of an underlying project company’s lifecycle. CIO is not a legal 
entity, but a facility  that describes two  funds which are separate legal entities.   
 
CIO comprises t wo separate but operationally inter-linked funds.  The first fund in the facility, the ‘CIO Development Fund’ 
(“DF”),  is mandated to provide development loans to fund the early stage development of a project lifecycle. The second 
fund, the ‘CIO Construction Equity Fund (“CEF”) , is mandated to finance the construction stage of a project ’s lifecycle 
with an all equity solution. The funds are structured with a 15- year investment period with a mechanism to recycle capital. 
Cashflows received by the fund, whether via repayment of development loans with premiums by the DF or exits once 
CEF’s project companies become operational will  be reinvested in additional projects over the course of  the 15-
investment period.  This recycling of capital mechanism enable s a greater number of projects to become operational, in a 
faster time and through the same commitment of capital by investors, resulting  in a greater global societal and 
environmental impact.  
 
In the future a third and final fund  will be  raised by CFM to complete the lifecycle financing of renewable energy project 
companies.  This fund, the ‘Refinancing Fund’ (“RF”) , will, once raised, provide debt to CEF project companies once they 
have a proven operational track record. At the moment the RF is not being raised and, as such, is not part of the scope 
of the present Funding Proposal or the requested financing from GCF . Fundraising for RF will commence once a sufficient 
number of projects have reached the constr uction phase.   
 
The Development  Fund and the Construction Equity Fund will be referred to as Climate Investor One (CIO) 
throughout this Funding Proposal at the exclusion on the Refinancing Fund.  
 
 
                                       Figure 1: Climate Investor One concept & structuring   
 
A. How CIO works  
 
The successfully developed , and therefore bankable , projects generated by the Development Fund (DF) act as proprietary 
deal flow (pipeline) for the Construction Equity Fund (CEF). The CEF pays the DF a premium to cover the cost of the 
development and then constructs the renewable energy project, through equity only financing. This process ensures that 
the DF remains evergreen with the ability to provide finance (in the form of development loans) to further projects. Once 
constructed and operational (with stable cashflows), the Refinancing Fund (RF) will provide debt (a partial refinancing) to 
the project company, which will release equity back to the CEF.  This process ensures that the CEF is replenished and 
retains the ability to finance further projects. Remaining equity and outstanding loans will be direct ed back to the CEF and 
RF, respectively,  upon sale of the asset.  The RF, once raised, will complete the lifecycle financing concept of CIO,


---
*Page 9*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 5 OF 93 
 
 
 A 
however the CEF and DF funds remain viable as standalone funds without the RF, as the operational project companies  
of the CEF will also be able to raise debt in from banks and development finance institutions, thereby releasing equity 
back to the CEF.    
 
B. The Importance of the CIO Initiative  
 
As an innovative whole- of-life financing solution, CIO is able to develop, construct and operate renewable energy projects 
in regions with significant power deficits, more expeditiously –  and at reduced cost – translating into more additional MWs. 
In addit ion, CIO provides a simpler, more cost -effective  solution for local (and international) developers. CIO will deliver 
significant environmental and societal impact in the countries , in which it invests  by building clean energy capacity, 
reaching thousands of people, creating and supporting jobs and avoiding GHG emissions. Furthermore, in some countries 
CIO will build the first IPPs and plants of the particular technology and so kickstarting the renewables market. Most of all,  
CIO will deliver and demonstrate a new way of financing renewable energy and infrastructure, more broadly, projects in 
developing countries using private sector commercial and institutional capital.  
 
Through the presence of highly additional donor capital in its structure, CIO is able t o offer to mainstream commercial 
investors, such as pension funds –  those generally reluctant to make these types of greenfield infrastructure investments 
- the opportunity to invest in CIO at a reduced  risk to gain much needed comfortability with developi ng markets and 
renewable energy investments.  
 
C. Climate Investor One Composition & Structure  
 
Development Fund   
 
Climate Investor One’s Development Fund is designed to finance the development stage of a project’s lifecycle. The DF 
seeks to find early stage project development opportunities whereby finance at this stage is scarce to come by or 
expensive when available due to the high- risk characteristics of developing renewable energy projects in its target 
markets. Not only does the DF enable readily available capital for a project developer, it also reduces the complexity of 
the development phase by being able to fund up to 50% of the development costs of a project, enabling the developer to 
focus less on capital raising and more on project development. This methodology is designed to reduced complexity and 
timelines throughout the development stage.  
 
Throughout the development stage, the CFM team along with 3rd party advisors will provide project development support 
/ assistance, including commercial assistance and financial modelling, legal assistance, structural assistance, 
implementation of international best practice environmental, social & governance standards, Know Your Customer 
(“KYC”) and anti -money laundering and counter -terrorist financing procedures with the objective to inform and influence 
the development process.  
 
It is estimated that a Construction Equity Fund of USD 775  million will require a Development Fund of USD 46.5 million. 
This figure is the conclusion of several factors. Firstly, CFM estimates a failure rate for  each dollar invested in projects in 
the development stage that will not be able to reach financial close and repay the development loan. Once a project is 
successfully developed and reaches financial close with the CEF, the investors in the project company (including CEF) 
will repay the development loan plus a premium  sized to compensate for the failure rate.  Secondly, even though capital 
lost from failed projects will be replenished by the premiums of successful projects, the size of the Development Fund 
should cover development loans to all 30 projects developed over the lifetime of CIO. This provides a buffer to guard 
against capital being locked into stalled or paused projects and enable the Fund to provide loans to attractive and impactful  
projects. For these reasons the size of the Development Fund has been set at USD 46.5 million to support approximately 
30 projects being constructed by the CEF over the lifetime of CIO.  
 
The goal of the development loan premium is to maintain the capital of the Development Fund meaning that the premium 
should compensate for failed projects . The premium is based on the estimated failure rate and may be adjusted over the 
investment period of the Development Fund if required .


---
*Page 10*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 6 OF 93 
 
 
 A 
Construction Equity Fund – Multiple Tranche Approach – Tier 1, Tier 2 & Tier 3  
 
Climate Investor One’s Construction Equity Fund is designed to finance and expedite the construction phase of a project’s 
lifecycle. CEF will provide up to 75% of construction costs in all -equity capital to projects developed with investments from 
the Development Fund.  The CEF is appropriately divided into three tranches so as to attract multiple investor classes.  
 
Tier 1  
The first tranche, Tier 1,  holds a junior equity position in the structure of the CE F, which absorbs a higher portion of risk 
throughout  the CEF –  acting as the principal enabler to attract commercial capital into the structure –  by providing a ‘first 
loss’ buffer to the CEF . All Tier 1  funding is routed through the Development Fund, which is the sole investor in the T ier 
1 tranche. Th e De velopment Fund is funded with donor capital in the form of reimbursable grants .  
 
Tier 2  
The second tranche, Tier 2, holds an ordinary equity position and targets commercial investors seeking commercial 
returns within the fund, at an acceptable risk profile. T ier 2 is supported by the first loss position of T ier 1 and affords a 
hurdle rate to investors on successful projects. This means that T ier 2 investors will receive their capital and the hurdle 
rate return after Tier 3 investors have been repaid their capital plus return. After Tier 1 investors receive the return of their 
capital  the Tier 2 investors receive the remaining returns .  
 
Tier 3  
The third tranche, Tier 3, ranks in a senior equity position and provides investors a guaranteed return on the back of an 
Export Credit Agency (ECA) guarantee. This tranche is designed for investors with no or minimal prior developing markets 
investment track record, who invest in CIO with a more risk averse position than investors in T ier 2. Tier 3 returns are 
supported by the first loss position of T ier 1, as well as the greater risk exposure of T ier 2.   
 
Dividing the CEF into three tranches enables an effect across the three tiers that de- risks the investment proposition for 
commercial investors in Tiers 2 &  3 while supporting their returns by utilising risk tolerant, highly additional donor capital 
in Tier 1. Without the provision of this type of donor capital, it is envisaged that the investment proposition would not be 
attractive enough to enable risk aver se, OECD -provided commercial capital at scale into such an early stage of a project’s 
lifecycle.  
 
Capital Recycling  
 
After the project is constructed an d reaches COD, it will be refinanced with debt to reduce the cost of capital and replenish 
CEF. There are no maximum refinancing limits, though CFM estimate that leverage will be between 50- 70% on a project 
by project basis , depending on project structures, size & technology.  At a certain point after refinancing CEF will exi t its 
equity stake in the project compan y and recover all outstanding capital. All capital recovered either via refinancing with 
debt or exiting the project will be reinvested into new projects  until the end of the investment period (15th anniversary of 
1st Close)  thus enabling the construction of more projects and the creati on of greater impact in the target countries. CFM 
estimates that with a size of USD 775 millio n, CEF capital will be recycled and reinvested by a factor of 3.37 over the 
lifetime of the Fund. Development Fund capital is also recycled via the repayment of development loans at financial close, 
as explained in the section above. CFM estimates that Development Fund capital will be recycled and reinvested by a 
factor of 3.8 over the lifetime of the fund.   
 
Refinancing will in part be provided by the Refinancing Fund, the third CIO fund to be raised in the short -term future. It is 
designed to ‘gear’ the project company with debt finance post construction, removing the need for complicated (and time 
exhausting) multi -party lending structures throughout the construction phase. The RF will comprise a combination of local 
and international lenders seeking to provide debt to well -structured and fully operating assets with stable cash- flows. CFM 
have received a letter of intere st from FMO stating a soft commitment for an investment of USD 25 million in CIO’s 
Refinancing Fund as well as an expression of interest from a large global insurance company investor. T his Fund is not 
part of the scope of the present Funding Proposal or the requested financing from GCF .


---
*Page 11*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 7 OF 93 
 
 
 A 
CIO Investment Strategy  
 
Climate Investor One targets  medium size renewable energy projects of between 25 MW –  75 MW. However, CIO may 
finance projects that are above ( as well as below ) the targeted size interval in order to fund e.g. a project ’s subsequent 
phase expansions or otherwise scale up CIO’s investments, which would be made possible by a GCF contribution.  
 
In order to achieve its investment objective to deliver clean energy at affordable prices across emerging markets , the 
strategy of Climate Investor One is to:  
• target Project Companies expected to have sustainable and relatively predictable cash flows, limited exposure to 
demand and pricing risk and limited dependence on the economic cycle;  
• target Project Companies which have the capacity to provide an appropriate risk adjusted return recognising that 
short -term yields on some investments may vary from the long- term target because of requirements for capital 
expenditure and resource availability;  
• acquire positions of significant influence in order to ensure, as far as possible, that Climate Investor One’s 
requirements are met during the development, construction and operational stages and for the durat ion of Climate 
Investor One’s investment period;  
• participate in the early development cycle of the Project Companies –  i.e. in the planning and development 
phases;  and 
• target Project Companies that can benefit from Climate Investor One’s expertise in areas  such as project 
development, environmental and social risk management, financial engineering and structuring.  
 
CFM screen partners for CIO based on (but not limited to) track record, financial resources, reputation & local 
connectedness, openness to CFM’s  ESG approach, as well as other factors. Projects are screened based on (but not 
limited to) commercial viability / return expectations, title to land, E&S  impacts , energy off -take, renewable resource 
quality & governmental support.    
 
CIO Investment Limits  
 
To ensure a diversified portfolio along geography and technology, in accordance with its investment strategy & restrictions  
(as further set out in section C.3)  CIO must abide by fund limits outlined below : 
 
Technology Scope:  
Climate Investor One (Development Fund and CEF) will diversify across renewable energy technologies, with a primary 
focus on wind, solar and run- of-river hydro the following proportions:  
• No less than 20% and no more than 45% of aggregate Fund capital1 into Project Companies using wind as an 
energy resource;  
• No less than 20% and no more than 45% of aggregate Fund capital into Project Companies using solar as an 
energy resource;  
• No less than 10% and no more than 40% of aggregate Fund capital into Project  Companies using run- of-river 
hydro as an energy resource; and,  
• Not more than 10% of aggregate Fund capital into Project Companies using other forms of renewable energy 
resources, including biomass and geothermal.  
 
Geographic Scope:  
Climate Investor One wi ll invest in a range of developing countries across Africa, Asia & Latin America achieving an 
optimal balance between risk, return and impact.   
 
Investments are targeted based on the following geographical distribution, to a maximum of:  
• 25% of aggregate Fund capital into one single country;  
• 40% of aggregate Fund capital into Africa;  
• 40% of aggregate Fund capital into South and South- East Asia;  
• 40% of aggregate Fund capital into Middle and South America;  
                                                             
1 Aggregate Fund Capital is total unlocked capital at any given point in time. Unlocked capital is all 
funding for which the tier proportions (20:40:40) hold.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 8 OF 93 
 
 
 A 
• 10% of aggregate Fund capital in other regions and;  
• No more than 30% of aggregate CEF capital in upper -middle -income countries across the above geographies.  
 
These limits apply to CIO each time the DF and / or the CEF is fully committed, and is reported on regularly to the Fund 
IC’s of which the GCF will ha ve the right to appoint a member to.  
 
D. CIO’s Programme for the Green Climate Fund  
 
With a GCF participation of USD 1 00 million , the fund sizes  are determined as: a US D 46.5 million  DF; a US D 775 million 
CEF, and; a US D 775 million RF. A GCF intervention would enable both significant scalability  to CIO and provide scarce, 
highly additional donor capital to the structure to help crowd in further private sector participation.  In collaboration with 
GCF and taking into account its comments, CFM have narrowed down the number of investee countries, which will 
receive GCF funding for renewable energy projects via CIO. With GCF funding the majority of CIO’s funding will flow into 
the 11 selected countries, defined in the section below. CFM estimates that approximately USD 500 million of total CEF 
capital will be committed to the 11  GCF earmarked countries in one investment cycle, with a minimum of USD 400 million.  
 
Country Selection Strategy  
 
CFM has analys ed the countries in CIO’s investment mandate countries to determine a list of twelve  GCF target countries 
based on the nexus outlined below . Consequently, through GCF, CFM can position CIO to make a meaningful contribution 
to the climate change goals of these countries, as outlined by their Nationally Designated Contributions (NDCs).  
 
The country selection process comprised three stages, whi ch correspond to the three selection criteria: 1) Country 
Ownership,  2) CIO Pipeline & Track Record and 3) GCF additionality, with GCF additionality comprising of the six GCF 
Investment Framework criteria. In the first stage,  CFM identified developing countries that have expressed renewable 
energy as a priority in their I NDC and have a strong commitment to expanding the proliferation of renewable energy 
technologies in their respective jurisdictions. Secondly, CFM narrowed down the country list further by identifying the 
countries where shareholders and individual team mem bers of CIO have the strongest track  record and the most tangible  
projects in CIO’s pipeline.  In the third and last stage, CFM analysed the country list with respect to the six GCF Investment 
Framework criteria. The final list was determined based on how each country fits all of the six criteria; therefore,  some 
countries fit all criteria equally well, while others are exceptionally good fits for a subset of criteria. This proces s resulted 
in the following country list:  
 
CIO has initiated preparation for the implementation of the programme 
across these 11 countries . At this point we have identified significant 
pipeline in these countries and signed 2 Joint Development 
Agreements (JDA) for 4 projects in Morocco and Djibouti. Other 
projects include a  solar farm in Nigeria,  a  solar project in Malawi , a  
run-of-river hydro project in Uganda and others indicated in sections 
B.1 and E.1. In two of the selected countries, namely Burundi, 
Madagascar, CIO does not have concrete project s at this point in time. 
Howe ver, due to significant potential for renewable energy and 
increasing market activity, CIO is expected to construct projects in 
those countries in the near to mid- term.  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  The final investment approval  from FMO’s Board was obtained on 
06/09/2016


---
*Page 13*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 9 OF 93 
 
 
 A 
Expected financial close (if applicable)  23 June 2017 (first close)  - USD 412 .6 million raised  
22 December 2017 (second close) –  USD 50 .3 million raised  
20 June 2018 (third close) – USD 75 million  
23 June 2019 (final close)  – date after which CIO fundraising will be 
closed.  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 19/04/2019 (estimated date of FAA effectiveness)  
First Closing : 23/06/2017 
End:  23/06/2037  
Programme lifespan  20 years


---
*Page 14*
---

F
INANCING / COST INFORMATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 93 B
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme
Please provide:  
•an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from financial
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme  
This section will  demonstrate (A) a financial and sensitivity analysis including model projections of the expected 
performance of CIO across its term length. This section will also serve (B) to demonstrate how Climate Investor One 
overcomes current prohibitive market barri ers - considering CIO a necessary and important intervention – and provide (C) 
a Programme budget break down .  
A.Financial Analysis
A
1. Introduction
The GCF  participation in CIO constitutes an investment in the DF and T1 t ranche of the CEF. The analysis in this section 
is based on its corresponding respective return expectations as outlined in the table below:   
T
able 1: CIO DF & CEF sizes  
Fund/TrancheSize (US D
million)Expected Returns
DF 46.5 Return of donor capital  
CEF T1 155 Return of donor capital  
CEF T2 310 Market equity return  
CEF T3 310 Market loan return  
T
he main investment goal of the DF is to maintain its capital throughout its life. This outcome is mainly driven by the success  
/ failure rates of the development of the underlying projects. The premium that will be charged can be adjus ted depending 
on the actual success  rate of the development activitie s. 
T
he CEF derives its income from the following activities at project level:  
•Dividend income from a project company;
•Refinancing the equity investments by debt at project level once operational;
•Exit proceeds from the disposal of a project.
Base Cas e
I
n the Base Case it is assumed that 3 0 projects are successfully developed and constructed. A key factor is the timing of 
cash flows. Specifically, given that CEF capital is recyclable, the timing of cash outflows and inflows determines whether 
the tranches are sized sufficiently  relative to each other and to the total size of the CEF. The relative sizing has been such 
that (i) cash inflows from refinancing and exits arrive on time to allow investment in new projects to continue uninterrupted , 
and (ii) that one tier does not run out  of capital  before the others.  The outcome of the Base Case shows the investment 
outcome for Tier 1 donors of the return of all capital provided.  
Please provide a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project 
objectives, and leverage public and/or private finance  
Overcoming Market Barriers
Climate Investor One was conceptualized and developed in order to overcome prohibitive barriers synonymous with 
project financed methods of financing. On the back of this, Climate Investor One was specifically designed to crowd in 
private sector financing to developing markets on the back of highly additional, enabling public sector funding.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 93 
 
 B 
Project finance is a widely used tool to finance infrastructure development; the tec hnique is used successfully in many 
markets across different sectors. It is, however, a complex tool, as any underlying project goes through a series of different 
phases, each with a different risk profile, and success requires appropriate funding at each stage.  
 
Simplistically, the project finance life- cycle can be broken down into three phases; project development, construction and 
the operational phase. As e ach stage has a distinct risk -return profile, levels of appetite vary from different providers of 
capital. There is also added complexity as successful projects require political support and enabling regulatory regimes.  
 
The challenges are even greater in emerging markets where investors face not only greater political and regulatory risk, but 
also higher levels of credit risk. Nevertheless, finding financial solutions is vital for  scalable infrastructure investments in 
emerging markets and is particularly vital for increasing investment in renewable energy infrastructure.  
 
To date, various efforts have been made by governments, financial arrangers and DFIs in the development community to 
find solutions to this challenge. Some initiatives have focused on specific parts of the value chain -  such as project 
development or refinancing. However, more rece ntly there have been efforts to create more complete, holistic financing 
solutions. These facilities have sought to bring all the various parts of the financing structure under a single management 
structure and hence eliminate some of the uncertainties tha t exist with regards to a particular project being able to find 
investors as it progresses.  
 
CIO was designed specifically with the aim of supporting infrastructure projects from development through to completion. 
Thus, CIO comprises two sub-funds which  coincid e with the key  main phases of project finance: project development and 
project construction.  These phases are financed by the CIO Development Fund and the CIO Construction Equity Fund.  
 
CIO has been designed to overcome many of the perceived weaknesses in infrastructure investment into emerging markets  
that transpire into an overall lack of bankable projects .  
 
In particular, CIO seeks to address the  following barriers : 
 
1) Slow Project Implementation Timelines  
 
Status Quo –  Market Failure


---
*Page 16*
---

F
INANCING / COST INFORMATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 93 B
Time is  the biggest risk for a project developer. Processes always take longer than planned. In developing countries, a 
project developer typically commences development with his own capital and within a short period of time seeks grant and 
TA funding because the  development stage is too early for institutional, private sector financiers to participate. As TA and 
grants usually only meet third party costs (e.g. consultancy fees and legal costs), and as the time line extends, the project  
developer needs to procure more capital to complete the development phase. If sufficiently advanced, the project developer can sometimes attract some commercial private sector interest. It is common that as timelines extend further, the process 
is repeated. The net result is that the project developer spends most of the time raising capital instead of developing the 
project. This results in an even further extension to the time line and in instances, a poor quality of development.  
Figure 2: Typical project finance development phase structure
C
limate Investor One’s response to the Market Failure:  
(A)CIO’s Development Fund
Climate Investor One can mobilize development capital at scale, at a very early stage of the development of the project and
has a broad mandate of costs that it can cover. This enables the Development Fund to provide financial support through t o
t
he end of the development period, relieving the project developer from a fund- raising  orientation, enabling a greater focus
on the development of the project to improve the rate of development as well as the quality of development.
Figure 3 : Climate Investor One development phase structure


---
*Page 17*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 93 
 
 B 
(B) CIO’s Construction Equity Fund (CEF)  
The figure below shows a typical, rather complex project finance structure with its multi -party contracts and financing 
arrangements. CIO’s CEF significantly reduces the complexity by removing the need for multi -party financing arrangements. 
A Project Finance Financial Close typically requires between 4- 6 lenders who are bound both together and to the project 
company by an extensive suite of agreements. Reaching consensus with a large group is very time consuming. CIO’s CEF 
replaces this source of funding w ith equity capital from the Construction Equity Fund, thereby reducing complexity, the 
number of parties involved, and cost of process and structure. This results in reduced timelines and projects being 
constructed faster, estimated to save multiple years,  at a more affordable cost to the end user. Through having readily 
deployable equity, and less parties to negotiate with, Climate Investor One will be able to develop, construct and operate 
bankable projects faster than the current market practice.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Typical project finance construction phase negotiation structure


---
*Page 18*
---

F
INANCING / COST INFORMATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 93 B
Figure 5 : Climate Investor One construction phase negotiation structure 
2)H
igh Cost of C apital
Many of the target countries present a higher risk profile compared to more socio- economically developed markets,
increasing the cost of capital for developers operating in these geographies. Innovative solutions are needed to ensure
projects do not fail because of lack of timely access to capital and an over -expos ure to political, financial and market risks;
C
IO addresses this in the following ways:  
1.Capital costs are reduced thanks to removal of certain project finance specific costs (debt service reserve accounts,
interest during construction )
2.Shorter timelines and efficient processes are less costly
3.Lower costs thanks to a de- risked facility reduces the cost of the capital
3)L
imited Exit / Refinancing Options for Investors
Banks and institutional investors take a largely opportunistic approach to infrastructure in emerging markets. The limit ed
c
apacity of local capital markets and the high cost of structuring transactions means projects can be left without financial
support. Even finance from DFIs can be cumbersome and take long periods  of time to deploy.
C
IO adds to additional exit options (CEF) and refinancing options (thr ough RF) and therefore helps to improve the depth of 
local capital available for renewable energy projects .  
Please provide a breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub- component in local and 
foreign currency and a currency hedging mechanism:  For example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal 
exploration project, sub- components would include civil engineering works, drilling services, drilling equipment and 
inspection test.  
Programme Budget Breakdown
This section provides (i) a project development budget (relevant for the DF) and (ii) a construction budget (relevant the CEF) of a representative project to be undertaken by CIO.  
Indicative Project Budget
T
he following project budget is for indicative purposes only, and budget item amounts may vary from project  to project  
depending on technology, jurisdiction, geography and other factors.  
T
able 4: Indicative Individual Asset Development Budget:  
Budget Item Percentage of Total


---
*Page 19*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 93 
 
 B 
Subtotal Resource Assessment  7% 
Subtotal Land  7% 
Subtotal Stakeholder Engagement  7% 
Subtotal E&S  5% 
Subtotal Technical  23% 
Subtotal Institutional & Financial  5% 
Subtotal  Legal  9% 
Subtotal Project Management & Miscellaneous  12% 
Total NET Budget  75% 
Contingency  25% 
Total DEVEX  100% 
 
The 25% contingency is reserved due to the unpredictable nature of renewable energy project development in developing 
countries. It must be high enough in order to stay within the preapproved budged and avoid having to go back to the 
Investment committee (IC)  for small variations in budgets.  The contingency level of 25% has been set based on 
considerable experience in project development, t o allow sufficient room for variation. Kindly note that a level of 25% is a 
conservative estimate 
 
Table 5: Indicative Individual Asset Construction Budget:  
Budget Item  Percentage of Total Budget  
Equipment Costs  70% 
Balance of Plant2 30% 
Total Construction Cost  100.00%  
 
Table 6: Indicative Costs for Benchmark Projects in the Current Pipeline (All currency amounts are in USD millions)  
Country  Capacity 
(MW) Development  
Costs  Construction 
Costs  Costs 
per MW DF 
funding  GCF DF  CEF 
funding  GCF 
CEF 
Total  588.6  40.9 816.1  1.4 15.7 10.4 440.8  70.5 
 
Table 7: Development Cost Financing Allocation  
Country  Development 
Costs  DF funding  GCF DF Funding  
(66% of DF) Third Party 
Sponsors  Other DF Donors  
Total  40.9 15.7 10.4 25.2 5.2 
 
Table 8: Construction Cost Financing Allocation  
Country  Construction 
Costs  CEF 
funding  Third Party 
Sponsors  Other Tier 
1 Donors  Tier 2  Tier 3  GCF CEF  
(80% of T1) 
Total  816.1  440.8  375.3  17.6 176.3  176.3  70.5 
 
CIO has significant pipeline in the targeted 11  countries. In order to construct all of the projects that are being pursued, 
more than the requested USD 80  million amount from GCF would be required, which provides a buffer.  This strongly 
indicates that with GCF funding CIO will be able to co nstruct quality renewable energy projects in these countries. Based 
                                                             
2 All the supporting components and auxiliary systems of a power  plant  needed to deliver the energ y, 
other than the generating unit itself, for example, ground preparation, concrete foundations, other civil 
works.


---
*Page 20*
---

F
INANCING / COST INFORMATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 93 B
on the current pipeline around 800 MW of clean energy would be built  with funds invested once. However, CIO is expected 
to recycle its capital and amplify it by a factor of 3.37 over the lifetime of CIO. The number of projects can vary depending 
on the capacity of each project and CIO’s investment stake, but on the basis of the current pipeline, GCF funding would 
result in approximately  20 projects in GCF -earmarked countries and ca. 30 projects in CIO’s total portfolio.  
B.2. Project Financing Information
Financial Instrument Amount Currency
Tenor Pricing (a)Total
project
financing(a) = (b) + (c) 821.7 million USD ($)  
(b)
Requested
GCF
Amount  (i)Senior Loans
(ii)Subordinated Loans
(iii) Equity  (Junior)
(iv)Guarantees
(v)Reimbursable Grants
(vi)Grants-
--
-
100 million USD ($)  20 years  
R
eturn of Capital  
*P lease provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is
expected to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between
GCF financing and that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspon d
t
o the level of the project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated i n
section E .
Total requested  
(v) 100 million USD ($)  Allocation:  
Reimbursable Grants : USD 20 million  – 
Development Fund;  Junior Equity: USD  
80 million – Tier 1, Construction Equity 
Fund  
(c) Co-
financing
AmountTable 9 : Co-Financing Amount  
Investor/Donor Commitment Type Expected Return Total
Development Fund
R
eimbursable Grant  R
eturn of Capital  26.5 
CEF Tier 1 Reimbursable Grant  Return of Capital  75


---
*Page 21*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 93 
 
 B 
 
 
 
CEF Tier 2  
 
 
  Ordinary Equity  Market equity return  310 
       
CEF Tier 3  
 
  Senior Equity  Market loan return  310 
 
The funding amounts provided in this table describe the full USD 775 million size of CEF and USD 46.5 million 
size of the Development Fund. An estimated USD 500 million of CEF and USD 30 million of Development 
Fund capital will be invested in GCF -earmarked countries as explained in section A. 2. The co- financing 
amounts for the 11  GCF -earmarked countries is outlined below.  
Table 10 Co-financing for 11  GCF -earmarked Countries  
Development Fund  
Total  10 
Construction Equity Fund  
Tier 1  
Total  20 
Tier 2 
Total  200.00  
Tier 3  
Total  200.00  
 
Scaling CIO & Mobilizing Private Sector Participation  
Donor capital is currently scarce within CIO, limiting the scalability and potential for impact.  
GCF funding is required to (i) fill the gap in donor funding and (ii) enable CIO to double its entire investment 
portfolio , catalysing further private sector investment.  Additional commercial funding in CIO is limited by the 
absence of further Donor capital due to the required Tier proportions in CIO’s CEF  (20% T1, 40% T2 and 40% 
T3).    
Climate Investor One already has a pipeline of interested private sector investors to join the CEF  upon scaling 
of the facility , leading to additional Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in some of the poorest countries in Africa 
and developing Asia.  The current investor pipeline includes two DFIs and a private foundation.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 93 
 
 B 
 Table 11: Funds Raised and GCF Contribution to Fundraising Goal  
*Amounts Catalysed by GCF  at Fund level  Fund  Total 
Commitments  Target  Gap  GCF 
Commitment / 
Funds 
Catalysed  % Gap Closed 
by GCF  
Development 
Fund   
 
26.7 
 
 46.5 20 20 100% 
CEF Tier 1   
 
 
75 
 
 155 80 80 100%  
CEF Tier 2   
 
 
210 
 
 
 310 100 160* 100% 
CEF Tier 3   
 
 
235 
 
 310 75 160* 100%  
 Lead financing institution: FMO  
  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
There are many barriers in financing renewable energy projects in developing countries. The main factors are as follows3: 
 
1. Lack of Long -Term Financing  
Renewable energy projects are normally characterized by high up- front costs and low  ongoing operating costs, which 
makes long term funding for such projects necessary. This is a disadvantage compared to traditional and GHG emitting 
technologies, which are often viable with short -term loans. In many developing countries long- term financing is difficult and 
sometimes impossible to get. This is in part due to regulatory or other restrictions on long- term bank lending. Furthermore, 
investors are unfamiliar with the renewables market and perceive technology and country risk to be high and diffi cult to 
estimate and price. Hence,  they are discouraged from investing. Long- term financing also depends on investors who are 
looking for long- term assets to match the profile of their liabilities such as pension funds. In developing countries, such 
funds either don’t exist or limit invest ment activities largely to the purchase of government debt owing to its low risk.  
                                                             
3 Adapted from a World Bank report, 2013.


---
*Page 23*
---

F
INANCING / COST INFORMATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 93 B
As shown in the chart below  (World Bank, 2015)  domestic credit to the private sector as a percentage of GDP in the selected 
11 countries is well below that of OECD countries . This indicates that there isn’t nearly sufficient domestic capital available 
to support renewable energy projects and that foreign funding is required.  
Figure 6: Domestic Credit to the Private sector as %GDP (Source: World Bank) 
2.Lack of Project Financing
Renewable energy  technology projects also seek to access funds on a project finance basis. With project finance the 
security for the loan comes from future project cashflows and little/no up- front collateral is required. There is still however, 
the need for a share of the project to be funded from equity. This type of funding allows renewable energy  technology 
projects to spread their costs over the project lifetime, funding the high upfront cost from the positive cashflows generated  
during operations. The alternative to this would be to rely heavily on equity funding, payments to which can be delaye d until 
the later years of the project.  
Renewable energy  technologies are more exposed to the limited availability of project financing than most conventional 
technologies as the share of capital costs in their total cost is much greater  
3.High and Uncerta in Project Development Costs
Renewable energy  technologies projects are quite vulnerable to changes in the regulatory framework. Due to their lack of 
cost competitiveness, these projects are dependent on a supportive regulatory framework to proceed— including 
commitments to pay premium prices, priority access to electricity grids including support for the necessary infrastructure 
investments and guarantees of purchases of their output. Severe problems for project viability can arise where the 
regulatory framework changes.  
Furthermore, such projects are often located in environmentally and socially sensitive areas. For example,  with larger solar 
and wind projects, land use requirements can be very significant. All these factors make it necessary for renewable energy  
project sponsors to have access to significant amounts of funds to cover the costs of project development prior to reaching 
financial close. Generally,  such funds come from their own resources or from sources of risk capital. In developing countries,  
the small size of potential renewable energ y technology project sponsors means that this route of funding is limited. 
Generally,  there is little availability of risk capital in developing countries financial markets  
4.Lack of Equity Finance
While large numbers of renewable energy project developers exist, there are only limited numbers of large- scale project 
sponsors, particularly among those operating in low -income countries, with the ability and willingness to fund renewable 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 120% 140% 160%MalawiMadagascarUgandaNigeriaCameroonBurundiDjiboutiKenyaIndonesiaMongoliaMoroccoOECD membersDomestic Credit to Private Sector (%GDP) 2014


---
*Page 24*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 93 
 
 B 
energy  projects  on a corporate finance basis. Renewable energy  projects are generally smaller than conventional 
generation projects and this is reflected in the size of developers. The high risks of investment in many LICs, whether inside 
or outside the energy sector, wi ll also tend to deter many larger energy companies based in more developed economies 
leading to a lack of equity.  
This lack of equity capital means that project sponsors are often unable to cover the costs of development activities without  
external assista nce. But, as highlighted above, access to risk capital of the type required is limited in LICs. The lack of 
equity capital also increases the dependence on project financing, as sponsors are unable to provide collateral for loans or 
to put up large amounts  of equity. As a result, loans have to be secured against future cash flows, given the absence of 
alternatives.  
5. High financial cost relative to other technologies  
The high costs of  renewable energy  relative to conventional generation technologies are a key risk to their success. These 
higher costs are exacerbated by the high cost of funds in many underdeveloped financial markets . The high up -front capital 
costs of many  renewable technologies  compared to conventional technologies further worsen their commercial position 
and make costs a concern.  
 
For grid -connected projects, the high cost of renewable energy  can be overcome, at least in part, through priority rights to 
dispatch and/or must -take obliga tions on off -takers. This means that these projects are effectively removed from having to 
compete for dispatch with other lower -cost conventional technologies. The higher costs imposed on off -takers of purchases 
from renewable energy  projects are generall y recovered from electricity customers as a whole either through the monopoly 
power of the off -taker or, where the electricity market is competitive, through some form of levy or universal charge.  
 
But if costs are too high relative to alternatives, afford ability concerns may mean that such priority treatment is not given. 
There may also be concerns whether renewable energy  projects that are more expensive than conventional alternatives 
will have commitments to pay them honoured, whether governments will continue to make the necessary funds available 
to cover the obligations of publicly owned off -takers, or whether attempts will be made to renegotiate these commitments 
on the grounds of affordability.  
 
In 2015- 2016 USD 8.8 billion of global renewable energ y financing, across all investors and financial instruments, went into 
Africa, with only USD 4.8 billion going into Sub- Saharan Africa (USD 4 billion in MENA).  Institutional investors contributed 
about 1% of global financing (IRENA, 2018)4. This shows that  in order to expand the renewable energy sector in developing 
countries, especially in Africa, new ways of attracting funds and optimising project finance have to be developed. CIO is 
designed to overcome renewable energy project financing barriers and att ract commercial capital to renewable energy 
projects, especially institutional capital. Through a successful demonstration effect CIO could help proliferate similar 
structures and blended finance facilities more broadly into climate related programmes.  
 
 
                                                             
4 IRENA and CPI (2018), Global Landscape of Renewable Energy Finance, 2018, International  
Renewab le Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi


---
*Page 25*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 93 C
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as t hese requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strateg ic Context
Please describe relevant national, sub- national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.  
A
ll of the 11 countries have both a need and desire for renewable energy as well as a regulatory environment that makes 
CIO projects possible. Firstly, we see from the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) that the countries have 
expressed a willingness to reduce emissions and indicated renewable energy as a priority in achieving the targeted reductions. All countries have set a conditional target for CO2 reduction that they could achieve, if new sources of 
financing are facilitated. Some countries have indicated that they will also be able to achieve an unconditional target with 
existing funds. It is very important for CIO that its investee countries would approve of and want CIO’s projects, therefore the NDCs are consulted. In Table 11, which summarizes NDC target s, renewables prioritisation and need for financial 
support to achieve the conditional targets, we see that GCF funding through CIO is in alignment with government goals and can help achieve the conditional targets for emissions reduction by providing a new source of financing.  
T
able 12: Nationally Determined Contributions 
CountryCO2 Emissions Reduction Targets
RE is a PriorityFinancial Suppor t
Needed (USD
billions) Unconditional Conditional
Burundi 3% 17%  Yes 1.49  
Cameroon N/A 32%  Yes N/A 
Djibouti 40%  60%  Yes 1.6 
Indonesia 41%  12%  Yes N/A 
Kenya N/A 30%  Yes 40* 
Madagascar N/A 14%  Yes 42.1  
Malawi N/A 47%  Yes N/A 
Mongolia 14%  >14% Yes N/A 
Morocco 13%  32%  Yes 45 
Nigeria 20%  45%  Yes N/A 
Uganda 7% 22%  Yes 5.74  
All targets are set for 2030. The point of reference for emissions reduction is BAU. 
*This target includes adaptation efforts.
I
t is important that each country would have an enabling regulatory environment that would allow for CIO ’s projects to be 
developed. Key points that describe each country’s energy sector regulation are provided in the list below. Some 
regulatory frameworks are more developed than others, but each country has laws that support the establishment of 
IPPs, which already have been successfully constructed in most countries. In others, such as Djibouti, CIO with GCF 
funding would have the opportunity of building the country’s first IPP and kickstart the private energy provider market.  
1.B
urundi
•V
ery low electrification rate, with only the cities of Gitega and Bujumbura that have a municipal electricity service.
•Households are the main consumers of energy in the country, accounting for 94% of total consumption. Their
needs are almost exclusively met by traditional biomass (99%). Electricity (0.3%), and oil products (0.4%) play
an insignificant role.
•The country’s electrical power sector is traditionally state owned, Electricity generation and supply in Burundi is
managed and administered by Régie de Production et Distribution d’Eau et d’Electricité (REGIDESO ).
•The Government of Burundi is very supportive of renewable energy expansion, especially of hydroelectricity. It
plans to increase electrification to 35% by 2030 by building 3 hydro power plants .


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 93 
 
 C 
• The Government is also developing policy to stimulate the private sector development of small -scale  hydro plants.  
 
2. Cameroon  
 
• Cameroon was one of the first countries in Africa to open the energy sector to private investment. The Electricity 
Law of 1998 resulted in the entry of AES as a majority shareholder of Sonel, the national utility, in 2001.  In 2014 
it was acquired by PE fund Actis and rebranded as Eneo.   
• A new phase of reform in the power sector started in 2011, with the promulgation of a new Electricity Law which 
paves the way for unbundling generation, transmission and distribution.   
• The 2011 law also opened the door to independent power generators and distributors in rural areas outside the 
concession of Eneo, but only one independent power generation and distribution license has  since  been awarded  
• The Government of Cameroon supports renewable energy and has set a target of 25% of the total energy mix 
coming from renewables by 2035.  
 
3. Uganda  
 
• Under the Electricity Act of 1999, the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) was established as an independent 
sector regulator; the resulting enabling environment opened up the sector to private sector investment and 
participation.  
• Distribution is regul ated, and cost -reflective tariffs are utilized, with 54% of power generation coming from 
independent power producers (IPPs).  
• Has introduced a Feed- in-Tariff.  
 
4. Kenya  
 
• Kenya’s energy market offers reasonably independent regulation, cost -reflective tariffs , and a functional market 
design: Kenya has completed the vertical unbundling of its energy sector  
• Kenya Power is partially -owned by private investors and is one of the continent’s most financially viable 
distribution & supply companies.  
• Kenya Power operates profitably, provides transparent financial reporting, and has not been late on an energy 
payment for six years . 
• Kenya Power’s financial stability and access to capital markets allows investors to invest without reliance on 
sovereign guarantees, al though IPPs require a letter of comfort from the government that covers political risk in 
order to obtain financing for projects . 
• Kenya’s track record of completing ten commercially viable Independent Power Producer (IPP) projects validates 
the ease and at tractiveness of the business environment . 
 
5. Malawi  
 
• Until recently , the Electricity Supply Corporation of Malawi Limited (ESCOM), the national electricity utility, was 
in a weak financial situation . 
• ESCOM has been reformed by:  
o Tariff reforms to bring revenues more in line with costs, resulting in ESCOM’s improved financial position.  
o Stronger operational practices to improve maintenance planning and execution, with ESCOM increasing 
spending on things like replacing faulty utility poles and critical repa irs at hydropower plants.  
o Technical assistance and new accounting policies to adhere more closely to international financial 
standards and implement information technology solutions to better manage inventories.  
o Installation of pre- paid meters and removal of illegal connections to reduce non -collection and non-
technical losses from electricity theft.  
• Key reforms and technical assistance have helped ESCOM deliver better service and become a more viable 
business partner for the private secto r, 
• In December 2016, ESCOM achieved an investment -grade credit rating (BBB) from the South Africa- based 
Global Credit Rating Co., an independent credit rating agency focused on emerging markets . 
 
6. Madagascar


---
*Page 27*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 93 C
•Madagascar’s government is working to expand its electricity  supply and encourage investment in the energy
sector to stimulate the economy.
•The majority of its existing capacity comes from hydroelectric and diesel power plants in limited and poor
condition.
•Has one utility, the State Power Authority (JIRAMA).
•More than 10 independent power producers (IPPs) account for an increasing percentage of the total electricity
production.
•Has introduced a Feed- in-Tariff.
7.D
jibouti
•T
he government of Djibouti has set a goal of achieving universal access to electricity by 2035.
•Electricity supply services are provided through the vertically integrated utility Electricité de Djibouti (EDD).
•Djibouti has wind and geothermal generation potential and is actively studying these options.
•In 2015 the Government enacted Independent Power Producer (IPP) and energy efficiency laws relating to larg e
and s
mall-scale IPP power projects, as well as for captive power.
•The law provides that the State remains the exclusive purchaser (Single Buyer) of power produced from IPPs in
Djibouti.
8.M
orocco
•T
he national utility Office National de Electricité et de l'Eau Potable (ONEE ) operates throughout the whole value
chain (generation, transmission and distribution).
•There exist several ways to generate electricity in the Moroccan market: a) electricity directly generated by ONEE,
b)I
PPs selling electricity to ONEE with individually negotiated PPAs, c) self -production, and d) IPPs selling
renewable energy -based  electr icity to large consumers via PPAs.
•Numerous sectoral strategies, plans and programs have been initiated over the last decade in order to achieve
poverty -reducing sustainable development whilst taking steps to preserve the environment.
•The national strategic objective of Morocco is to safeguard the security of the energy supply by reduci ng
depe
ndence on energy imports.
•With consistent sun and strong winds, Morocco has strong potential in renewable energy, with a long -term goal
of becoming an energy exporter to European and African markets.
9. N
igeria
•T
he National Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Policy (NREEP) for Nigeria enter ed into force in 2016,
w
hich provides a general legislative framework for renewable energy and energy efficiency sectors in Nigeria.
•The government of Nigeria approved the Feed- in tariff regulation in November 2015.
•According to the new regulation, the electricity distribution companies (Discos) will be obliged to source at least50% of their total procurement from renewables.
•The new feed- in tariff regulation already determines the procedure for auctions for the larger projects.
•First project -financed IPP reached financial close in 2015.
10. Mo
ngolia
•I
n June 2014, the Green Development Policy was  adopted. The policy serves as a guideline for transition t o
gr
een development.
•In 2002, the power sector was unbundled resulting into 18 independent companies , which are still wholly owned
by the State.
•The E nergy Regulatory Commission  launched the single- buyer model where the National Electricity
Transmission Grid purchases all the energy output of energy producers (five State owned CHPs and one privately owned wind power plant which are all located in the central region) and then sells to distribution companies.
•The Mongolian Parliament aims to reform the energy sector and transition to a market economy. Recently, t he
P
arliament announced the partial privatization of State -owned power plants.
•Approved first ever IPP in 2012.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 93 
 
 C 
• To incenti vize renewable energy development, the Mongolian government has mandated feed -in tariffs of 8 to 
9.5 U.S. cents per kWh for wind energy and 15 to 18 U.S. cents per kWh for solar energy.  
 
11. Indonesia  
 
• State-owned enterprise PLN is responsible for transmis sion and distribution of electricity in Indonesia  
• strong commitment to implement the planned climate change mitigation and adaptation activities to be led and 
co-ordinated among various stakeholders including governmental institutions and the newly establi shed 
Directorate General of Climate Change, under the Ministry of Environment and Forestry  
• Regulation No. 21/2008 addresses emission regulations in Indonesia, such as the requirement for thermal power 
plants to install emissions monitoring systems and prepare an emission inventory.  
• The establishment of MEMR Regulation No. 31 in 2009 provided PLN with a legal basis for buying renewably 
generated power from IPPs.  
• Regulation No. 4 in 2012 superseded this regulation, setting specific feed- in tariffs for bioenergy power (biomass, 
municipal solid waste and landfill gas) and hydropower projects up to 10 MW that vary based on the region where 
the project was installed.  
• Since then, more detailed regulations have been implemented for various renewable energy technol ogies  
• For larger -scale projects, such as hydropower and more recently wind power, PLN negotiates directly with project 
developers for a PPA.  
• For most small -scale renewable energy projects (up to 10 MW), feed- in tariffs are the policy mechanism of choice 
in Indonesia, although auctions for small -scale solar PV projects also were used in the past . 
 
 
In tables 13 and 14 electricity generation is described by country. We can see that on average countries have 47 % of 
renewable capacity. This is a relatively high share;  however , it includes large hydroelectric plants, which are often 
assumed not to emit GHG , however in reality they do have GHG  emissions  due to the decay of flora in the flooded 
reservoir. Furthermore,  they are not environmentally sustainable due to the negative effects on biodiversity  and local 
communities.  Excluding hydroelectricity, the renewable energy capacity as a percentage of total capacity drops down to 
only 11%. This is a low share considering that all of these countries have a comparative advantage for renewable energy, 
because of an abundance of natural renewable resources.  
 
In conclusion,  the 11  countries in which CIO would invest GCF funding have the desire to increase their renewable energy 
capacity and have developed and/or  are refining the regulatory environments to support its expansion. However, the 
share of renewable energy is not representative of the large amount of renewable resources, which is mainly due to the 
financi al barriers described in the previous section. CIO , with GCF support, could greatly increase renewable energy in 
these countries and create positive impact on both climate change mitigation and the economic development.  
 
According to an IRENA5 report, in order to achieve the Paris Agreement goal of limiting temperature rise below 20C the 
share of renewables in primary energy supply has to rise from 15% (2015) to about 65% by 2050 alongside greatly 
improv ed energy efficiency. This is a large inc rease that would require the tripling of current global investments and 
cannot be achieved without additional sources of funding. CIO aims to increase the global share of renewable energy by 
targeting some of the countries, where financing such technology is most difficult.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
5  IRENA and CPI (2018), Global Landscape of Renewable Energy Finance, 2018, International  
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 93 
 
 C 
Table 13: Installed total and renewable capacity  (EIA 2015)6 
Country  Installed 
Capacity 
(MW) Generation 
(GWh/year ) Renewable 
Capacity 
(MW) Renewables 
(% Installed 
Capacity)  Non-
Hydroelectric 
Renewables 
(MW) Non-
Hydroelectric 
Renewables 
(% of 
Capacity)  
Burundi  68 230 59 87%  2 3% 
Cameroon  1,545  6,610  728 47%  721 47%  
Djibouti  130 405 0 0% 0 0% 
Indonesia  57,345  221,306  8,559  15%  3,154  6% 
Kenya  2,301  9,568  1,567  68%  747 32%  
Madagascar  668 1,508  174 26%  10 2% 
Malawi  375 2,120  373 99%  23 6% 
Mongolia  1,106  5,192  56 5% 56 5% 
Morocco  8,040  27,967  2,145  27%  839 10%  
Nigeria  10,478  29,830  2,060  20%  20 0% 
Uganda  922 3,235  786 85%  80 9% 
Total/Average %  82,978  307,971  16,507  44%  5,652  11%  
 
Table 14: Renewable Energy Technology as a % of total installed capacity  (EIA 2015)6  
Country  Hydroelectricity Geothermal  Solar  Wind  Biomass and 
Waste 
Burundi  84%  0% 3% 0% 0% 
Cameroon  47%  0% 1% 0% 0% 
Djibouti  0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 
Indonesia  9% 2% 0% 0% 3% 
Kenya  36%  26%  1% 1% 4% 
Madagascar  25%  0% 1% 0% 0% 
Malawi  93%  0% 2% 0% 5% 
Mongolia  0% 0% 0% 5% 0% 
Morocco  16%  0% 1% 10%  0% 
Nigeria  19%  0% 0% 0% 0% 
Uganda  77%  0% 2% 0% 7% 
Average  32% 3% 1% 1% 2% 
 
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline,  key barriers, challenges and /or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario.  
 
CIO’s primary goal is climate change mitigation via increasing the proliferation of renewable energy in developing 
countries. Therefore,  its main objective is to reduce GHG emissions by constructing ca. 30 projects during the entire 
                                                             
6 U.S. Energy Information Administration, International Energy Statistics  
https://www.eia.gov/beta/international/data/browser/#/?pa=0000000000000000000007vo70000fvu&c=41
00000002000060000000000000g000200000000000000001&tl_id=2- A&vs=INTL.2 -7-AFRC -
MK.A&vo=0&v=H&end=2015


---
*Page 30*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 93 C
program and 20 projects  in the 1 1 countries, where GCF funding will be deployed. At the moment such an expansion of 
renewable energy in the 11 countries is not possible, mainly due to the financial barriers , described in section B.3, even 
though they have the desire and regulations to do so as described in the previous sections. In order to achieve significant 
reductions in emissions new sources of funding have to be made available, as expressed in the 1 1 countries NDCs . Table 
11 and the accompanying figures describe the trend in CO 2 emissions for the 11 countries. Here we can see clear upward 
trajectories, which will become steeper due to increase in energy demand resulting from economic growth. The average 
growth rate of CO 2 emissions over the 10- year period in table 15 was 3. 4%, which is high relative to the OECD group, 
where emissions have been decreasing. In the past few years, we can also see that the rate of emissions growth has 
been accelerating, as can be predicted by economic growth. Without the provision of renewable energy , as these 
countries grow , the energy sector will likely expand by more fossil fuel power production that will further worsen climate 
change. Also without a rapid expansion of the energy sector the countries’ economic growth will be stifled. 
C
IO wil l contribute to the avoidance of CO 2 emissions by developing renewable energy, low -emissions, power plants as 
well as creating a new tool in the climate finance tool box that will be replicable in the energy as well as other climate and 
development related  sectors. A successful CIO demonstration effect would cause a paradigm shift that would accelerate 
the use of blended finance structures and significantly increase the flow of private sector funds into developing countries. 
B
ased on CIO’s current pipeline in the 11 countries, an estimated total of 2. 697 million tons of  CO 2 emissions would be 
avoided annually over the lifetime of the Fund.   
T
able 15: CO 2 Emissions from Energy Consumption in millions of tons (EIA)  
Country 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Burundi 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 
Cameroon 7.4 7.9 7.7 8.4 8.6 8.1 6.5 8.1 8.4 9.7 
Djibouti 1.7 1.6 1.7 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.8 1.0 1.0 1.0 
Indonesia 348.6  387.4  378.6  401.1  447.7  464.6  479.2  485.3  493.0  502.0  
Kenya 11.5  11.4  11.4  11.4  12.6  12.9  12.8  13.9  14.9  16.6  
Madagascar 2.5 2.5 2.8 1.8 1.9 2.1 3.5 3.2 3.1 3.1 
Malawi 1.1 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.9 1.1 1.1 1.2 
Mongolia 6.8 7.2 7.2 7.6 8.1 8.4 9.5 13.2  13.8  14.2  
Morocco 36.6  35.8  37.4  41.5  47.8  43.0 39.0 46.7  52.1  52.3  
Nigeria 103.1  100.5  100.9  69.5  79.8  98.2  95.2  95.6  97.2  97.5  
Uganda 1.9 2.0 2.0 3.3 3.4 3.4 2.5 3.9 4.0 3.9 
Total 521.6 557.7 551.3 546.9 612.2 643.3 652.2 672.2 688.8 701.7
Growth Rate - 6.92% -1.14% -0.80% 11.94% 5.09% 1.37% 3.07% 2.47% 1.87%
OECD 13,759.413,882.513,568.212,775.113,158.513,077.0 12,869.412,660.712,540.312,425.8
Growth Rate - 0.89% -2.26% -5.85% 3.00% -0.62% -1.59% -1.62% -0.95% -0.91%
7 Please see Annex 9 for calculation


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 93 
 
 C 
 
Figure 7: Trend in CO 2 Emissions from Energy Consumption million tons. Source EIA (2015)8     
       
The figures above provide a depiction of CO 2 Emissions from Energy Consumption in million tons. The upper figure 
shows all 1 1 selected countries. However, because three countries ( Morocco, Nigeria and Indonesia)  have significantly 
larger annual emissions than the other 8 , the figure below provides a closer look into the emissions trends of the remaining 
9 countries, as indicated in the legend.  
                                                             
8 U.S. Energy Information Administration, International Energy Statistics. 
https://www.eia.gov/beta/international/data/browser/#/?pa=0000000000000000000000000000000000000
0000000000000000001&c=4100000002000060000000000000g000200000000000000001&tl_id=40-
A&vs=INTL.4008- 8-AFRC -MMTCD.A &vo=0&v=H&end=2015  0100200300400500600
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015CO2 Emissions: 11 Countries
Burundi Cameroon Djibouti Indonesia
Kenya Madagascar Malawi Mongolia
Morocco Nigeria Uganda
024681012141618
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015CO2 Emissions: 8 Countries Magnified
Burundi Cameroon Djibouti Kenya
Madagascar Malawi Mongolia Uganda


---
*Page 32*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 93 C
C.3. Project / Programme Description
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
T
his section highlights key features and objectives of CIO and subsequently zooms into its different components that fit 
together to achieve the goals of CIO with GCF’s involvement.  All investments made by CIO, whether through the 
Development Fund or through the Construction Equity fund are made in accordance with the Investment Strategy and 
Restrictions  as well as C IO’s Responsible Investment Code.  
•C
IO will build more projects faster by servicing the financing needs of projects at different stages  of their evolution
•The Development Fund will increase the quality and reduce development timelines of a project
•The Construction Equity Fund will provide scarce equity capital during the construction phase of the project
•GCF’s involvement can scale the size of the facility and can increase the number of projects delivered by 3X from
current levels
Role in the market: “Build more, Faster ” 
Climate Investor One is a blended finance facility mandated to deliver renewable energy infrastructure projects in developing markets by contributing to each of the respective development, construction, and operational phases in a 
project’s lifecycle. CIO was designed to address the lack of private financing options in developing markets for such projects and offers an encompas sing whole- of-life project financing solution. To finance each stage of a project, CIO has 
established two independent funds operating at arms’ length – the Development F und and the C onstruction Equity Fund. 
C
limate Investor One aims to deliver clean energy at affordable prices to the most energy deprived countries . 
Furthermore, CIO aims to capture value and deliver investor returns by addressing certain financing related market barriers synonymous with invest ing in renewable energy technologies in developing markets through the application of a 
whole- of-life funding solution. CIO will fulfil this objective by deploying capital into greenfield renewable energy project 
assets effectively and expeditiously to achieve medium to long- term returns to the providers of such capital. CIO will 
target the developing markets and focus on projects which use wind, solar PV and run- of-river hydro technologies to 
generate electricity. Other renewable energy technologies may be considered in light of projects that offer attractive 
returns and create significant environmental and societal impact. These technologies include, but are not limited to, biomass/bio- waste -to-energy , waste- to-energy, and geothermal.    
C
limate Investor One has been designed to target medium size renewable energy projects of between 25 MW – 75 MW. 
However, CIO may finance projects that are above (as well as below ) the targeted size interval in order to fund e.g. a 
project ’s subsequent phase expansions or otherwise scale up CIO’s investments, which would be made possible by a 
GCF contribution. In order to create a diversified portfolio, CIO’s funding allocation is subject to geographical and 
technology limits set out in section A.2.  
C
FM screen partners on (but not limited to) track record, financial resources, reputation & local connectedness, openness 
to CFM’s ESG approach, as well as other factors. Projects are screened based on (but not limited to) commercial viability / return expectations, title to land, E&S, energy off -take, renewable resource quality & governmental support.    
CFM screens and selects projects and partners employing the extensive renewable energy and infrastructure 
development and investing experience as well as abides by the Development Fund and Construction Equity Fund Investment Strategy and Restrictions. The restrictions  include geographical, technology and quantum of investment 
restrictions as outlined in section A.2. In addition, the Investment S trategy and Restrictions specif y that in the due 
diligence phase projects must be evaluated by an independent reputable technical adviser, who will provide an opinion on capex contingencies, site, grid and resource quality and quantity as well as regime risk. Key screening is on PPAs 
whereby no less than 75% of the CEF portfolio by value must have a long term, fixed price & quantum PPA in place. 
Furthermore, projects must also be evaluated by reputable and independent E&S, legal and insurance advisors and legal


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 93 
 
 C 
opinions have to be obtaine d with respect to relevant documentation, permits and licenses. Lastly, each project must 
have a financial model developed and certain sensitivities tested.  
 
CIO Responsible Investment Code Environmental & Social Principles  
 
CIO and its  project  companies will commit to continuous improvements with respect to the governance and 
management of environmental, social matters (including health and safety) (hereafter referred to as ‘E&S’) and work 
over time to apply relevant good international industry practices (hereafter referred to as ‘GIIP’) with appropriate targets 
and timetables for achieving them. Therefore,  CIO and its  project companies, will implement management systems 
which effectively address E&S risks and realize E&S opportunities as a fundamental par t of a p roject company’s value 
and in accordance with the following principles:  
• Achieve compliance with all relevant legal requirements, regulations, and industry -specific codes of practice 
relating to E&S governance and management.  
• Minimize adverse impact s and enhance positive effects on the environment and all stakeholders (including 
employees and the affected communities) as relevant and appropriate, of the Project Companies.  
• Encourage the Project Companies to make efficient use of natural resources and to protect the environment 
wherever possible.  
• Encourage the Project Companies to work within a defined timeframe towards full compliance with the 
International Labor Organization (“ILO”) Core Labor Standards and ILO Basic Terms and Conditions of Work and 
to respect the International Bill of Human Rights (which includes the United Nations (“UN”) Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Ri ghts) in line with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights as 
reflected on www.business -humanrights.org.  
• Encourage the operation of the Project Companies to be carried out in accordance with GIIP such as in the IFC 
Performance Standards, the World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines or other 
internationally recognized sources.  
• Recognize and, as appropriate, promote the social development impact from the Investments.  
• Consider the potential for positive impacts and opportuni ties from business activities.  
• Provide relevant E&S training and support employees involved in the investment process enabling them to work 
in accordance with the above principles  
 
A. Development Fund  
 
Role in CIO: “ Reduce development costs  and timelines and increase development quality”   
 
The objective of the Development Fund (“DF”) is to provide d evelopment loans , accompanied by  development support /  
assistance  provided by CFM and 3rd parties , to project companies in order to fast -track qualifying development projects 
to financial close by reducing the development timeline and improving the ultimate bankability of renewable energy 
projects in emerging markets. The Development Fund will increase the implementation rate of projects which, t hrough 
reducing the reliance on energy derived from fossil fuels and other non- renewable fuel sources, will promote the 
production of renewable energy. As part of Climate Investor One, DF will seek to enable an increased number of projects 
to commence deve lopment by providing developers and promoters of qualifying projects with:  
 
• Financial assistance of up to 50% of development costs in the form of d evelopment loans, thereby reducing the 
number of financiers  required to complete the development phase;


---
*Page 34*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 93 C
•Development support /  assistance  provided by CFM and 3rd parties in the development phase , including
commercial assistance, legal assistance, structural assistance, implementation of best practice international
environmental, social & governance standards, Know Your Customer (“KYC”) and anti -money laundering and
c
ounter -terrorist financing procedures with the objective to inform and influence the development process so that
it yields a project which is appropriate for implementation and construction -stage funding by Climate Investor
One; and
•F
inancing comfort,  that as part of Climate Investor One the project will have access to a simplified and complete
funding solution to support the project through construction and, later, refinancing.
T
he DF  will not seek to be a sole developer or to compete with developers, but will deploy capital into a project in the 
form of d evelopment loans , thereby positioning the Development Fund as the provider of choice of risk tolerant capital to 
developers and promoters – it aims to be regarded by the market as a source of funding willing to accept risk.  
D
F bears up to 50% of the development costs, on average USD 1.5 million per project, leading to an aggregate funding 
need of USD 46.5 million. The remaining 50% is to be provided by the project developer. Development costs include, but 
are not limited to, feasibility studies, scoping studies, renewable resource assessments, financial modelling, legal support 
and Environmental & Social Impact Assessments. . 
C
apital in the Development Fund is recycled through the repayment of development loans with a premium. The size of 
the development loan premium is set in order to recuperate funding from failed projects. It is estimated that through the 
continuous deployment and repayment of development loans, the Development Fund capital will be recycled by a factor of 3.8.  
I
n order to ensure portfolio diversification, DF will support the development of projects that will vary in size, geography, 
technology, vintage, and stakeholder composition. DF will furthermore support the development of projects across a broad spectrum of the aforementioned factors to both enhance its risk -mitigation strategy , as well as alleviate potential 
conflicts of interest.  
B.Construction Equity Fund
Role in CIO: “ Reduce construction costs, complexity and time line”  
T
he objective of CEF is to increase the number of renewable energy projects implemented in developing markets by 
providing a single source of equity financing for up to 75% of the construction funding required to construct and commence operation for approved renewable energy projects. As part of Climate Investor One, the Construction Equity Fund will seek to reduce the overall cost and time of getting projects operational by:  
•Provid ing financing for the construction of qualifying projects;
•Reducing the complexity and cost of financing at project level through an equity only construction funding
strategy;
•Establishing and operating projects that allow for optimisation of the balance sheet at a later stage;
•Reducing the construction timeline and thereby reducing the exposure period for investors;
•Reducing the overall construction costs by elimination of certain project finance related debt costs includingInterest During Construction and Debt Service Reserve Accounts (which may take up 10- 15% of a construction
budget); and
•Recycling capital from completed projects to new projects, thereby improving the development productivity ofcapital and reducing the non- productive time typically associated with fundraising.
T
he Construction Equity Fund is designed to hold an equity interest in each project Company , which it will acquire in two 
tranches:  
•An initial equity holding acquired for a nominal amount at the commencement of Climate Investor  One’s
participation in the project, at the same time as the Development Fund provides the development loan.


---
*Page 35*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 93 C
•Provision of additional equity finance during the construction period of up to 75% of total project construction
costs.
Fund Investment Targets  and role  of GCF  Funding
T
he size has been determined by an estimated construction of ca, 30 projects, with a total funding requirement of circa 
USD  3,482  million. Based on the assumption that the CEF takes up to a 75% equity share in each of the projects  that it 
constructs, C EF’s funding requirements will be circa USD  775 million in the CIO structure and an additional approximately  
USD 260 million (a third of USD 775 million)  coming from third parties or project sponsors.   
C
apital in the Construction Equity Fund is recycled via refinancing and exiting of projects. After a period of time post 
construction, when the project has reached COD, a portion of all equity will be refinanced with debt to reduce the cost of 
capital and replenish CEF. Furthermore, after refinancing CEF will exit its equity stake in the project and recuperate its 
remaining capital to be re- invested in other projects. It is estimated that through continuously investing, refinancing and 
exiting the projects CEF capital will be recycled by a factor of 3.37.  
T
he structure of the fund allows for the ranking of cash flow entitlements in a way that appeals to the different investor 
types and their risk -return requirements. The CEF capital tiers represent different risk/return positions and the current 
size of CEF is:  
•Tier 1 USD  75 million capital recovery  return, junior  equity tranche  from CEF donor investors (20%)
•Tier 2 USD 210 million market equity return , ordinary equity tranche  from development finance institutions (DFIs)
and private equity / commercial investors (40%)
•T ier 3 USD  222 million market loan return,  senior equity tranche  from commercial investors comfortable with
construction risks, benefiting from a cover for commercial and political risk provided by an Export Credit Agency (40%)
Given the required 20 / 40 / 40 proportions in the CEF, further T2 investment cannot be fully utilized due to lack of available 
T1 capital, and T3 capital cannot be fully utilized in the structure due to the lacking T2 and T1 capital. Thus, a GCF 
participation in the T1 tranche would be highly catalytic as it would ‘unlock’ the structure for necessary and further 
commercial investment in T2 and T3 tranches. 
With GCF’s participation, the CEF can be increased in size to deliver more projects which will amplify impact. The size of 
CEF would then be as follows:  
•Tier 1 USD 155 million capital recovery  return, junior equity tranche  from CEF donor investors (20%)
•Tier 2 USD  310 million market equity return , ordinary equity tranche  from development finance institutions (DFIs)
and private equity / commercial investors (40%)
•Tier 3 USD  310 million market debt return, senior equity tranche  from commercial investors comfortable with
construction risks, benefiting from a cover for commercial and political risk provided by an Export Credit Agency(40%)


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 93 
 
 C 
 
 
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic 
framework in section H.  
 
Key Objectives of  Climate Investor One  
 
Table 16 below encapsulates the ethos of CI O. The output of CIO’s activities results in a catalytic outcome. The table 
shows impact in GCF -earmarked countries only, not CIO’s entire investment portfolio .  
 
Table 16 : CIO objectives, activities, outcomes and outputs  in the 11  GCF -earmarked countries  
 
CIO’s Key Objectives  Key Activities and Expected Outputs/Outcomes  
Deliver Clean Energy  – Providing clean 
energy at affordable prices and to tackle 
the problem of climate change is the most 
important objective of CIO.  CIO will develop approximately 20 renewable energy projects by leveraging 
proven technologies –  wind, solar, run- of-river hyd ro. The projects developed 
will cumulatively add ~1, 620 MW and produce ~4,3 60 GWh of clean energy 
annually. Clean energy produced will have a positive environment impact - 
reducing ~2. 69 million tonnes of carbon emissions per annum.  
Societal Impact  – Equality is the bedrock 
of society and inclusive growth is 
paramount in reducing economic CIO’s projects will create significant societal impact to local communities by 
employing and training local talent with best industry practices. In particular, 
through CIO’s Gender Integration Action Plan (Annex 3) , CIO projects will


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 93 
 
 C 
inequality and instating gender equality in 
societies.  intentionally impact women as stakeholders, workers, and end -users by both 
identifying and mitigating potential risks as well as proactively enhancing their 
benefit from increased access to renewable energy. CIO’s projects have the 
potential to directly create 26 ,460 jobs in the 11  countries of its operations. 
Of these, it is expected that there will be meaningful employment 
opportu nities for women. Employment and training will develop local 
communities and improve lives of nearby inhabitants. The employment of 
female staff will contribute to the reduction of gender inequalities in the 
targeted countries.  
Address energy deficit in D eveloping 
Markets – Economic and demographic 
resurgence of developing markets has 
increased the energy demand and supply 
gap. This presents an attractive 
opportunity for CIO to add clean energy 
capacity and supply energy.  CIO will identify opportunities in  developing markets with high energy 
demand and deficit and partner with local developers with a proven track 
record to co- develop projects in the respective markets. CIO’s project will 
catalyse the renewable energy landscape in the respective markets – 
through knowledge transfer – spurring the interest of other stakeholders to 
actively participate in the growth of the industry. Energy generated from 
projects will be connected to the grid providing uninterrupted energy supply. 
It is estimated that 8 .15 million people will benefit from the clean energy 
produced by CIO’s projects. Clean and affordable energy will further 
galvanise industrialization whilst adhering to the best interests of the 
environment.  
Mobilising Private Capital  – 
opportunity for comm ercial investors to 
capitalize on the economic resurgence in 
emerging markets.  CIO will actively raise funds from risk averse commercial investors to invest 
in emerging markets through structured blended finance investments in de-
risked assets. Proceeds fr om the sale of investments will be reinvested in 
two to three additional investment cycles. CIO’s experienced team will 
generate returns with downside protection, which will encourage 
apprehensive commercial investors to gain renewable energy exposure in 
developing markets. Increased commercial investor participation will 
galvanise the interest of peer investors to invest in renewable energy in 
developing markets by setting up CIO comparable facilities, leading to a 
fertile investment landscape.  
Fast deliv ery of projects  – Project 
finance tends to be complex and 
cumbersome. Often, projects are delayed 
due to financial and structural constraints. 
CIO will simplify the traditional project 
financing approach by adopting a whole-
of-life funding concept  CIO will  simplify project finance structures by funding the entire life cycle of 
the project. This will reduce the number of parties involved enabling speedy 
development, construction and operation of projects. In reducing 
complexities in structures and expediting  delivery timelines, more projects 
are delivered faster; creating more assets and more impact. This innovative 
model can be scaled up across developing markets with GCF’s participation.  
 
Application of GCF Investment Criteria in the Project Approval and Implementation Process  
 
Apart from the key CIO objectives outlined above, CFM will consider and apply the 6 GCF Investment Criteria throughout  
the project ’s lifecycle as  indicated in the table below. Before a project is contracted, in the sourcing and DD p hase, CFM 
will evaluate the investment opportunity against the GCF criteria among other CIO investment criteria and restrictions. As 
the project progresses into development and construction, the criteria will be included in periodic reporting to investors . 
In the operational phase, CFM will report on realised impact indicators as well as continue to address the GCF criteria.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 93 
 
 C 
Table 17: GCF Investment Criteria in each Stage of a Project ’s Lifetime  
GCF Criteria  Project Phase  
Project Sourcing, DD and IC 
Approval  Development  
Phase  Construction 
Phase  Operations Phase  
1. Impact 
Potential  Impact indicators are estimated, 
baseline is determined and 
impact potential is taken into 
consideration in the approval 
process  Ex-ante estimates 
are firmed up and 
reported  Ex-ante estimates 
are reported  Ex-post results are 
reported at least 
annually  
2. Paradigm 
Shift Potential  Paradigm Shift Potential 
indicators ar e assessed and 
impact potential is taken into 
consideration in the approval 
process  Ex-ante estimates 
are firmed up and 
reported at least 
annually  Ex-ante estimates 
are reported at 
least annually  Ex-post results are 
reported at least 
annually  
3. Sustainable 
Development 
Potential  Sustainable Development 
Potential indicators are 
estimated and impact potential 
is taken into consideration in 
the approval process  Ex-ante estimates 
are reported, Do 
Good programme 
is prepared and 
(partially) planned  Ex-ante estimates 
are reported, Do 
Good programme 
is implemented Ex-post results are 
reported  at least  
annually . Do Good 
programme is 
continued /fully 
implemented 
4. Needs of 
the Recipient  Needs of the recipient are 
evaluated and taken into 
consideration in the approval 
process  Needs of the local 
community are 
assessed   Needs of the local 
community and 
recipient country 
are addressed as 
agreed. Financial 
and power 
generation needs 
are materialised.  Contribution to the 
needs of the 
recipient is reported 
a least annually , 
stakeholder 
engagement is 
continued  
5. Country 
Ownership  Country Ownership is assessed 
and confirmed Compliance with all 
relevant laws and 
regulations is 
ensured, PPA with 
the off -taker is 
negotiated and 
signed, stakeholder 
engagement is 
carried out  Compliance with 
relevant laws and 
regulations is 
ensured  Compliance with 
relevant la ws and 
regulations is 
ensured  
6. Efficiency 
and 
Effectiveness  Financial viability and returns 
on investment are estimated 
and analysed and considered in 
the approval process  Financial project 
estimates are 
updated. Ex -ante 
estimates are 
firmed up and 
reported  Financial project 
estimates are 
updated. Ex -ante 
estimates are 
reported  Ex-post financial 
results are reported 
at least annually


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 93 
 
 C 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and f inancial profile of the Sponsor ( Executing Entity ) and 
how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity  investment , management, operations, production and 
marketing.  
 
Climate Fund Managers, which was c o-founded by FMO (Accredited Entity) and Sanlam  InfraWorks  (FMO’s 
implementation partner) , is one of three Executing Entit ies  together with the two funds that it manages : the Development 
Fund and the Construction Equity Fund. Please note that FMO, in its capacity of the sole Board member of the DF, is 
also considered an Executing Entity for purposes of the Programme. Both co- founders of CFM  have a long history of 
successfully executing renewable energy infrastructure projects and programmes in developing markets.  
• Accredited Entity FMO with a strong track record is a co- founder and investor in CIO. 
• Second co- founder and investor in the facility , Sanlam InfraWorks, is a joint venture between a premium 
infrastructure firm, Phoenix  InfraWorks, w ith a profound  track record of delivering renewable energy infrastructure 
projects across developing markets  and Sanlam: Africa’s second largest financial services firm with on the ground 
experience in Africa and the Energy sector.  
• Collectiv ely, the founders have committed USD 168.4 million to CIO.  
Climate Fund Managers (CFM), is a separate legal entity set up for fund raising and implementation of the investment 
strategy on behalf of its shareholders. CFM is the Fund Manager of the Climate Investor One funds . CFM is an equal 
joint venture co- founded by FMO and Sanlam  InfraWorks. Furthermore, CFM has been established to implement and 
manage innovative climate financing platforms in developing markets. Climate Investor One is CFM’s maiden renewable 
energy platform.  
CFM has been established on the strong belief that successfully managing the development, construction and operations 
of renewable energy projects in the target regions requires an innovative, complete lifecy cle funding solution. Climate 
Investor One builds on a track record of previous successful partnerships between FMO and Sanlam InfraWorks , which 
includes two renewable energy funds and three assets. The partnership track record between FMO and Sanlam 
InfraWorks  is elaborated in section E.5.2 of this application.  
 
FMO (Accredited Entity)  
FMO is the Dutch development bank and has invested in the private sector in developing countries and developing 
markets for more than 45 years. FMO invests in sectors w ith the highest long- term impact: financial institutions, energy, 
agribusiness and infrastructure. FMO is a profitable financial institution owned 51% by the Dutch State, 42% by Dutch 
banks and 7% by employers’ associations, trade unions and individual inv estors.  
 
Each of FMO’s investments aims to generate an attractive financial return and meaningful development impact. FMO’s 
profitable track record proves that these two can go hand in hand. Based on a proprietary impact model, FMO measures 
the impact usi ng two key metrics: jobs created and supported (including indirect jobs), and greenhouse gas emissions 
avoided. These metrics allow FMO to keep track of progress towards its goal to double the impact and halve the footprint 
by 2020. FMO’s track record is e laborated in section E.5.2  
 
Sanlam  Infra Works BV 
Sanlam InfraWorks  (InfraWorks) BV is an investment & development company targeting infrastructure and climate related 
investments in global emerging markets. The company was formalized in February 2018 and combines the renewable 
energy investment expertise of Phoenix InfraWorks (Phoeni x) – headed by former African Infrastructure Investment 
Managers (AIIM) CEO, Mr. Andrew Johnstone – with Africa  on the ground know how of one of  Africa ’s largest financial 
institutions company, Sanlam.  
Phoenix has in excess of 40 years emerging markets infrastructure and renewable energy investment experience, 
including the structuring and raising of investment funds and management of one of Africa’s largest infrastructure 
platforms. Sanlam, established almost 100 years ago, currently has approximately U SD 80 billion in assets under 
management (AUM).


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 93 
 
 C 
 
Commitment of FMO & Sanlam InfraWorks  
The commitment of CFM’s members, FMO and Sanlam InfraWorks , to the success of Climate Investor One is 
demonstrated by their investments in CIO. FMO and Sanlam InfraWorks  are aligned to a successful outcome of CIO 
through their cumulative investments in excess of  US 75 million in CIO.  
 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  
 
The market for Renewable Energy investments is driven by the following three factors:  
A. Climate change is expected to be a major influencer of capital flows  
B. Economic growth in developing markets is highly energy intensive, expected to result in a major power 
deficit  
C. The global use of renewable energy is expanding rapidly  
 
A. Climate change expected to be a major influencer of capital flows  
The world is at a critical juncture in its efforts  to combat climate change. Governments are increasingly recognizing that, 
in the absence of fully committed and urgent action, climate change will have a severe and irreversible impact across the 
world. In December 2010, the 196 Parties to the United Natio ns Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
agreed to a long- term global objective to keep the increase in long- term global average temperatures to below two 
degrees Celsius. In order to meet this objective, it is of key importance for countries around the world to proactively 
manage and reduce Greenhouse Gases (GHG) emitted through human activity9. To facilitate this an estimated USD 2.3 
trillion will need to be directed at low carbon technologies and energy efficient solutions by 2035.  
 
Since 1995,  annual global GHG emissions have risen by more than one- quarter. Energy production and use accounts 
for around two- thirds of global GHG emissions today, of which carbon dioxide (CO 2) forms the great majority of trace 
gases. Of all energy -related CO 2 emiss ions, electricity consumption accounts for around 45%. Effective action in the 
electricity sector is, consequentially, essential to tackling the climate change problem.  
 
In the beginning of the 20th century, energy related increases in CO 2 emissions origin ated almost exclusively from Europe 
and the United States. However, emissions in developing countries have increased rapidly, led by strong industrialization, 
economic and population growth. As of 2015, OECD countries account for around 40% of global CO 2 emissions with 
non-OECD countries accounting for around 60%. By 2040, it is expected that developing countries’ CO 2 emissions will 
grow by 150% and account for around 68% of global CO 2 emissions. As a result, climate change and the willingness to 
reduce CO 2 emissions are playing an increasingly important role in the political agendas of developing markets.  
                                                             
9 GHG emissions include: CO 2, Methane (CH 4) and Nitrous Oxide (N 2O)


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 93 
 
 C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: CO 2 emissions outlook in selected regions (Source: EIA)  
  
B. Energy intensive growth of developing markets  
Over the past decade, developing countries in Africa, Latin America, Asia and the Middle East have experienced strong 
growth in GDP, population, urbanization and industrialization. GDP growth in these regions has consistently outpaced 
that of developed countries, averaging 6.2% over the past 15 years. The size of developing markets’ population is now 
approximately 6 billion, making up 83% of the world total. Strong GDP growth has also resulted in a rapid increase in 
demand for energy, although supply in many developing countries has not been sufficient to account for such increase 
in demand. W orldwide, 1.1 billion people continue to live without sufficient access to electricity, of which 99.9% live in 
developing markets. This is equivalent to approximately 16% of the global population.  
 
Going forward, demand for energy is set to increase at a strong pace. In particular, global electricity consumption is 
seeing significant levels of growth, estimated at approximately 40% by 2040. The largest share of this growth in 
consumption is expected to be driven by developing markets, which will see an inc rease of 60% over the same period.  
 
Figure 9: Developing markets historic GDP growth (2010 USD ($)  (Source: 
EIA))  Figure10: Electricity consumption outlook (Source: EIA)


---
*Page 42*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 93 C
C.The increasing importance of renewable energy
Due to the threat of climate change and the persistent demand for energy, global use of renewable energy is increasing 
rapidly. Global renewable energy installations have now reached a cumulative total of 1, 850 GW and in 2015 renewable 
energy investments accounted for more than 45% of new, global power generation capacity, with investments totalling 
USD 290 billion. 2015 was a record year for both wind and solar energy, largely due to a continual decline in technology 
costs. In 2015, investments in renewable technologies included of USD 110 billion invested in wind amounting to 63 GW 
of additional capacity, driven by declines in onshore turbine prices of up to 45% since 2010. Investments in solar PV 
amounted to USD 161 billion or 47 GW due to price drops of up to 80% for solar photovoltaic modules since 2010. Small -
scale hydro investments saw an increase of 4 GW of additional capacity, amounting to USD 4 billion. The remaining 35 
GW of additional capacity in 2015 can be attributed to 28 GW of l arge-s cale hydro, 5 GW of b iomass and approximatel y 
1.5GW of g eothermal capacity. Renewable energy capacity now accounts for 23.7% of global electricity production. At 
the recent rate of increase, renewables - excluding large hydro - are expected to become a leading source of electricity 
with an average global investment need of USD 260-300 billion per year until 2030.   
Figure 11 : Global new investment in renewable energy (UNEP & Bloomberg 
New Energy Finance) Figure 12 : Renewable energy power generation and capacity as a s
of global power (Source: BNEF, EIA, IEA, UNEP)  
Describe the competitive environment including the list of  competitors with market shares and customer base and key 
differentiating factors  (if applicable).  
C
IO’s Competitive Edge  
•Consolidates fragmented roles of different  market players into one hybrid facility
•Introduces whole- of-life funding concept to the renewable energy infrastructure market
•Simplifies project finance structure by reducing the number of stakeholders in each project
A
s CIO is a whole of life funding concept for infrastructure project financing, there are multiple competitors depending on 
the stage of the project. In the figure above, indicatively, CFM have identified some of CIO’s competitors at various stages 
of a project’s life.  
Fi
gure 2 in section B .1 represents the structure of a typical project finance transaction. Multiple party involvement reflects 
in a complicated and cumbersome financing structure.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 93 
 
 C 
CIO’s uniqueness lies in the innovative whole -of-life funding of renewable energy infrastructure projects. This  structure  
de-clutters the complex project finance process and enables a faster delivery of projects on a large scale. Traditional 
approaches  to project financ ing can often be time consuming and the involvement of multiple stakeholders can extend 
timelines for project delivery.  
 
CIO’s intervention saves an estimated 2- 3 years combined for development and construction of a project. Hence, more 
projects can be delivered, faster. F igure s 3 and 5 in sect ion B.1 demonstrates CIO’s competitive edge in project financing.  
 
Table 18: GCF  Approved Private Sector Mitigation Projects and Programmes in the 11  CIO Countries   
Country  GCF Approved Mitigation Projects and Programmes  
Burundi  None  
Cameroon  None  
Djibouti  None  
Indonesia  None  
Kenya  • GEEREF Next  
• KawiSafi  
• UGEAP  
Madagascar  • Sustainable Landscapes in Eastern Madagascar  
• GEEREF Next  
Malawi  None  
Mongolia  • GCF-EBRD Sustainable Energy Financing Facilities  
• Business loan programme for GHG emissions reduction  
• Renewable Energy Program #1 - Solar  
Morocco  • GCF-EBRD Sustainable Energy Financing Facilities  
Nigeria  • UGEAP  
Uganda  • GEEREF Next  
 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
Provide  details of government licenses  or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue.  
 
Currently, neither CFM nor any of the CIO Funds are required to hold any license or permit to conduct their activities in 
offering to and accepting commitments from (potential) investors. When required, licences and permits will be obtained 
on a project by project basis.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations.  
 
CFM and the CIO Funds are domiciled in the Netherlands and are registered for corporate income tax, dividend 
withholding tax and VAT purposes in the Netherlands.  
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  
 
CEF and the CIO Funds w ill at first closing have Directors & Officers and Professional Indemnity insurance cover in place 
at industry standard levels and provided by industry leading insurance brokers. Also,  CFM have appropriate insurance 
cover in place with respect to its emplo yees and similar personnel , such as health  / disability and travel insurance.  
 
At project level all required insurances for the asset class and activities conducted will be obtained, including business 
interruption insurance and third -party  liability insur ance.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 93 
 
 C 
 
Such  cover in place will be reviewed periodically to be in line with industry standards.  
 
 
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the organization  
structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities 
and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  Also describ e which of these structures are already in place and 
which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish them.  
 
• Section A  below shows that CFM has designed a strong organisational structure spread across four continents 
to deliver and monitor projects  
• Section B  below shows that CFM has designed strong governance and administrative processes to maintain 
premium operational quality of projects  
• Section C  below shows that CFM has hired seasoned professionals with a  solid track record of delivering high 
quality projects in developing markets  
• Section D  below shows that CFM has bestowed accountability within all key stakeholders of a project by creating 
an obligation via contractual agreements  
• Section E below shows the  contractual arrangements between GCF, FMO, CFM, CEF and the Development 
Fund  
 
A. Organizational Structure  
CFM is organised along regional and functional lines which combines; (i) a strong investment and operational focus with 
industry and local expertise and (ii) solid middle and back office skills in operations, finance and strategy (iii) sound ris k 
management, coor dinated legal / tax structuring and robust compliance functionalities.  
 
CFM will operate from its offices in the Hague, the Netherlands (head office), Nairobi, Kenya , Singapore,  and Latin 
America (regional offices) as follows:  
 
The Head Office: has  and manages  functional responsibilities that are deployed across the regional markets in the 
following areas: (i) fund management, administration and fund operations, (ii) investor relations, (iii) finance, (iv) legal,  
tax, compliance and risk management,  (v) environmental, social & governance management and (vi) human resources.   
 
The Regional Offices: are led by regional heads with strong networks as well as specific skills and experience over 
discrete geographies and sectors, thereby providing the regional teams with regional intelligence. So far CFM has opened 
two regional offices in Nairobi and Singapor e. Following closing of the Funds, a third office in Latin America will be opened.  
 
Regional offices are responsible for deal origination, due diligence and execution support and operational management 
of portfolio companies. Teams consist of staff with complementary and specific skills and experience required,  which 
includes the following: sourcing expertis e, deal execution experience, financing expertise, operational asset management 
experience, proven buy -and build track record in renewable energy and/or developing markets, exit know -how, industry 
knowledge and environmental and social expertise. Recognisi ng that project development skills go beyond commercial, 
investment and financial engineering skills, the regional executive teams focussed on the CIO Development Fund also 
have strong renewable energy project development skills (including resource assessments, negotiating power purchase 
agreements, land negotiations, permitting and licensing procedures).  
 
Project Offices  will be stablished once a transaction has been appro ved and development can commence. The office 
will be located  in the local jurisdiction in which the project is domiciled. The project office will manage & supervise the


---
*Page 45*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 93 C
development activities of the project. Oversight of the project office will be from bot h the CFM HQ & CFM Regional 
Offices.  
B.G
overnance
The Governance structure of Climate Investor One has been designed to ensure appropriate supervision and investor 
representation to each Fund, to guarantee adequate expertise is procured into each forum,  as well as to create alignment 
of interest and control. The governance structure proposed is one of a non- discretionary manager. This means CFM will 
make recommendations regarding investments to each Fund, and the Investment Committee of the respective Fund will 
decide whether to proceed or not. In this model each Fund and the members of the Investment Committee assume the overall responsibility and liability of such investment decisions.  Note that the two different ICs have been established (one 
for the Development Fund and one for the CEF) for the alignment of interest.  
C.C
limate Fund Managers’ Team
Climate Fund Managers are a specialist team of highly experienced infrastructure and emerging markets professionals with a common goal of delivering the investment outcome of Climate Investor One.  
T
he team currently consists of 25 employees , approximately half of which are responsible for investments and project 
development and are based in HQ (The Hague), Nairobi, Kenya and Singapore.  
A
side from an extensive and strong track record in project finance in emerging markets, financial engineering, asset 
management and fundraising; the team combines features of energy investment, fund management expertise and strong interest to develop blended finance as an investment technique to mobilise commercial capital into the climate finance sector in pursuit of attractive risk  adjusted returns with significant developmental and environmental impacts.  
C
limate Fund Managers have an entrepreneurial spirit that is guided by a common culture and desire to deliver financial 
investment results whilst improving the lives of others.  In the case of CIO this is pursued by providing access to affordabl e 
energy in power deficient regions of the world; mitigating GHG emissions to ensure a better, cleaner future, and; replacing 
old ways of thinking and structures with innovative solutions – all, without compromising superior, risk adjusted returns 
on investment.  
T
eam Track Record
CFM’s multidisciplinary team has a stellar track record. Whilst Climate Investor One is the first fund of Climate Fund Managers, several of the team members have an extensive history of working together in other capacities over the past 
decade. This includes the raising of four funds, the establishment of two fund management companies, the development 
of two large wind farms and one solar farm, the disposal of four large assets in Africa, with investment returns in excess 
of 15% per annum over twenty years delivered to investors.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 93 
 
 C 
 
D. Project Structures  
 
Figure 13 : Typical project structure  
 
Key responsibilities and agreements defining the project’s parameters include; implementation agreements with the 
government, project capacity and elements such as the required environmental & social impact studies summarizing 
obligations to the developer.  Typically, project SPV’s in which CEF holds shares (directly or indirectly) will be domiciled 
in the countries in which the projects are based, with or wit hout the use of interposed entities, as applicable.  
 
Revenues for the project are generated through an o ff-taker  Agreement, which for renewable energy projects is typically 
arranged within a Power Purchase Agreement. Next to the rates and payment structure, risk allocation is arranged for 
items such as resource risk, interconnection/grid availability, and political and natural force majeure. Normally both the  
Off-taker and the Independent Power Producer (IPP) have to provide certain performance obligations.  
 
The construction works are arranged through an Equipment Supply Agreement (ESA) and a Balance of Plant (BoP) 
agreement, usually combined into an Engineering, Procurement & Construction (EPC) Contract.  The number of EPC 
contractors used differs per sector e.g. typically within the hydro sector construction works are done under a single EPC 
contractor whilst for wi nd projects multiple EPC parties can be used. The EPC Contract contains scope of work, price 
and payment schedules including advance payment guarantees. Other key elements include the risk allocation on certain 
construction risks (e.g. geotechnical risk , adverse weather conditions ), performance bonds, warranty periods, liquidated 
damages and limitation of liability.  
 
The Operations & Maintenance (O&M) Contract deals with the activities for maintaining the project at a certain 
performance level. The performance or availability level that the O&M contractor guarantees is one of the critical 
components next to the scope of work, price and limitation of liability. Insurance policies and Land Lease Agreements 
also form part of the suite to key documents.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 93 
 
 C 
The Financing and Shareholders’ Agreements are a set of legal documents that deal with the terms and conditions of the 
debt and equity finance, sponsor support, cash waterfall and security.    
  
Financing for renewable energy projects can take a number of forms but are typically either financed through an owner’s 
balance sheet by way of corporate finance or on a limited or non- recourse basis through project finance.   A key difference 
between the two approaches lies in how debt is structured.   Both project and corporate finance often include a debt 
component (to leverage or preserve the owners’ equity, among other reasons) al ongside the equity owned by the 
shareholders. In project finance, the project company borrows against the cash flow generated by the project alone 
(additionally secured by available assets and guarantees), while corporate finance leverages the companies’  balance 
sheet,  not the cash flows.   
 
A key point in project finance is that the cash flows from the project alone must be sufficient to service the debt i.e. to 
repay the debt without corporate guarantees.   The magnitude of the cash flow that is deemed suf ficient depends on the 
risk profile of the project.   The process of structuring debt is complex, time consuming and often costly.   In addition, the 
covenants imposed by lenders put a degree of inflexibility into the financing structure, which makes it diff icult for the 
project company to withstand variances from forecast s in the early years. The use of equity only from the CIO 
Construction Equity Fund is designed to remove this complexity time lag and rigidity, and thereby increase the 
probability of a proj ect reaching successful operations.  
Project Sustainability & Contracting  
 
Each SPV or Project Company will be staffed by experienced and capable staff consisting at a minimum of a CEO, a 
CFO with the necessary background in the financial running of a similar project vehicle, a CTO with the necessary 
background and understanding of the project technology and operations and an E&S manager. The SPV or Project 
Company will enter into a robust Full Service Agreement (with the necessary guarantees) with the suppliers of the 
equipment or a company which is fully accredited by the equipm ent provider to execute the service and maintenance of 
the plant.  
For non- equipment maintenance (Balance of Plant), a service contract will be executed with a company with the 
necessary background and track record to execute such services. In the CAPEX of  the project a full set of spares will be 
included meeting standard operational requirements for the designated technology. These spares will be under warranty 
and the Full Service provider must guarantee that such spares remain under warranty during their  storage period and 
that when such spares are utilized they are replaced by others with full warranties attached.  
The term of the Full Service Agreement (FSA) will equal at a minimum 50% of the life of the project, which is 20 – 30 
years depending on the off -take agreements and technology used, with an option to extend such agreement by 2 
extensions of 25% of project lifetime. Depending on the technology used, the Full Service Agreement may after 
termination be substituted by in- house personnel trained by the Full Service Provider during the term of the FSA.  
 
           E. Contractual Arrangements and Flow of Funding  
For the financing of the Programme, the GCF and the Accredited Entity will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement 
(“FAA”), in the form of a re imbursable grant .


---
*Page 48*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 93 
 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation   
 
*In addition to this monitoring requirements, the Funded Activity is also subject to financial reporting per the AMA/FAA, suc h as Unaudited/Audited Financial Statements, Financial information 
reports, and other reports as defined in the FAA.  
§ In addition to the Annual Reports, CIO will also provide Quarterly Reports as per the Development Fund Donors Agreement and the Construction Equity Fund Members Agreement , as 
outlined in the Funding Proposal  COMPONENTS/OUTPUTS 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 Target 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 Target
Component 1: the Development 
Fund
Output 1.1
Renewable energy projects 
successfully developed and reached 
financial close13 projects 20 projects 
Activity 1.1.1 Capital raising for the 
Development Fund
Activity 1.1.2 Project Sourcing, due 
diligence and approval by CFM and 
the Fund IC
1.1.3 Providing development loans
1.1.4 Project development and 
project development support 
Output 1.2
Accelerated installation of 
renewable energy capacity and 
development of new markets for 
renewable energy_ _
Activity 1.2.1 Accelerating Project 
Development Process
Component 2: the Construction 
Equity Fund
Output 2.1  Increased number of 
small, medium and large low-
emission power suppliers13 IPPs / 
1,053 MW / 
56,650  
GWh20 IPPs / 
1,620 MW / 
87,160 
GWh
Output 2.2 Construction and 
Operational & Maintenance Stage 
Jobs 17,200 jobs 26,460 jobs
Activity 2.1.1 Capital raising for the 
Construction Equity Fund
Activity 2.1(2).2 Project Investment 
and Construction
Activity 2.1(2).3 Project Refinancing 
and Exit
MilestonesEffective 
Date 19 
AprilDrawdown 
Period End 
23 June Investment 
Period End 
23 June Completion 
Date 23 June
Project Monitoring*Inception 
ReportAPR APR APR APRInterim 
EvaluationAPR APR APR APRInterim 
EvaluationAPR APR APR APRInterim 
EvaluationAPR APRCompletion 
ReportFinal 
Evaluation


---
*Page 49*
---

R
ATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 93 D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consideration of  other alternatives . 
T
he Importance of GCF in Blended Finance
B
lended finance acts as the glue to mobilize private sector capital off the strategic use of public sector financing – by 
means of de- risking structures – targeting investment opportunities with social and environmental purpose, where major 
capital flows are still lacking.  
G
CF Additionality
A
s outlined during discussions with CFM and FMO, GCF a dditionality is foundational to its investment decisions. 
C
FM identifies the following ways to demonstrate GCF additionality in respect of an USD 100 million investment in 
Climate Investor One:  
A)I
nvestment by GCF will narrow CIO’s investment focus to a selected subset of countries that have ambitious climate
change targets, sizeable energy deficits and / or an over reliance on fossil fuels  with particular focus on African/LDC
countries ;
B)A
 GCF intervention in CIO’s Development Fund will catalyse a facility that offers scarce early -stage funding for
project development;
C)A
 meaningful GCF contribution in CIO’s Construction Equity Fund (Tier 1) will enable Climate Investor One to scal e
be
yond a successful pilot initiative, increasing the overall impact potential of the facility .
I
n addition, CFM highlights the following:  
An USD 20 million investment in CIO’s Development Fund (DF) mobilizes a pool of capital targeted for high- risk
early -stage funding (the DF) that is scarcely available in the market. Access to development capital is one of t he
m
ain unique selling points of CIO. By providing scale to the DF facility, GCF will enable CIO to facilitate th e
s
uccessful development of a significantly greater number of projects ( ca.30 ), all of which offer CIO’s
Construction Equity Fund a preferential financing opportunity. At present, CIO’s  DF has USD 26.5 million
committed, which is almost fully committed to projects.
C
IO’s Construction Equity Fund (CEF) is the ‘engine room’ of CIO and consequently CIO’s most effectiv e
i
nstrument for project developers. As the CEF accommodates multiple investors’ risk / return preferences, the
CEF structure is tranched accordingly with strict ‘blending’  proportions to minimise concessionality:
oT
ier 1 makes up 20% of CEF and is comprised of junior equity.
oTier 2 makes up 40% of CEF and is comprised of ordinary equity.
oTier 3 makes up 40% of CEF and is comprised of senior equity.
P
ublic sector investors catalyse those of the private sector through their participation in the Tier 1 (T1) tranche. 
In this regard, T1 offers the most ‘ additionality’ in the structure. All private sector participation in this structure is


---
*Page 50*
---

R
ATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 93 D
contingent on the T1 tranche. The 20% of CEF donor funding share is the minimal needed amount in the first -
loss position, required to generate a market equity return for CEF Tier 2 investors. This return is needed to 
attract sufficient funding from commercial investors.  
G
CF Leverage
T
able 19  shows the catalytic effect of GCF funding. As shown over one investment cycle GCF would catalyse USD 473 
million in commercial capital to be invested in project development and construction. Over the lifetime of CIO, GCF 
would catalyse USD 845 million of commercial capital for project development and construction.  
T
able 19: Funds Catalysed in GCF  Countries  (USD millions)  
Investor/
DonorContributionCatalysed  in
CIOCatalysed  3rd
Party 1 cycleTotal Invested
1 cycleCatalysed  3rd
Party Fund
LifeTotal Invested
Fund Life
GCF DF20 0 20 40 76 152 
GCF CEF80 320 133 533 449 1,797  
Other DF10 0 10 20 38 76 
Other CEF T120 80 33 133 112 449 
Total130 400 197 727 676 2,475  
Assum ptions  1.Funding Catalyzed within CIO is USD 2 of Tier 2 and Tier 3 funding each for every USD 1 of Tier
1 capital.
2.Over the fund’s life, CEF capital will be recycled 3.37 times.
3.Over the fund’s life, Development Fund capital will be recycled 3.8 times.
5.3rd party sponsors provide 50% of development costs and 25% of construction equity. These ar e
minimum amounts as per CIO’s investment restrictions.
6 The difference between catalyzed and invested capital is that within CEF capital is considered t o
be catalyzed once, however is recycled and re- invested, explaining why those numbers are higher.
7.The Total Funds Invested only include the development and construction ph ases.
C
FM request a total contribution of USD 1 00 million, whereby GCF have the opportunity to become the largest donor in 
the CIO structure with the highest additionality & impact potential.  Notably, a sizeable investment by GCF is a necessary 
requirement to ensure that CIO is sufficiently capitalised to invest in each of the countries on its GCF target list.


---
*Page 51*
---

R
ATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 93 D
D.2. Exit Strategy
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability  will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support  from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long- term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets (if 
applicable) . 
In this section we will outline Project Sustainability & Contracting as well as the Exit Strategies for CIO funded projects. 
E
xit Strategies
E
ach Fund shall have its own designated exit strategy tailored to match its respective investment thesis. CFM believe 
that the projects incubated in the CIO programme will be an attractive acquisition target for potential buyers because 
CIO incubated projects future -proof renewable energy infrastructure assets, use proven technologies (wind, solar, run -
of-river hydro), involve de -risked brownfield assets  (once operational), generate long- term stable cash flows  and create 
long-term societal and environmental  impact.     
T
he CIO Development Fund shall exit its investments to the CIO Construction Equity Fund using a pre- determined set 
of exit criteria charging a development premium.  In the event of no exit to CEF, attempts will be made to sell the project 
to a 3rd party, if unsuccessfully the development loan will be written off.  All exit proceeds will be recycled by the CIO 
Development Fund into the development of new projects , making the DF evergreen. 
T
he CIO Construction Equity Fund will exit its investments at a time considered appropriate, but not later than end of 
the Fund’s life. CFM will actively look for suitable buyers for the CIO Construction Equity Fund’s interest in the project. 
Those buyers will have an interest to continue to operate the assets for the medium to long term.  
C
FM have a long-standing relationship with some of the prospective acquirers. CFM have broadly distinguished these 
acquirers by the following:  
•P
ension Funds  – local and/or international pension funds looking for stable long- term cash flow generating
assets to add to their portfolio. There is a growing trend of direct investments in the pension fund managementindustry. Pension funds are very risk averse and de- risked brownfield assets prove to be an attractive investment
proposition for this investor class.
•De-fossilisation of large Institutional portfolios  – large institutions that have portfolios comprised of
investments in traditional fossil fuel generating investments (oil, gas and coal) motivated to shift their focus onto
green investments. Acquisition of operational assets prove to be a better option for this investor class vis -à-vis
dev
eloping and constructing new assets.
•P
rivate Equity Funds  – local and/or international private equity  /infrastructure funds with secondaries mandates
typically look for brownfield assets with a good track record. CIO’s projects , characterized by  stable cash flows ,
will be an attractive target for such funds.
•B
uyout Funds  – Local and/or international buyout funds look for unlevered assets. Prior to the refinancin g
ev
ent, CIO’s projects are fully funded by equity which will make the projects attractive to bids from such funds.
Buyout funds will introduce debt capital into the projects , which would enable projects to expand their MW
capacity resulting in more impact than before.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 93 
 
 
 
 
 D 
• Utility Companies  – local and/or international utility companies actively scout the market for attractive 
acquisition targets. Since CI O’s projects will be located in developing markets with high energy demands, utility 
companies would absorb these assets to add more MW s to their portfolios . 
 
• Large multinational corporates  – large multinational corporates wishing to increase their corporate social 
responsibility activities typically look for projects with high societal and environmental impact quotient s. CIO’s 
projects conform to this investment criterion.  
 
• Large Local Indu stries – large locally domiciled industries look for captive energy generation to serve their 
energy requirements will be attracted towards CIO’s projects as the costs of energy can potentially be cheaper 
than fossil fuel generated energy available on the grid.


---
*Page 53*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 93 E
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the proposed  
project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub- criteria  and indicative 
assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where relevant and 
applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
E.1. Impact P otential
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub- criteria 
and assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework . 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock -in of long- lived, high 
emission or cl imate -vulnerable infrastructure.  
CIO is a climate mitigation vehicle that delivers clean energy to developing countries. By virtue of its investment 
philosophy, CIO contributes to shifting low -emission sustainable development pathways across a set of jurisdictions  
identified as compelling investment cases as per GCF’s Investment Framework. These countries include:  Burundi, 
Cameroon,  Djibouti,  Indonesia, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mongolia, Morocco, Nigeria and Uganda.    
C
IO’s key impact indicators are the amount of electricity it can produce, the number of people it can serve and the amount 
GHG emissions it can avoid. The potential for these indicators depends on country characteristics, such as the quality of utility grid, the rate of electrification, the amount of renewable resources, such as intensity of irradiation or wind speed, and the energy mix. To determine the investment suitability in respect of CIO’s impact potential, GCF target jurisdictions 
are primarily identified by having less than favourable: Electrification (%), Rural Electrification (%),  Non-Hydroelectric 
Renewables Share of Energy Sector (%), Total Installed Capacity (GW), Clean Energy Investments (USD Billion), and Emissions (GHG tCO
2). The current state of the target countries regarding these indicators is described in Table 20. 
T
able 20: Current State of the Electricity Sector10 
CountryAccess to
electricity
% (2014)Rural
Access to
Electricit y
%
 (2014)Installed
Capacit y
M
W (2015)Non-
Hydroelectri c
R
enewabl es
(%
 of
C
apacity)
(2015)CO2
E
mission s
f
rom Energy
Consumption
2015 (million s
of tons)Cumulative
clean energ y
i
nvestment s
2011
-2015
(
USD billions)
Burundi 7% 2% 68 3% 0.2 0.1 
Cameroon 57%  22%  1,545  47% 9.7 N/A 
Djibouti 47%  10%  130 0% 1 N/A 
Indonesia 97%  94%  57,345  6% 502.0  4.45 
Kenya 36%  13%  2,301  32% 16.6 3.56 
Madagascar 17%  11%  668 2% 3.1 N/A 
Malawi 12%  5% 375 6% 1.2 0.10 
Mongolia 86%  51%  1,106  5% 14.2 0.29 
Morocco 92%  85%  8,040  10% 52.3 N/A 
Nigeria 58%  39%  10,478  0% 97.5 0.32 
Uganda 20%  10%  922 9% 3.9 0.27 
10 Access to electricity data is taken from the World Bank databank, Clean energy investments are taken 
from Climatescope, capacity and emissions are from the EIA.


---
*Page 54*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 93 E
CIO selected its target countries based on overall impact, which means that some countries perform well in all categories, 
while others excel in one. For example, Burundi  has very low electrification rates and needs energy investment, yet the 
existing energy mix in the country is almost all large- scale hydro. Even though large- scale hydro is not considered a 
clean technology, it is still renewable. Such a large share of renewables in the energy mix will reduce the estimated GHG 
avoidance; however, the impact in terms of providing electricity is great, because the country has so little of it. The same 
can be said of  Uganda and  Malawi : these countries have relatively high shares of renewable technology in their power 
sectors, mainly due to large- scale hydro power, but are in desperate need of electrification. Furthermore, large 
hydroelectric plants do emit GHG, through the decay of flora in the reservoir and harm the local environment. Conversely, 
Morocco has high electrification rates , but comparatively low share of r enewables  in their power generation mix. Djibouti 
has a lot of impact potential in all categories, due to the countr y’s low electrification rates as well as lack of renewable 
power. All the target countries could benefit from clean electricity investment, however as indicated in Table 20. none 
receive adequate clean energy financing.   
T
able 21 : CIO’s Current Project Pipeline Impact Estimates 
Capacity (MW) GWh/year People ReachedGHG avoided/yea r
(tCO 2eq/year)
Total 588.6 1,583 2,962,000 976,000
T
able 21 indicates the expected impact of one or more projects  in each of the target countries. The numbers are based 
on benchmark projects in CIO’s pipeline. The table (21) is closely related to Table 20. Since CIO’s potential impact 
depends on the current state of the country’s electricity sector. The Sub- Saharan A frican countries will benefit mostly in 
terms of people served, due to their low electrification rates. Morocco, Nigeria, Indonesia and Uganda will benefit 
exceptionally in GHG avoidance. Even though all countries have a geographical advantage for renewable technologies, some of the target countries will benefit exceptionally in terms of electricity production due to their abundance of renewable resources, such as Morocco (solar and wind) and Djibouti (wind).  
Table 22 shows estimated GCF and CIO impact in the 1 1 countries, calculated on the basis of the current pipeline.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator
Table 22 (a,b): Impact in the 11 selected countries  
GCF Funding (Direct & Catalysed )
1 cycle (Medium Term) 3.37 cycles (Long Term)Total during life time of all
technologies
MW Installed 380 1,300  1,300  
Electricity Produced 1,030 GWh/year  3,490 GWh/year  69,730 GWh  
GHG  Avoided 640,000  tCO2eq/year  2,150,000 tCO2eq/year  42,990,000 tCO2eq  
People Reached 1,940,000  6,520,000  6,520,000  
Jobs Created  MCI11 6,200  20,900  20,900  
Jobs Created  O&M12 70 220 220 
Jobs Created  Total 6,280  21,160  21,160  
11 Manufacturing, Construction and Installation. Please note that the equipment is not manufactured in the 
country of the project, hence only a portion of these jobs are created in the 1 2 selected countries.  
12 Operations and Maintenance.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
GCF + Other  Donor Funding (Direct & Catalysed ) 
 1 cycle (Medium Term)  3.37 cycles (Long Term) Total during life time of all 
technologies  
MW 480 1,620  1,620  
Electricity Produced  1,290 GWh/year  4,360 GWh/year  87,160 GWh  
GHG  Avoided  800,000 tCO2eq/year  2,690,000 tCO2eq/year  53,730,000 tCO2eq  
People Reached  2,420,000  8,150,000  8,150,000  
Jobs Created MCI  7,800  26,200  26,200  
Jobs Created O&M12 80 280 280 
Jobs Created Total  7,850  26,460  26,460  
 
 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
Table 23: Cost Estimates Based on Current Pipeline  
MW per  USD 1 million  0.72  
GWh/year per USD 1 million  1.94  
GHG/year avoided (tCO 2eq) per USD 1 million  1,195.82  
People Reached per USD 1 million  3,629.23  
MCI Jobs per USD 1 million  11.65  
O&M Jobs per USD 1 million  0.12  
 
 
Table 24: Total estimated funds invested in 11  GCF -earmarked countries  
Investor/ 
Donor  Contribution  Catalysed  in 
CIO  Catalysed  3rd 
Party 1 cycle  Total Invested  
1 cycle  Catalysed  3rd 
Party Fund 
Life Total Invested 
Fund Life  
GCF DF  20 0 20 40 76 152 
GCF CEF  80 320 133 533 449 1,797  
Other DF  10 0 10 20 38 76 
Other CEF T1  20 80 33 133 112 449 
Total  130 400 197 727 676 2,475  
Assum ptions  1. Funding Catalyzed within CIO is USD 2 of Tier 2 and Tier 3 funding each for every USD 1 of Tier 
1 capital.  
2. Over the fund’s life, CEF capital  will be recycled 3.37 times.  
3. Over the fund’s life, Development Fund capital will be recycled 3.8 times.  
5. 3rd party sponsors provide 50% of development costs and 25% of construction equity. These are 
minimum amounts as per CIO’s investment restrictions.  
6 The difference between catalyzed and invested capital is that within CEF capital is considered to 
be catalyzed once, however is recycled and re- invested, explaining why those numbers are higher.  
7. The Total Funds Invested only include the development and construction phases.


---
*Page 56*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 93 E
For the purpose of calculating the impact indicators only construction phase funding is considered , because some of the 
Development Fund financing catalysed and invested will fail, hence have no impact. Also, even though the Development 
Fund is crucial for the project and without it construction would not be possible, only construction financing is assumed 
to finance the MW of capacity that will cause impact.  
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator values 
for a similar project/programme in a comparable context).  
T
he indicator values delivered by Climate Investor One are comparable to other, business as usual  projects at the project 
level. Where CIO  excels however, is in its ability to bring scale  through the programme level ensuring greater overall 
impact.  
In addition, CFM anticipate that CIO will be able to deliver more projects, at a faster rate, and more economically than current marke
t practice through its ability to reduce project timelines and costs throughout the development and 
construction phases. Furthermore, the recycling of capital feature that CIO utilises enables greater impact per USD  
invested in the programme as compared with individual investments at the project level.  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate- resilient 
development pathways could be scaled- up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish 
it. 
C
limate Investor One has the potential to cause a paradigm shift at two levels: (i) the global development finance sector 
level, and (ii) the investee country. The first shift arises from the novelty and innovation of CIO itself, because it  introduces 
a new catalytic tool into the development and climate finance toolbox, which will potentially be used by other Development 
Finance Institutions and impact investors. The second shift is bespoke to each country and arises due to the impact CIO causes in terms of electricity provision, pioneering the private energy market and new forms of infrastructure finance.  
P
aradigm shift in development finance
A
s described in Section A ‘The Importance of Climate Investor One’, at programme level, CIO is a new and innovative 
solution to financing renewable energy assets in developing countries. CIO’s significance lies in ‘how’ it finances projects.  
This model enables a greater contribution to poverty alleviation, sustainable development and low carbon development 
pathways through a more expeditious process and end- to-end financing, consistent with the goal of keeping global 
temperature increases to less than 2 degrees Celsius  as set out under the Paris Agreement . 
A proven blended finance concept, the CIO structure can be scaled and/or replicated across other climate and 
sustainable development related themes, including water infrastructure, ocean preservation, bio-diversity protection, 
sustainable cities, etc. It is the intention of CFM to raise a platform of climate finance programmes based on the model 
of CIO, advocating the blended f inance approach to global sustainable development problems.  
In addition, CIO will offer the potential for knowledge transfer and learning, contributing to the creation or strengthening 
of knowledge, collective learning processes, and institutions. CIO is actively represented in the development finance and 
renewable energy infrastructure development communiti es through various international forums, conferences and


---
*Page 57*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 93 E
summits. By globally engaging its peers CFM fosters discussion and debate on topics in blended finance, impact 
investing, developing country infrastructure and financial innovation, thus changing the  very way country development is 
funded.  
P
aradigm shift in individual countries
A
t country level, CIO may itself re- invest in subsequent projects should the potential funding opportunities arise, and 
previous projects perform as per expectation. Also, CIO itself may create a replication effect, whereby other prospective 
developers seek all -equity financing solutions as offered by other investors when markets mature. Furthermore, in some 
of the target jurisdictions CIO will cause a paradigm shift that is specific to the country. These countries have nascent IPP markets and, in some cases, they do not have IPPs yet, nor the appropriate regulation for a private IPP market. The 
potential for bespoke paradigm shift is listed in Table 25 . below.  
T
able 25 : Bespoke paradigm shift  
Country Bespoke Paradigm Shift Potential
Burundi Primarily by virtue of introducing a new financing concept to the market.  
Cameroon Primarily by virtue of introducing a new financing concept to the market. 
DjiboutiOpportunity for CIO to finance the first IPP and contribute to the IPP regulations, which are 
currently being developed. At the moment one of the most actively pursued projects in CIO’s 
pipeline is a 110 MW wind farm in Djibouti. Phase 1 ( 61MW ) of the project alone will increase 
installed capacity in the country by 61%, causing a paradigm shift by massively increasing the 
availability of power.  
Indonesia Primarily by virtue of introducing a new financing concept to the market.  
Kenya Primarily by virtue of introducing a new financing concept to the market.  
Madagascar Primarily by virtue of introducing a new financing concept to the market.  
Malawi Primarily by virtue of introducing a new financing concept to the market.  
Mongolia Primarily by vir tue of introducing a new financing concept to the market.  
MoroccoOpportunity for CIO to kickstart the nascent private PPA market for medium sized corporates in 
the medium voltage space.  
NigeriaOpportunity for CIO to kickstart the mid -sized IPP market a nd finance the first utility scale solar 
power plant.  
Uganda Primarily by virtue of introducing a new financing concept to the market.  
F
rom an early stage, CFM will equip stakeholders with project development and project management skills, as well as 
by providing financial skill and institutional capacity building skills. In addition, CFM will transfer skills pertaining to E&S  
management – central to CIO’s investment philosophy, and project sustainability.  
I
n jurisdictions that have limited / no private sector renewable energy investment, CIO will set precedence, contributing 
to enhanced regulatory framework and policy development, assisting with climate responsible planning.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
Lastly, by starting or expanding the power sector and engaging with the local  government, CIO will advocate and 
incentivize the government to invest more in the expansion and improvement of the utility grid and connect more 
people to CIO’s clean power plants.  
 
CIO’s paradigm shift potential can be summarized by its Theory of Change. It clearly outlines CIO’s core features and 
CFM’s core activities in managing CIO. CIO’s action plan and scope of activities is new in the market and will result in 
concrete outcomes, which will create an impact that will not only improve the environment and boost sustainable 
development, but will change the very way in which developing country infrastructure is financed and developed.  
Figure 14 : CIO Theory of Change  
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions.  
 
The strengthening of knowledge and collective learning processes is an important objective of Climate Investor One. 
Specific outputs and impacts delivered by CIO pertain to the creation and strengthening of knowledge, ensuring that 
relevant capacity rests within local and national institutions post CFM / CIO involvement in its project companies.  
 
Skills and knowledge used to implement project companies in the national jurisdictions in which CIO invests will be 
replicable for various stakeholders across other renewable energy projects within these jurisdictions and the regions 
more broadly, with certain skills and knowledge having cross sector / inter -disciplinary applications as well.  
 
Aside from CIO contributing to improved knowledge on climate change solutions and mitigation, the delivery of renewable 
energy projects to the regions will help contribute to increased project development, financial, project management, 
institutional capac ity building (at local, national and regional levels), stakeholder engagement and E&S implementation 
skills.


---
*Page 59*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
Project Development Skills  
 
Project development requires a multitude of technical and inter -personal competencies –  often gained through pre vious 
experience with the processes involved. With the hands -on approach of CFM, first time and inexperienced co- developers 
will gain valuable and replicable experience in this aspect of project implementation, which will prove to be transferrable 
and highly valuable for future project development processes.  
 
Financia l Skills  
 
As CFM will lead the financial structuring of a project company, developers / sponsors will gain valuable experience with 
structuring all equity solutions for construction phases of a project lifecycle, with post construction gearing for optimization 
of time and cost.  
 
Project Management Skills  
 
Beneficiaries including project developers and operations & maintenance staff will be trained in project management 
best practices to develop, build and run the renewable energy assets optimally during and after construction. O&M staff 
will be trained in reporting, stakeholder engagement, risk awareness and technical skills pertaining to the maintenance 
and sustainability of the projects.  
 
Institutional Capacity Building Skills  
 
Institutional engagement fo rms the basis of any successfully project. Throughout the development, construction and 
operational phases of a project, local, national and regional (where applicable) institutions are consulted and engaged 
over IPPs and PPAs, capital procurement and E&S issues. Where institutions have lacked engagement to date, CFM 
will help pave the way for parties seeking to implement renewable energy projects in the targeted jurisdictions.  
 
E&S Skills  
 
As an E&S approach consistent with international best practices i s central to CFM’s investment philosophy, and 
paramount to the success of an underlying project, implementation of CFM’s ESMS shall help guide not only the success 
of CIO, but also lay precedent for its partner developers whom may go on to develop and impl ement future projects in 
other capacities. CFM’s  ESMS is freely available online for anyone to use as a guideline or for learning.  
 
CFM will often take the lead on managing E&S aspects of projects and will provide the opportunity for co-
developers/sponsors  of projects within its portfolio to strengthen their knowledge and approach to the management of 
E&S issues. CFM will support co -developers/sponsors with E&S training of project staff and contractors to ensure that 
the E&S requirements are met, thus trans ferring knowledge to the local workforce wherever possible.  
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program.  
 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include:  
• Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region  
• Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme  
 
At the programme level CFM will contribute to the creation of an enabling environment in the following ways:


---
*Page 60*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
• Environmental and social sustainability : All projects in which CFM invests have to conform to the requirements of 
CFM’s  Responsible Investment Policy and the Environmental and Social Management System , which has been 
developed in accordance with good inter national industry practices and is aligned with the IFC Performance 
Standards  (IFC PS)  and GCF Standards . Therefore, all the host communities of the projects in which CIO  invest s will 
benefit from projects established to the highest standards and this will help to set the standard for local regulators 
and developers of other projects.  
 
• Local Content and Building Local Capacity : CFM will encourage all projects in which CIO invests to source local 
goods and services to the extent practicable. This will include but not be limited to sourcing of local labour as well as 
local services and materials. A typical 40MW solar project is likely to employ 250 people during construction,  the 
majority of which unskilled or semi -skilled , and therefore will provide employment for local communities.  Indirect 
employment opportunities will also result associated with transport, supplying camps and the provision of goods and 
services. CFM will encourage the management teams of project companies  to take action where feasible to build 
local capacity so that suppliers and the labour market can develop their skills and competencies as needed to be 
included in the supply chain.  
 
• Stakeholder Engagement: Effective community engagement is central to the successful management of risks and 
impacts on communities affected by the Project, as well as central to achieving enhanced community benefits. CFM 
will ensure that all projects establish and implement a  gender responsive Stakeholder Engagement Plan ( SEP) which 
is designed in accordance with the IFC PS and which will be comprised of the following elements:  
• Identification of internat ional and national regulations and best practice governing stakeholder engagem ent; 
• Identification and analysis of the stakeholders relevant to the Project;  
• Development of a methodology and programme of engagement activities during the construction process;  
• Establishment of a gender responsive Grievance Mechanism in accordance with i nternational good practice; 
and  
• Establishment of effective mechanisms of monitoring and reporting.  
CFM will ultimately be responsible for all external engagement related to the CIO Funds and its assets.  
• Disclosure of E&S Information: Linked to engagement with communities is the disclosure of Project -related E&S 
information. In accordance with CFM’s ESMS, disclosure is conducted in accordance with local legal requirements 
where they exist, as well as in accordance with standards establi shed by the IFC. The extent and specific nature of 
the disclosure is also determined by the E&S risk categorisation of the Project. For all projects, E&S information that 
will be disclosed will include a summary of the E&S impacts and risks of the project;  ongoing reporting to communities 
on the Project’s progress with the E&S management and monitoring plans; the Project’s stakeholder engagement 
plan; and the grievance mechanism. Access to the environmental and social impact assessment (if this has been 
required for the Project) will also be provided.  
 
• Access to Energy : CFM is also committed to maximizing the opportunities for environmental and social benefits , 
including positive gender considerations,  particularly to local communities in the area of influence of CIO’s  project 
investments. These benefits go above and beyond what is required from any project to obtain and maintain its ‘social 
license to operate’. All projects will consider the potential for wider community benefits, which will be incorporated 
into the project design. Of particular focus will be the opportunity to provide host communities with access to energy, 
for example through the installation of solar panels on community buildings. Such opportunities concerning host 
communities will be identified through the ESIA conducted during project development and will be implemented in 
line with t he Gender Integration Action Plan, which seeks to promote, where practically feasible, gender equita ble 
access to energy to ensure that  women and men equitably benefit from access to such resource.  
 
In some geographies where CFM / CIO will be active,  it will be introducing new and renewable technologies  to the 
country, which it is hope d will promote further investment and reliance on renewab le energies in these countries.  
The CIO programme will construct approximately 30 projects in developing markets. Countries that have a skewed 
energy demand and supply gap will be made primary targets  for investment. CIO will develop, construct and operate 
renewable energy projects in these countries using proven technologies such as wind, solar PV and run -of-the-river


---
*Page 61*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 93 E
hydro to produce affordable clean energy. The technology and the equipment used for the projects are in the most 
advanced state and the equipment will be sourced from leading OEMs. CFM believe that by introducing latest technology 
and technique in the market, CIO will attract collaboration with leading local stakeholders to tackle the energy shortfall 
problem in these markets.  
CIO will introduce a first of its kind, whole- of-life funding concept in developing markets. This innovative funding scheme 
will make capital readily available for projects at different stages of a project – development, construction and operation. 
By doing this, projects can progress at faster pace compared to more prevalent fragmented funding schemes. 
Furthermore, projects are funded using equity instead of debt in the initial phases (development and construction),  
reducing cash flow pressure on projects during its non- operational years. This unique funding approach de -risks the 
project making it more attractive to lenders for subsequent introduction of debt into the capital structure of projects. The 
introduction of such a funding scheme will develop the capital markets in the targeted countries and encourage other 
private commercial investors and lenders to follow a similar approach.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, 
and/or improve climate- responsive planning and development.  
CFM’s activities are expected to support and strengthen local, regional and national regulatory/legal frameworks  level in 
terms of (i) how to structure and accommodate Independent Power Producers, (ii) increas ing private sector investment 
flows and (iii) adapt ing to increasing amounts of (volatile) renewable energy fed into national electricity grids. Given that 
most of the energy offtake is dealt with through government institutions, and in many countries there w ill be limited IPPs 
and bankable PPAs implemented, CFM ’s continuous dialogue with relevant national and local government  institutions  
will offer ample opportunities to contribute to the development of regulatory framework s and policies.  
CFM further aim s to lead by example in all its relationships and communications with regulators, local governments and 
stakeholders. CIO’s projects will adhere to IFC ’s Performance S tandards  and GCF Standards , which may go beyond 
local / national requirements. Where relevant, and where it is able, CFM  will work with local governments to further 
promote renewable energy solutions.  
CFM’s activities may also impact upon the following:  
•Increasing the share of a countr y’s renewable energy capacity in respect of national energy mix and / or
electrification targets.
•Promoting healthy competition between project developers to optimize project solutions and technological mix.
•A reduction in a countr y’s requirement to import / produce fossil fuel s, thereby reduc ing existing trade deficits
caused by importation of refined oil products.
•Investments in local businesses (particularly throughout construction) that create revenue and employment
opportunities , as well as increased government revenues resulting from increased household incomes and
taxation.


---
*Page 62*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Access to affordable, sustainable energy is an enabling factor for economic development, poverty reduction and the 
facilitation  and promoti on of more gender inclusive societies.  CIO’s main goal is to mitigate climate change through the 
development of renewable energy in developing countries. However, CIO’s projects will have some co- benefits listed 
below.  
 
Through the record of accomplishment of its shareholders and a Responsible Investment Policy 
(http://www.climateinvestorone.com/files/170922- responsible- investment -policy.pdf ) comprised of ‘Do No Harm’ and ‘Do 
Good’ pillars, CIO will  produce positive environmental & social externalities through each of its underlying investments, 
in each of the targeted countries. Below are brief descriptions of CIO’s co-benefits and positive externalities. The full 
analysis of the co- benefits in each country will be provided at request.  
 
Environmental Co- benefits  
 
Whilst CIO’s focus is climate change mitigation through the reduction in GHG emissions, the renewable energy projects 
that will result from CIO’s financing will have other environmental externalities, depending on the country  in question . For 
example, many of CIO’s target populations use fuel wood for cooking and heating, which contributes to deforestation. 
CIO’s projects would contribute to alleviating this problem. Furthermore, CIO foll ows strict environmental and social 
responsibility guidelines, which ensures the preservation of biodiversity and indigenous species.  
 
Economic Co- benefits  
 
The economic benefits of providing developing countries with clean energy are unquestionable. Elect ricity allows 
businesses to grow faster and can be used to increase labour productivity. Energy is necessary for developing countries 
to reach the economic developmental level of high- income countries. CIO brings clean energy faster than other financing 
structures, hence allowing countries to grow faster. Some of CIO’s countries have specific energy related economic 
issues, such as dependence on imports. For example, Morocco imports over 90% of its energy, which makes it vulnerable 
to price fluctuations and exposes it to a  fiscal  deficit risk.  
 
Social Co -benefits  
 
All of CIO’s projects are subject to guidelines on social governance, which ensure the most benefit for local communities. 
The positive social externalities of providing clean energy are numerous,  especially, if the population did not have 
electricity before. Some of the social externalities will be particularly beneficial to some countries. For example, Morocco 
ranks as the country highest in pollution, which serves as a severe health hazard causi ng a variety of respiratory diseases 
and contribut ing to the country’s mortality rate.  
 
Gender Co- benefits:  
 
CFM recognise that the energy shortfall in many developing countries is a gender ed issue , as women are typically more 
vulnerable to the negative consequences of  energy poverty , and men often disproportionally benefit by increased access 
to energy when compared to women. In many of these jurisdictions, w omen are often solely  responsible for household 
and community energy provision.   
CIO’s interventi on in its GCF target countries will seek to help reduce the exposure that women have to energy poverty 
through the implementation of the Gender Integration Action Plan, which is designed to  help benefit women as renewable 
energy stakeholders, workers, and end- users.


---
*Page 63*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 93 E
E.4. Needs of the Recipient
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc).  
N
/A – Climate Investor One is a mitigation only platform . 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs: 
•Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population
•Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from addressi ng
the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
•Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.
G
CF target countries align directly with CIO’s primary focus on LIC / LMIC countries, that indicate a need for 
intervention, as outlined below:  
T
able 26: Country Socio- Economic Development Indicator s (World Bank 2016) 
CountryWorld
Bank
Incom e
Group
Classificat
ionPopulation
in millionsGDP
(curren t
USD
billions)5-year
GDP
growthGDP per
capita,
PPP
(curren t
internatio
nal USD)FDI, ne t
inflows (%
of GDP)Poverty gap
at USD 3.20 a
day (20 11
PPP)13
Burundi LIC 23 32 5% 778 0 19%  
Cameroon LMIC  11 3 2% 3,609  2 52%  (2013)  
Djibouti LMIC  1 2* 5% 3,349  7 18 %  (2013)  
Indonesia LMIC  26 932 5% 3,570  0.5 8.3% (2016)  
Kenya LMIC  48 71 6% 3,161  1 N/A 
Madagascar LIC 25 10 3% 1,509  5 58% (2012)  
Malawi LIC 18 5 4% 1,171  6 53% (2010)  
Mongolia LMIC  3 11 7% 12,276  -37 1% (2014)  
Morocco LMIC  35 104 3% 7,838  2 N/A 
Nigeria LMIC  186 405 3% 5,872  1 40% (2009)  
Uganda LIC 41 24 4% 1,823  2 28% (2012)  
OECD N/A 1,289.94  47,552.62  1.76  41,871.15  3.06  0 
*2015 data
13 Poverty gap at $3.20 a day (2011 PPP) is the mean shortfall in income or consumption from the poverty 
line $3.20 a day (counting the non- poor as having zero shortfall), expressed as a percentage of the poverty 
line. This measure reflects the depth of poverty as well as its i ncidence.  (World Bank, 2018)


---
*Page 64*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
 
All the chosen economies have a great need of investment. As indicated in the table above, all countries have low levels 
of GDP and GDP per capita, when adjusted to Purchasing Power Parity. The GDP per capita adjusted to PPP in high 
income countries about  USD 47,500, whereas the highest GDP per capita within the GCF target countries is just over 
USD 21,000  with Burundi , Uganda, Malawi and  Madagascar  not even reaching USD 2, 000. This, combined with the 
poverty gap indicator , reveals living standards that are very low. Indeed, the GCF target countries from the Sub- Saharan 
region have very large poverty gaps, which indicate that poverty is both prevalent and deep. These macro- level 
aggregates represent an everyday reality for t he citizens of the target countries that involves a lack of basic life 
necessities , such as proper nutrition and housing, basic education and healthcare, adequate public amenities and, most 
of all, clean affordable power. Though the economic growth rates r epresented are well above those of developed 
economies, it is estimated that countries need to grow at least 7 percent a year to put a dent in poverty, specifically in 
order to double per capita income in one generation. Only Mongolia has reached this target in the previous year, which 
indicates that the other target countries will remain impoverished for longer than a generation. CIO addresses these 
economic needs by virtue of catalysing commercial capital into these countries  and constructing additional electricity 
capacity to spur growth and development.  
 
There is no doubt that CIO’s target countries, although heterogeneous, are all in a developmental stage that creates 
great potential for additionality of investment. Furthermore, the data on FDI inflows as well as cumulative clean energy 
investments from the impact potential section show that these economies do not receive nearly enough investment to 
spur their development or a domestic clean energy sector.  Even though FDI inflows as per centage of GDP are high in 
some countries, relatively to OECD economies, due to the small GDP values the real FDI amounts are small. 
Furthermore, in section B.3 we elaborate on the lack of funding for such renewable energy projects in these countries, 
which combined with the country expressed needs for financing as shown in table below, makes clear that a significant 
expansion of renewable energy will not be funded unless additional capital is made available. One of CIO’s main 
objectives is to solve this problem by attracting commercial capital to these projects by virtue of CIO’s innovative fund 
structure.  
 
Table 27 : Country Power Undersupply and INDC Needs  
Country  SAIDI14 
(Hours) SAIFI28 
(#) INDC Emissions 
Unconditional  
Target  INDC Emissions 
Conditional  
Target  INDC Financial 
Support Needed 
(USD billions)  
Burundi  660 330 3% 17% 1.49 
Cameroon  103 26.4 N/A 32% N/A 
Djibouti  N/A N/A 40% 60% 1.6 
Indonesia  4.2 2.8 41%  12%  N/A 
Kenya  80.9 16.9 N/A 30% 40* 
Madagascar  N/A N/A N/A 14% 42.1 
Malawi  N/A N/A N/A 47% N/A 
Mongolia  16.2 9.6 14% >14%  2.5 
Morocco  0.6 2.3 13% 32% 45 
                                                             
14  The System Average Interruption Duration Index  (SAIDI ) is the average total duration of outages over the 
course of a year for each customer served, while The System Average Interruption Frequency Index  (SAIFI ) 
is the average number of service interruptions experienced by a customer in a year. Annual data (covering 
the calendar year) are collected from distribution utility companies and national regulators on SAIDI and 
SAIFI. Both SAIDI and SAIFI estimates shoul d include planned and unplanned outages, as well as load 
shedding.  (World Bank, Doing Business, 2018 (for Burundi 2016))


---
*Page 65*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
Nigeria  2,557.7  485.7  20% 45% N/A 
Uganda  50.2 27.8 7% 22% 5.74 
 
Access to electricity is a critical precondition for the development of every sector of society, including business, industry, 
education, healthcare and governance. In the table above,  we see that the 1 1 countries have severe power shortages,  
expressed in the SAIDI and SAIFI indexes,  which negatively af fect the development of the private sector. We see that 
power outages  are frequent and last a long period. Therefore,  businesses cannot perform efficiently and experience 
financial losses due to outages. Since CIO projects will provide power to the electricity grid, the power generated will 
reduce outages and their duration  
 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country(ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs 
and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional 
framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
 
Country Ownership & Priorities  
 
On the back of discussions held with GCF, CFM acknowledge that the point of departure for selecting a target / focus 
country is whether Country Ownership is encapsulated, specifically through the following three elements: 1)  Nationally 
Designated Contribution (NDC) commitments, 2) Positive Stakeholder Engagement, and, 3) No Objection Letter (NOL) 
support.  
 
Nationally Designated Contribution (NDC) commitments  
The countries selected by CFM all recognise their mitigation and ada ptation requirements, vocalising these within their 
NDC, as highlighted in table ( 28) below. T he short -listed countries cite specific  targets to combat climate change across 
various short, medium and long- term periods.  
 
Table 28: Country Engagement and Nationally Determined Contributions  
Country  NDC CIO 
Emissions Targets  
RE is a 
Priority  Financial 
Support 
Needed  
(USD 
billions)  NDA/ Govern
ment 
Engagement  NOL 
Received  Unconditional  Conditional   
Burundi  3% 17%  Yes 1.49  Yes Yes 
Cameroon  N/A 32%  Yes N/A Yes Yes 
Djibouti  40%  60%  Yes 1.6 Yes Yes 
Indonesia  41%  12%  Yes N/A Yes Yes 
Kenya  N/A 30%  Yes 40* Yes Yes 
Madagascar  N/A 14%  Yes 42.1  Yes Yes 
Malawi  N/A 47%  Yes N/A Yes Yes 
Mongolia  14%  >14%  Yes 2.5 Yes Yes


---
*Page 66*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
Morocco  13%  32%  Yes 45 Yes Yes 
Nigeria  20%  45%  Yes N/A Yes Yes 
Uganda  7% 22%  Yes 5.74  Yes Yes 
* This amount includes funding needed for climate change adaptation efforts.  
 
All of the above countries outline GHG reduction priorities in excess of 10%, wit h Morocco, Djibouti, Ni geria and  Malawi  
setting ambitious targets almost or above 50% BAU scenario. To achieve these targets  all 11 countries will require 
increased Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in renewable energy projects through initiatives like CIO. As Djibouti currently 
has ~0% of  its energy mix coming from renewable technologies, its ambitious target of 6 0% reduction in GHG emissions 
per BAU seems achievable given the need for greater electrification and a political will to open the country to FDI in the 
renewable energy sector. Though t he targets for Madagascar and Mongolia are smaller than the others, t his, however, 
does not detract from the importance of further renewable investment in these countries , as the y are  still heavily reliant 
on fossil fuel importation to fulfil its r emaining energy needs.    
 
Positive Stakeholder Engagement:  
To demonstrate Country Ownership further at project level, CFM have engaged with governments, local communities 
and the private sector.  
 
No Objection Letter (NOL) support : 
CFM and FMO have sought governmental support in the form of a No Objection Letter (NOL), granting approval at the 
political level to receive GCF financing through CIO.  
 
In addition, CFM will always include a local partner in each of its underlying project invest ments; engage with civil society 
organisations and other relevant stakeholders & pay due attention to Environmental & Social Safeguards, including 
gender equality.  
 
For more information, see CFM’s Environmental & Social Management System for Climate Inves tor One:  
https://www.climatefundmanagers.com/files/180301- esms -v-2e-clean.pdf  or a Summary of the ESMS in Annex  2. 
 
By outlining country priorities and governmental engagements, CFM have identified suitable jurisdictions that have 
ambitious climate change targets, of which CIO can help contribute to their national strategies. In addition, CFM have 
already engaged with t he governments of these countries, testing the CIO concept and its ability to assist with these 
INDC priorities.  
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the activities 
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
CFM is an equal joint venture between FMO and Sanlam  InfraWorks. CFM has been established to implement and 
manage innovativ e climate financing platforms in developing markets. Climate Investor One is CFM’s maiden renewable 
energy platform. CFM has been appointed on market standard terms, and will act as an independent, non- captive fund 
manager at arm’s length of its shareholders. Furthermore, as the Accredited Entity it will monitor the capacity of CFM’s 
performance in the management of the CIO funds, including the application of CFM’s anti -corruption and AML/CFT policy 
and require CFM and the CIO Funds to support FMO in the fulfilment of FMO’s rights and obligation under the AMA and 
FAA including its reporting obligations towards the GCF. FMO will ensure that any Subsidiary Agreement it enters into 
with CFM, the DF or the CEF will reflect the relevant provisions under the FAA a nd/or AMA and will take appropriate


---
*Page 67*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 93 E
action and/or exercise remedies available to it under the CIO Fund documentation to avoid or remedy a (pending) breach 
of the applicable provisions under the AMA and/or FAA to protect the interests of GCF.  
1.FMO’s Track Record
With an investment portfolio of EUR 9.2 billion spanning over 85 countries, FMO is one of the larger bilateral private 
sector development banks in the world. FMO has debt and private equity teams dedicated to energy finance, consisting 
of 46 energy professionals, including 6 dedicated environmental and social specialists. The team has grown the 
organization’s energy portfolio to a current committed level of ca. EUR 2. 4 billion - of which 77% is in renewable energy 
across a range of technologies (solar PV, solar CSP, run -of-river hydro, onshore wind, biomass, landfill gas -to-energy, 
geothermal) – in over 40 countries. As of 2015, FMO had invested in over 40 wind, hydro and solar projects, of  which 
32% of the energy portfolio was in hydro, 29% in wind, 7% in s olar PV and 9% (200 MW) in other renewable 
technologies.  This depth of experience has allowed FMO to build a solid understanding of the key risks and opportunities 
faced by any particular category of renewable energy projects.  This knowledge, a pplied to future investment opportunities 
and development stage projects facilitates the optimisation of project development, planning, financial structuring and 
risk management to help deliver better projects, faster and with better investment metrics.  
FMO has been initiator and co- founder of several fund initiatives and general partners including Emerging Africa 
Infrastructure Fund (EAIF), The Currency Exchange (TCX), Afric a Invest and Arise. In 2015, FMO Investment 
Management (FMO IM) reached a EUR 153 million final close for the Actiam -FMO SME Finance Fund (investor base: 
European pension funds and insurance companies). FMO IM is currently fund raising for the NN -FMO Emerging Markets 
Loans Fund with a target size of up to USD ($) 750 million (which is designed for institutional investors) and the retail focussed, open ended FMO Privium Impact Fund with committed amounts of over USD ($) 45 million within the first 6 months after its start. Further, FMO has established partnerships with other fund managers, DFIs, commercial banks, export agencies and re- insurers, making catalysing funds an important and growing part of its business.  
F
MO may provide strategic shareholder services to CFM in the areas of KYC / compliance, tax, fundraising capability 
and investor relationship management.  However, it has been agreed with FMO that CFM will outsource certain KYC / 
AML CFT & Compliance requirements to reputable & specialised firms  (SGG), at both fund  and project level, while 
keeping supervision.  While CFM is responsible for outsourcing these services, FMO supervises and adopts the KYC -
AML policy through its participation in the CFM Supervisory Board.  
2.S
anlam InfraWorks BV Track Record15
S
anlam InfraWorks BV is an investment & development company targeting infrastructure and climate related investments 
in global emerging markets. The company was formalized in February 2018 and combines the renewable energy investment expertise of Phoenix InfraWorks (Phoenix) – headed by former African Infrastructure Investment Managers 
(AIIM) CEO, Mr. Andrew Johnstone – with the capital raising & asset management expertise plus on the ground know 
how of one of Africa’ s largest financial institutions company, Sanlam.  
Phoenix has extensive experience in mobilising private sector capital, establishing and growing fund management 
organisations, implementing disciplined investment processes and managing a highly successful infrastructure 
investment platform.  Phoenix principals comprise 40+ years infrastructure investment experience which includes: (i) structuring and raising four funds of more than USD ($) 1.3 billion, (ii) raising and managing Africa’s largest infrastructure 
fund, (iii) managing a world leading project finance advisory and lending team overseeing 174 assets in 20 countries, (iv) 
execution of transactions in Africa, Asia, Europe, North America and South America, (v) establishment and governance 
of a successful renewable energy  development business and (vi) completion of 33 renewable energy transactions.  
15 This was during the period that Mr. Andrew Johnstone was the CEO of Africa Infrastructure Investment 
Managers, a role he held for 10 years.16 Over the funds’ lifetime in 3.37 investment cycles in the 
construction phase.


---
*Page 68*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 93 E
Phoenix brings best -in-class  fund structuring, fundraising, investment analysis, asset management as well as fund 
management experience and expertise. The combination of a private sector infrastructure partner (Phoenix) and a 
development finance institution (FMO) provides a complementary business balance across the objectives of  donors , 
DFIs and private sector institutional investors.  
Founded in 1918, Sanlam is now South Africa’s second largest financial services group. Over the years, Sanlam's focus gradually shifted from traditional life insurance to providing a broader range of financial products and services. Sanlam 
has its shares listed on both the Johannesburg and Namibian Stock Exchanges. Sanlam’s ownership consist s of: 
 65.27% 
Public Shareholders, 13.5% Ubuntu- Botho Investments (Pty) Ltd, 12.24% Public Investment Corporation, 7.62% 
Subsidiaries, remaining balance other. It has a presence in more than 47 countries globally, including 34 African countries 
and across six sectors:  financial Institutions, energy, agribusiness and infrastructure, manufacturing, services.  Sanlam 
holds a zaA rating from Standard & Poor’s.  
Table 29: FMO, Phoenix InfraWorks and Sanlam Track Record 
Country FMO Investments (#) Total Value (USD million)CFM  Team Track Record
(#)
Burundi 0 0 0 
Cameroon 1 1.00 1 
Djibouti 0 0.00 0 
Indonesia 10 128.59  0 
Kenya 13 194.29  4 
Madagascar 2 0.14 0 
Malawi 2 6.90 0 
Mongolia 10 236.24  0 
Morocco 2 11.50  1 
Nigeria 16 526.67  6 
Uganda 16 213.50  1 
Total 72 1,318.83 13
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with NDAs 
on the funding proposal and the no- objection letter.  
Engagement with NDAs
Pursuant to the funding application requirements and protocol as set by the Green Climate Fund (GCF), FMO via its direct shareholding in Climate Fund Managers, have since November 2016, appointed a dedicated internal resource at CFM who has actively engaged with all of the 11 country NDAs.  
G
reen Climate Fund shared a list of NDA contact names and departments for each of these 11 countries, and CFM has 
officially corresponded with each of these NDA representatives, either via e- mails or direct phone calls . Also,  CFM has 
visited most of the NDA representatives to share with them in person the reason for such NOL request as well as 
explaining the FMO / CFM business proposition and the benefits that such NOL could hold for each respective country.


---
*Page 69*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
In additio n to all correspondence, CFM have also created and are continuously updating a secure register of all 
communication with each NDA to ensure transparency of all communications.  
 
Please also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations  that were conducted when this proposal 
was developed.  
 
Multi -Stakeholder Engagement Plan   
 
Each of the individual projects/investments will develop and implement a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) as part 
of the International Standard Environmental and S ocial Impact Assessment that will be undertaken. All relevant 
stakeholders will be identified through a stakeholder mapping exercise, and will include national, regional and local 
stakeholders including government, non- governmental organisations (NGOs), ci vil society organisations (CSOs) and 
local communities. Consultation will include focus groups with women (as well as other traditionally vulnerable groups) 
to ensure that they are given an opportunity to contribute to baseline data gathering, but also to be involved in 
consultations and decision -making where relevant. All relevant stakeholder groups will be included in the SEP with 
engagement activities scaled accordingly.  
 
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private and 
other public investment.  
 
CIO will construct ~30 renewable energy infrastructure projects in developing markets which will have significant 
environment and societal impact. GCF’s contribution  enables CIO to construct  3x more projects  than is currently possible.  
The development, construction and operations of these projects can be very complex and are often delayed. This is fairly 
typical acros s geographies and even more so in developing markets. In a traditional project finance approach, there are 
multiple stakeholders involved at all stages , which results in significant delays in decision making. For each stage, the 
developer has to go through a lengthy process of multiple fund raisings. Availability of capital is scarce in developing 
countries increasing the cost of financing a project. Furthermore, the CAPEX of these projects in developing markets 
tend to be higher due to logistical nuances, due- diligence costs, statutory costs etc.  
High financing and CAPEX costs inflate the overall input costs , making margins slimmer for developers. This outcome 
hinders local equity investor or local lender participation. CIO’s innovative whole- of-life fundi ng facility  addresses a 
multitude of issues. Firstly, with funding made available by CIO at different stages of the project, the developer saves 
time on the lengthy fundraising process. Secondly, CIO makes equity only investment in the construction phase of the 
project. This eliminates cash flow and financial distress from the project during construction. Thirdly, CAPEX of CIO 
projects is leaner as CFM have exclusive technology partnership agreements with OEMs. These partnerships unlock 
economies of scale f or equipment sourcing, installation and maintenance. With a whole- of-life funding concept, CIO 
projects have fewer stakeholders that require liaising with during decision making. To sum, the financing structure of CIO 
facilitates faster delivery of more ef ficient projects , making clean energy accessible and affordable.  
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
Climate Investor One will deliver projects to the market more expeditiously than classic project finance approaches  (See 
section B.1 – Overcoming Market Barriers) . In doing so, Clima te Investor One will deliver significant climate mitigation


---
*Page 70*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
impact – faster – to the jurisdictions in which it invests. Aside from the expeditiousness of CIO in the construction and 
operationalization  of projects, the facility  will also create a greater ov erall volume of impact through its ability to deliver 
scale, through a portfolio of ~ 20 assets (across GCF countries only) .  
 
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co- financing ratio (total amount of co- financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long- term low emission investment.  
 
Table 30 : Capital Catalysed and Invested  
  A B C D E F 
 Investor/ Donor  Contribution  Catalysed in 
CIO  Catalysed 3rd 
Party 1 cycle  Total Invested  
1 cycle Catalysed 3rd 
Party Fund Life  Total Invested 
Fund Life  
1 GCF DF  20 0 20 40 76 152 
2 GCF CEF  80 320 133 533 449 1,797  
3 Other DF  10 0 10 20 38 76 
4 Other CEF T1  20 80 33 133 112 449 
5 Total  130 400 197 727 676 2,475  
Assumptions  1. Funding Catalyzed within CIO is USD 2 of Tier 2 and Tier 3 funding each for every USD 1 of Tier 1 
capital.  
2. Over the fund’s life, CEF capital will be recycled 3.37 times.  
3. Over the fund’s life, Development Fund capital will be recycled 3.8 times.  
4. 3rd party sponsors provide 50% of development costs and 25% of construction equity. These are 
minimum amounts as per CIO’s investment restrictions.  
5. The difference between catalyzed and invested capital is that within CEF capital is considered to be 
catalyzed once, however is recycled and re -invested, explaining why those numbers are higher.  
 
1. Catalysed Financing  Ratios  
 
1.1 Total Financing Catal ysed  / Total GCF Investment  (1 cycle) : 
 
2𝐵𝐵+2𝐶𝐶+1𝐶𝐶
1𝐴𝐴+2𝐴𝐴=473
100=4.7 
 
1.2 Total Financing Catalysed / Total GCF Investment (Fund Life):  
 
2𝐵𝐵+2𝐸𝐸+1𝐸𝐸
1𝐴𝐴+2𝐴𝐴=845
100=8.5 
2. Co-Financing Ratios  
 
2.1 Total Co-Financing / Total GCF Investment  (1 cycle):


---
*Page 71*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
3𝐴𝐴+4𝐴𝐴+5𝐵𝐵+5𝐶𝐶
1𝐴𝐴+2𝐴𝐴=627
100=6.3 
 
2.2 Total Co- Financing / Total GCF Investment  (Fund Life):  
 
3𝐴𝐴+4𝐴𝐴+5𝐵𝐵+5𝐸𝐸
1𝐴𝐴+2𝐴𝐴=1,106
100=11.1 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
 
Financial Rate of Return  
A GCF participation within Climate Investor One will not alter the financial return for investors on an individual project 
return basis; the mechanics and proportions of d onor capital vs. c ommercial capital remain the same regardless of further 
donor commi tments. However,  GCF investments in DF and Tier 1 of CEF are crucial in order to achieve attractive returns 
for commercial investors and create a flow of private capital into developing country infrastructure projects.  
 
A GCF participation in the Development Fund helps to:  
• Reduce the financial risk for private sector developers associated with the development phase as the CIO DF 
can absorb up to 50% of the costs  
• Reduces the development risk and increase the likelihood of reaching financial close thanks to the development 
support /  assistance provided by CFM and 3rd party advisors in the development phase.   
 
A GCF participation helps to:  
• De-risk the Construction Equity Fund by absorbing potential losses  at project level in priority to the losses 
exposed to the private sector  
• Attract more private sector investors including pension funds.  
• Unlock investments from the Export Credit Agencies (ECA ) of the Netherlands to provide a guarantee to the Tier 
3 Investors. Given the per ceived risks, the ECA  could not offer their products to CIO without the support of  donors 
such as  the GCF.  
 
The appealing feature of the way CIO is financed is that it:  
• Combines several investment products made available by d onors, development agencies, the Dutch Export 
Credit Agency  and private sector actors into one, effective investment platform  
• While this introduces complexity at the Fund level (CIO), it reduces complexity at the project level as the DF  and 
CEF (and, eventually,  RF) are able to offer one integrated, lifecycle funding solution to investee projects  
 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
 
Please refer to Section E.2.1 for the long run financial viability of GCF’s intervention  
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.).


---
*Page 72*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 93 E
GCF Exit from CIO
GCF’s Exit from CIO Development Fund and CEF T1 is structured as follows:  
•GCF’s entire USD 100 m illion investment is routed through the DF  (via FMO)  in the form of reimbursable grants ,
of
 which USD 80  million will be invested by the DF in CEF as T1 junior equity in project companies and USD
20m is provided directly to the DF for the provision by the DF of  development loans to project companies.
•Starting from year 15, the DF will distribute all cash received to donors as it becomes available, subject to t he
c
ash being available, the DF will make distributions until the donors receive capital back .
•Upon the dissolution of the DF (20th anniversary of 1st Close) any surplus funds in the DF will be distributed as
decided by the Donors Meeting  in accordance with the applicable laws in the Netherlands for foundations.
E.6.4. Application of best practices
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
T
o ensure seamless operations and longevity of the project, CFM purchases best -in-class quality equipment from OEMs. 
Each project is deeply analysed on its potential to harness renewable resources to efficiently produce clean energy. The 
CFM team have installed numerous renewable energy projects in developing markets and have the know -how of best 
practices developed from past project operations and experiences.  
CF
M will  build beneficial relationships with local and international developers, co- sponsors, suppliers, manufacturers and 
other key partners to ensure robust and optimized project implementation, economics and operations. To this extent, 
CFM extensively scouted for high calibre experienced partners with similar values and integrity  
To conform to industry best practices and to bestow technical capabilities, CFM have recently appointed a Chief 
Technical Officer (CTO) with more than 30 years’ emerging markets renewable energy development, construction and 
operations experience, who will lead all development and construction management processes. 
Similar partnerships are in the process of being established for technologies used by CFM in the solar , wind  and run- of-
the-river hydro segments, with CFM currently scouting the market globally to find suitable partners. Partners will not only 
provide best -in-class equipment but also share technical knowledge and best industry practices with CFM for projects.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators
GCF 
core 
indicat
ors Estimated cost per tCO 2eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions (mitigation 
only) 
(a)T otal project financing : USD 2,475 million  (Development Phase: USD 228 million, Construction Phase:
USD 2,247 mi llion)16
(b)Requested GCF amount :  USD 1 00 million
(c)Expected lifetime emission reductions over  t ime: 2.69 million tCO2eq/year  x 20 = 53. 73 million tCO2eq
(d)Estimated cost per tCO 2eq: USD  46.06
(e)E stimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq avoided: USD 1.86
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
Public Finance Leveraged by GCF within CIO
16 Over the funds’ lifetime in 3.37 investment cycles in the construction phase.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 93 
 
 
 E 
Nil. With a contribution of USD ($) 1 00 million from GCF, all donor (public) capital will be secured within the CIO 
CEF structure and no further public sector capital will be catalysed.  
Private Sector Finance Leveraged by GCF within CIO  (USD million)17 
The table below provides private sector capital leveraged by GCF’s contribution to the Development Fund and 
Tier 1 of the construction Equity Fund. GCF would leverage 4x its Tier 1 commitment within CEF and third party 
commitments of USD 525 million over the lifetime of CIO (USD 76 million in the development phase and USD 
449 million in the construction phase).  
Table 31: Private Sector Finance Leveraged  
Leveraged in CIO Tiers 2 & 3  320 
Leveraged from 3rd parties over the life time of CIO  525 
Total Leveraged  845 
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit generated as a result of the project/programme)  
The following numbers are based on CIO’s current pipeline. Please refer to section E.1 . 
 
Table 32: Costs per Unit of Impact18 
USD  per 1 MW  1,386,510  
USD per 1 GWh/year  515,537  
USD  per 1 tCO 2eq of GHG/year avoided  836 
USD  per 1,000 people reached  276 
USD per 1 MCI Job Created  85,825  
USD per 1 O&M Job Created  8,069,811  
 
                                                             
17 Here we include the funding of all investors seeking a commercial return leveraged by GCF capital. 
Please refer to section E.6.2 for calculation.  
18 Please refer to Annex 9 for calculation


---
*Page 74*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 93 
 
 
 F 
 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the  detailed economic and financial analysis  (including the financial model, 
taking into consideration the information provided in section  E.6.3). 
Please see section B.1. for detailed financial analysis on CIO.  
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification  (both qualitative and quantitative)  for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2.  
GCF participation in CIO enables significant scaling of the facility . Without such participation, CIO will remain at its current 
scale, deliver  ~66% fewer projects and proportionally less impact. As donor capital within the structure enables private 
sector involvement, further private sector participation (thus scale) is hindered by  the present insufficient  levels of donor 
funding . 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  
CFM will install best in class future proof equipment for all CIO projects. Proven technologies  such as solar PV, on -
shore wind, and run-of-the-river hydro will form the core technologies of projects. C FM will purchase premium quality 
equipment from leading OEMs for all projects. A brief narration on the  technology is provided below:  
Solar PV 
Solar photovoltaic (PV) devices generate electricity directly from sunlight via an electronic process that occurs naturally 
in certain types of material, called semiconductors. Electrons in these materials are freed by solar energy and can be 
induced to travel through an electrical circuit, powering electrical devices or sending electricity to the grid.  
Solar PV technology works as follows. Photons (light particles) strike and ionize the semiconductor material on the solar 
panel, causing outer electrons to break free of their atomic bonds. Due to the semiconductor structure, the electrons are 
forced in one direction creating a flow of electrical current.  
Solar cel ls are not 100% efficient. In part, this is because some of the light spectrum is reflected, some is too weak to 
create electricity (infrared) and some (ultraviolet) creates heat energy instead of electricity.  
A typical crystalline silicon solar cell, whi ch is the most used PV technology , are wafers of high- purity silicon coated with 
various impurities and are fused together. The resulting structure creates a pathway for electrical current within and 
between the solar cells.  
Run-Of-The-River Hydro  
The run- of-the-river hydroelectric concept uses the natural flow of water from a river to produce electricity. Run- of-the-
river hydroelectric projects are dramatically different in design, appearance and impact from conventional (impounded) 
hydroelectric projects.  There are two main differences. First, there are no large water storage dams or reservoirs required. 
Second, there is no or limited alteration of downstream flows, since all diverted water is returned to its natural watercours e 
below the powerhouse.  
Climate Investor One focuses solely on the run- of-the-river technology as this offers the least technology risk and the 
impact on the natural and social environment is limited in comparison to conventional impounded hydro projects, which 
require a signific ant reservoir and/or often alter the downstream flows.


---
*Page 75*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 93 
 
 
 F 
Wind Power  
Wind turbines generate electricity by harnessing the natural force of the wind in order to power an electrical generator. 
The most commonly used technology is based on the gearbox technolo gy (although there are increasing numbers with 
direct drives) whereby a low speed shaft is turned through the rotation of the blades. The shaft goes into a gearbox, 
which increases the rotation speed. The generator that is linked with the gearbox converts the mechanical energy into 
electrical energy. A transformer converts the electricity from low voltage to the appropriate voltage for distribution.  
Wind turbines typically have one, two or three rotor blades and range between 30 and 90 metres in diameter. The power 
of wind turbines installed on land varies from 10 kW up to several MWs, with the crucial parameter being the diameter of 
the turbine: the greater the length of the blade, the greater the area swept and the energy produced. Currently, the most 
powerful turbine is rated at 8 MW and has a rotor diameter of 164m.  
Large modern wind turbines are typically equipped with a yaw mechanism that actively controls the turbine to face the 
wind direction measured by a wind vane.  By minimizing the yaw angle (the misalignment between wind and turbine 
pointing direction), the power output is maximized.  
The energy produced by a wind turbine varies in terms of the actual potential of the site itself (function of the wind speed) , 
the a vailability of the machine itself (ability to operate in the presence of wind: with the standard being above 98%) and 
the arrangement of the devices in the wind farm (wake effect: negative effect on each other).  
Why Solar PV, Wind & Run -of-River Hydro?  
Relative to traditional forms of energy production, energy generation through renewable resources is now in a post 
nascent stage, and for some technologies, is reaching maturity. A sustainable and generally unlimited supply of wind, 
sunlight and water specif ically make wind plants, solar PV plants and hydro plants a central source for harnessing energy. 
These renewable energy technologies are becoming increasingly cost competitive and are fully operationally reliable. 
Technological sophistication and increased production scale have reduced pricing, order lead- times and overall time to 
project revenues across the board. Global generation costs of wind and solar projects are continuing to fall with a 
reduction of 61% in s olar PV and 14% in o nshore wind costs ove r the past five years. Wind pricing has reduced threefold 
in the past three decades and various studies predict at least a 20- 35% reduction in the next two decades. Resultantly, 
the costs of many renewable energy technologies have become competitive with fossil fuel generation costs and in some 
cases are lower than conventional generation options already (on a levelized cost basis). The further cost reductions 
expected in future will make it increasingly difficult to motivate the introduction of conventional generation options with a 
heavy carbon footprint in nearly all jurisdictions.    
From a risk perspective CFM’s technology and investment team will concentr ate on proven technologies that are mature 
and understood, especially as CFM will be operational in less developed jurisdictions with limits in the capacity of 
governments, utilities, regulators and financial institutions to absorb unfamiliar technologies.   Thus,  CFM concentrates 
on wind, solar and hydro as proven and mature technologies with a downward cost -of-energy  trend. CFM does however 
allocate a small percentage of its investments to other renewable technologies , such as bio- mass, waste -to-energy or 
green fuels. These will however be the exception rather than the rule and will be judged on a project by project basis. 
Fundamental to CFM’s approach is a cross technology platform with mature technologies to de- risk the portfolio. In all 
cases, each project will be thoroughly examined as to which of the mentioned technologies can best harness the available 
renewable resources to mitigate carbon emissions whilst supplying affordable energy and diversifying a given country’s 
energy mix.   
F.3. Environmental,  Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at e ach stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS)


---
*Page 76*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 93 F
standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and Action 
Plan. 
In accordance with CIO’s Responsible Investment Code and Responsible Investment Policy, CIO strives to achieve 
positive sustainable development outcomes through its investments through two pillars: a ‘Do No Harm’ and a ‘Do Good’ 
pillar. By application of these pillars, CFM is committed to:  
•Avoiding and otherwise minimizing and mitigating the impacts of its investments on local communities;
•Safeguarding the environment and sustainably managing natural resources;
•Minimizing CIO’s contribution to climate change through its own operations and through investments in therenewable energy sector;
•Protecting the health and safety of all those working on the projects in which CIO invests; (this and the previousthree commitments are in CFM’s Do No Harm pillar); and
•Maximizing opportunities for positive environmental and social benefits to be realized (the Do Good pillar).
In order to achieve these commitments, CIO is committed to complying with all legislation and applicable Environmental and Social (E&S) requirements for all investments. CIO will invest only into projects when they are expected to be 
designed, constructed,  operated, and maintained in a manner consistent with applicable E&S Requirements. If, at the 
time of making an investment decision, a project poses a potential reputation risk for the Fund or its investors due to unacceptable Environmental and Social management practices, it will be rejected.  
Through the implementation of CFM ’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), CFM  will assess every 
potential project to determine its E&S risk classification. An assessment will be conducted at the earliest  stage of a deal 
using a checklist to make a rapid assessment of the likely environmental and social impacts of the proposed investment. 
This high- level screening will also help to identify any activities that are included in the Exclusion List s of the Development 
Fund and the Construction Equity Fund. If any excluded activities are included in the proposed investment, the 
prospective Project Company will be informed that the investment will not be considered further. Based on the results of 
the deal screen, the investment will be categorized as either A (high or very high); B+ (medium high); B (medium to low); 
and C (low). These categories align with the IFC’s E&S project categorisation (i.e. A; B and C) with the exception of 
CFM’s B+ category which would fall within IFC Category A. Using IFC’s categorisation for financial institutions , 
respectively GCF categorisation, FMO (as an accredited entity) has categorised CIO as category A (IFC PS) , respectively 
I-1 (GCF). This reflects the fact that C IO’s portfolio may in future include business activities with significant and adverse
environmental and/or social impacts that may be irreversible. This is likely to form only a limited part of C IOs portfolio
with C IOs focus being on investments that have limited adverse environmental and social impacts.
The E&S risk categorization and the type of fund being considered will determine the nature and extent of ongoing due 
diligence activities that will be conducted to further assess the project’s E&S risks. These will  vary from a desk -based 
review of information through to a visit of the project location(s) and interviews with relevant stakeholders. It will also 
determine further E&S requirements, including the need for an international -standard Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and other specialist studies. There is a requirement for each project to develop and implement an 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which sets out the mitigation measures and management 
procedures to ensure that ne gative impacts, as identified in the ESIA, are avoided or mitigated. CFM’s ESMS has 
monitoring and reporting procedures in place to check the implementation of the ESMP throughout the construction and 
operation phases of each project.  Through the Do Good element of CFM’s Responsible Investment Framework, CIO will 
identify opportunities to deliver environmental and social benefits. CFM’s approach is focused on aspects including 
gender equality; affordable and clean energy; industry, innovation and infrastructure; and climate action (See Section E.3 for more information).
The CIO Gender Integration Action Plan exemplifies CFM’s commitment, outlined in its Responsible Investment Code  
and Responsible Investment Policy, to its pillars of ‘Do No Harm’ and ‘Do Good’. This plan outlines five components to


---
*Page 77*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 93 F
operationalise CIO commitment to gender and social inclusive access to renewable energy specifying the policy and 
gender infrastructure f ramework to realise these pillars within each project as well as collectively.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, disbursement 
methods and audi ting. 
The CIO Funds will be administered by CFM including  drawdowns from and distributions to investors, as well as all fund 
related accounting will be instigated, overseen and performed by CFM (as asset manager). CFM has an Authorisation 
and Payments Policy in place , which details the process of authorising and making payments to external parties, including 
the various levels of internal authorisations required in order to ensure a sound control environment. CFM  has controlled 
access to the CIO Fund ban k accounts and is responsible for initiating and releasing payments according to the 
Authorisation and Payments Policy and generally in accordance with the CIO Funds’ governing documentation.  
A
ll investor reporting is controlled and managed by CFM. A monthly review of the trial balance is performed by the CFM 
Finance Manager and quarterly and annual reports are prepared by CFM.  
T
he CIO Funds’ and CFM’s accounts will be audited annually by PwC . Accounts will be prepared according to the 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and will consist of, among others, a balance sheet, profit and loss 
account, explanatory notes, auditor’s report, overview of project turnover activity, breakdown of management fees paid, 
breakdown of fund operating costs etc.  
CFM will require the project companies to prepare accounts in accordance with appropriately recognised financial 
reporting standards and each project company is required to appoint an Auditor. CFM’s financial reports will be subject to FMO review and 
approval through FMO’s participation on CFM’s supervisory board & CFM’s Audit, Risk and 
Compliance Committee.


---
*Page 78*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 93 G
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Implementation
Investment Risk
The risk that the assets in the CFM managed assets’ 
portfolio underperform investment expectations and 
decline in value.  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by: 
-Robust asset selection processes in accordance with defined investment criteria, including Investment Committee
approval
-Comprehensive due diligence procedures
-Oversight by way of representation on project company boar dG.1.  Risk Assessment Summary
As Climate Investor One is a financing facility  mandated with the delivery of renewable energy projects in developing 
countries, the CIO Funds and the portfolio companies in which they seek  to invest may face a degree of risks and 
challenges associated with the strategy and the geographies operated in.  
Climate Fund Managers believes that these investment risks and challenges can be broadly summarized across six 
categories: 1) Implementation; 2) Economic; 3) Financial; 4) Political, Environmental & Social; 5) Technology, and; 6) 
Governance / Rule of Law.  
Other than identified investment risks, CFM has also identified potential enterprise risks normally associated with the 
business conducted.  These enterprise risks include: 1) Counterparty, 2) Legal and regulatory, 3) Reputation, 4) 
Compliance.  
The risk management framework employed by CFM will seek to identify, monitor, and exclude/mitigate perceived risks. 
Risks so identified will be classif ied in accordance with their likelihood and scale of impact and the measures put in 
place to mitigate/exclude such risk materializing. To ensure sufficient executive oversight, risks and procedures in 
place to prevent such risks occurring will periodically  be evaluated and reported to the CFM board of directors and, 
where relevant, to investors in accordance with proper fund governance procedures.  
CFM has an elaborate, internal compliance manual and framework , which includes a number of policies and 
procedures designed to provide employees guidance on perceived areas of risk and assigning responsibility internally 
for proper resolution of queries or issues arising, which include (but are not limited to) the financial management & 
procurement policies and guidelines will be applied to the selected SPV’s .


---
*Page 79*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 93 G
-Involvement in asset strategy decisions
-Monitoring of asset performance and revenue- drivers
-Assessment of risk management framework in place at the asset.
-Regular site visits to assets to remain updated on management and operational activities and progress
Selected Risk Factor 2
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Implementation
Regulatory Risk
The risk that changes in the regulatory environment or 
regulator’s attitude will have adverse impact on CFM 
and the CFM managed assets’ operations and/or 
strategy.  Other  Medium  (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
-Continual dialogue with regulators and governments
-Strong contractual position in the project documents
-Dedicated legal and compliance staff
-Continued evaluation, review of legislation
Selected Risk Factor 3
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Implementation
Operational Risk Including Offshore Operations
Risk that financial loss may occur through errors, 
omissions or inadequacy of processing, people, 
infrastructure and systems of CFM and the relevant 
CFM managed assets.  Technical and operational
 Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
-Adequate segregation of duties
-Documented policies and procedures (updated as required)
-Continuous training policy
Selected Risk Factor 4
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Implementation
Compliance RiskOther  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low


---
*Page 80*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 93 G
The risk that CFM and CFM managed vehicles’ 
compliance obligations (regulatory or internal) are not 
met, including reporting requirements.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
-Dedicated legal and compliance staff
-Quarterly compliance reporting and testing
-Continuous training policy
-Formal  staff induction training
-Documented policies and procedures (periodically updated as required)
Selected Risk Factor  5
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Implementation
Conflicts of Interest Risk
The risk that a conflict of interest occurs in an area of 
CFM’s service provision to its Managed Vehicles, their 
investors and its relationship with all of its stakeholders 
whereby CFM (or an investor or other stakeholder of 
CFM) may benefit whilst possible tangible loss may be caused to (another) investor to whom CFM provides a 
service.Technical and 
operational
 Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
-CFM has a comprehensive policy established to manage conflicts of interest
-Following the identification of a potential conflict, the manager will implement measures to manage and mitigat e
t
he identified conflict will be implemented promptly through three basic mechanisms to manage a conflict, namely
controlling, avoiding and disc losing.
-The appropriate mechanism to manage a conflict will depend on the circumstances and nature of any given
conflict.
Selected Risk Factor 6
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Economic
Interest Rate Risk
Risk that cost of borrowing increases (and CEF Tier 2 
returns decrease) due to changes in interest rates  post 
refinancing event Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:


---
*Page 81*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 93 G
-Changes to debt facilities or hedging policy approved by the board.
-Borrowing restrictions within the trust deed and prospectus or information memorandum, investment policy,
regulatory requirements, considered when selecting debt facilities.
-Fund board to be advised of the selection process and in the negotiation of terms and conditions of any debt
package.
-Where considered appropriate (and authorized by the fund agreements) derivatives used to manage interest rat e
ex
posure.
-Calculations confirming adherence to borrowing limits, financial covenants under lending documentation and
hedging policies tabled at board meetings
Selected Risk Factor 7
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Economic
Currency Risk
The risk that future cash receipts/payments will 
decrease/increase due to adverse movement in 
exchange rates.  Financial  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by: 
-Most Power Purchase Agreements (PPA’s) contracted by CIO at asset level are directly or indirectly denominated
in USD leading to an influx of USD (or equivalent) amounts.
-It is therefore estimated that most of Power Purchase Agreements will be indexed to USD currencies. If deemeddesirable / necessary, CIO has the option to explore hedging opportunities made available by local markets or byTCX (the Currency Exchange, a hedging mechanism that enjoys wide support from the DFI community includin
g
EBR
D and Kf W)
-In principle, CFM may only enter into futures, options or other derivative transactions for the purpose of, and onlyto the extent required for, hedging currency positions on non- USD Investments. CFM are not obliged to do this,
however
-A hedging policy may be adopted in respect of non- USD currency commitments for imminent acquisitions or
divestments, considered on a project -by-project basis or hedging of short -term distributions
-Distributions and other cash flows from assets are not hedged
Selected Risk  Factor 8
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Financial
Financial Close Risk
Limited access to finance and protracted timelines to 
agree terms prevent projects reaching financial close 
and subsequently refinancing  Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:


---
*Page 82*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 93 G
-Providing a one -stop-shop for finance at development, construction and refinance phases to avoid protracted
negotiations with multiple parties.
-Match- making projects with suitable local, international or public finance.
Selected Risk Factor 9
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Financial
Exit Risk
The risk that CFM is not able to di spose of all of its 
assets in full  . Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by: 
-Development of high quality projects
-M&A activity in investment regions shows appetite for greenfield renewable energy infrastructure.
-Active divestment opportunity screening throughout the lifetime of a project
Selected Risk Factor 10
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Financial
Counterparty / Credit Risk
The risk that a counterparty (the other party with whom 
an investment or borrowing transaction is made) will fail 
to perform contractual obligations and default in either 
whole or part under a contract.  Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
-Risk assessed as part of due diligence process, preparing the underlying investment proposal and reviewed on
an ongoing basis
-International credit ratings checked where relevant
Selected Risk Factor 11
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Financial
Liquidity Risk
The risk that CFM and a CFM managed asset does not 
have sufficient cash to meet forward commitments.  Financial  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low


---
*Page 83*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 93 
 
 
 G 
Meaning that revenues on the manager or project levels 
are below expenses and there is a lack of liquidity.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
- Detailed 5 -year cash forecast updated monthly  
- “Forward commitments test” and liquidity limits under which available liquidity must not fall.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 2 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Political  
Political Risk  
Risk that sovereign rights exercised by governments 
are contrary to the rights of the Fund, or project 
company under the relevant agreements.  Other  High (>20% of 
project value)  High  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
- Virtue of donor as Official Development Assistance (ODA) providers and DFI funding  
- Acquiring Political Risk Guarantee (World Bank, MIGA)  when specific events heighten the political risk in a project 
company  
- Government Letter of Support  
- Put Call Option Agreement’s (PCOA)  
- Offtake Agreement  
GCF funding would be complimentary to already established ODA providers (USAID, Dutch Government) in the 
Development Fund and T1 Construction Equity Fund of CIO, in providing additional political risk mitigation capabilities 
on the back of being established under the framework of the UNFCCC.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Environmental & Social  
Environmental and Social Risk  
Impact on natural resources, employees, investors, 
customers and community by the business activities of 
CFM or a CFM managed asset fund and its 
investments.  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
- The application of FMO’s emerging markets experience in the design of C FM’s Environmental and Social 
Management System , which will apply to all CIO investments  
- Adherence to international Environmental and Social standards  as well as local legal requirements.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 93 
 
 
 G 
- Disclosure of project -related information in accordance with local legal requirements as well as the IFC 
Performance Standards (PS).    
- FMO reputation management and stakeholder engagement experience  
- Dedicated E&S specialist to implement CFM ESG due diligence processes at all stages.  
- Monitoring of implementation of the  ESMS throughout the lifecycle of any project.  
- Implementation of GIAP with particular focus on gender responsive stakeholder engagement and consultation as 
well as gender responsive grievance mechanisms  
Selected Risk Factor 1 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Technology  
Technology Risk  
Risk of technology underperforming through inadequate 
natural resources, and / or inadequate maintenance.  Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
- Risk assesse d as part of due diligence and preparing the underlying investment proposal  
- Investing in proven technologies from known / trusted manufacturers  
- Contracting independent experts to assess viability of resource potential of project sites  
- Securing EPC contracts  
- Securing OEM maintenance contracts  
Selected Risk Factor 1 5 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Technology  
Construction Risk  
Risk that there are significant issues during project 
construction and potential delays and construction 
overruns.  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
- High quality  planning and project management  
- Appropriate contractual arrangements and risk allocation mechanisms (including guarantees and liquidated 
damages)  
- Securing high quality EPC  and Balance of Plant contractors  with appropriate track record  
 
Selected Risk Factor 16  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring


---
*Page 85*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 93 G
Governance / Rule of Law
Good Governance / Rule of Law / Corruption
Risk of failed governance at the project company level; 
a counterparty or employee acting corruptly  or 
fraudulently or in breach of law.  Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Managed by:  
-A focus on good governance at both the fund and project level which will benefit local counterparties through strict
adherence to the rule of law and in mitigating corruption risk
-Existence of robust and clear compliance policies and procedures  including KYC, Anti Money Laundering and
Count
er-Terrorist Financing  and Anti-Corruptio n
-E
nsuring appropriate fraud insurance cover
-Ongoing KYC, internal sanctions list and anti- money laundering  and counter -terrorist financing checks and
verifications
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the proj ects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors.


---
*Page 86*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 93 
 
 
 H 
 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level19 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -
emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathways  
 
 CIO seeks to create a paradigm shift in the way renewable energy projects in developing countries 
are funded by catalysing private sector, commercial and institutional capital into such projects by 
virtue o f CIO’s innovative structure. CIO is able to attract capital into renewable energy expansion in 
emerging markets that would not otherwise be invested. This is necessary to meet the large funding 
needs to reach the Paris Agreement goal of keeping temperatur e rise below 20C. 
 
Furthermore, CIO accelerates and increases the success probability of renewable energy projects by 
providing a simplified whole- of-life funding solution to Project Companies along with CFM ’s active 
management  and development support /  assistance to Project Companies. Hence CIO’s 
transformational impact is both in the way capital for climate change mitigation projects is raised and 
the way projects are funded. CIO will not only create a significant amount of clean energy capacity 
by vir tue of its investments but also add a new instrument to the development and climate finance 
toolbox.  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Base  
line Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term 
(end of 
2027)  Final  
(end of 
2037)  All Mid-target s are  based on 
approximately 65% of capital 
invested  
Fund -level impacts in the 11 GCF -earmarked countries  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions 
through 
increased low -
emission energy 
access and 
power generation   1.1Tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) 
reduced or 
avoided  Annual 
Report  0  34.92 
million 
tCO 2eq 53.73 
million 
tCO 2eq • Target(s) based on FMO 
Energy Impact Scoring Tool  
calculations  
• Baseline change as estimated 
by the IFI Harmonized 
Emissions Factor at year of 
project contracting.  
• Annual GHG avoided is 2. 69 
million  tCO2eq/year for all 
projects, assuming all CEF 
capital invested and recycled 
3.37 times.  
Volume of 
finance leveraged 
(or mobilized) by 
CIO & co -Total Co -
financing 
leveraged at 
final close of 
CIO  Annual 
Report   0 USD 430 
million  - • USD 400 million in Tiers 2&3 
• USD 20 million in Tier 1  
• USD 10 million in the 
Development Fund  
                                                             
19 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators  are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 87*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 93 H
financiers at 
project level  
Total capital 
leveraged at 
end of fund 
life Annual 
Report  0 - USD 
2,129 
million  •USD 1,453 million in CIO
oDevelopment F und
U
SD 38 million
oCEF USD 1,415 million
•USD 676 million from 3rd
par
ties in the development  and
c
onstruction phases.
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of
Verification
(MoV)  Base
line Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if 
applicable)  Final
Project/program
me
outcomesOutcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission 
power suppliers  6.1 Number of 
IPPs 
constructed  Annual 
Report  0 13 20 •Projects  constructed in the 1 1
GCF -earmarked countries
•Total size of CEF is USD 500
million
•Capital is recycled with a factor of
3.37
•CEF invests USD 85 million o n
average per project
6.2 Number 
of individuals  
and 
households  
with 
improved 
access to 
low-emission 
energy 
sources  Annual 
Report  0 5.30 m. 
individu
als; 
1.20 m. 
househo
lds 8.15 m 
individu
als; 
1.85 m. 
househo
lds •Individuals served per USD  1
million invested is based on
current pipelin e
•Household size is assumed at 4. 4
members per household. 
•The same number of male and 
female beneficiaries is assumed.  
6.3 
Additional 
MW’s 
delivered to 
grid Annual 
Report  0 1,053 
MW 1,620 
MW CEF investment of 75% of total 
equity is assumed.  
•Capital recycled with a factor of
3.37
Project/program
me outputsOutputs that contribute to outcomes
Component 1 Development Fund
Output 1. 1 
Renewable 
energy projects Number of 
renewable 
energy Annual 
Report  0 13 20 •Average development loan of USD
1.5 million per project


---
*Page 88*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 93 H
successfully 
developed and 
reached financial 
close  projects 
reached 
Financial 
Close  •Development Fund loan at 50% of
development costs.
•Projects identified, financed  and
successfully developed.
Output 1. 2 
Accelerated installation of 
renewable energy 
capacity  and 
development of new markets for 
renewable energy  Time saved 
in 
comparison 
to 
comparable 
transactions 
in similar 
region  Annual 
Report  0 25% per 
project 
in days, 
*13
projects  25% per 
project  
in days, 
*20
projects  •20 projects developed over t he
lifetime of the Development Fund
•Time saved for each project
•Project  specific benchmarks per
country and per technology will b e
developed, as per iTAP review
discussion
Component 2 Construction Equity Fund
Output 2.1.  
Increased number of small, medium 
and large low -
emission power 
suppliers  Number of 
renewable 
energy projects  
reached COD Annual 
Report  
0 13 20 •Projects constructed in the 11
GCF -earmarked countries
•Total size of CEF is USD 500
million
•Capital is recycled with a factor of
3.37
•CEF invests USD 85 million o n
average per project
Gr
een 
energy  
produced  Annual 
Report  0 56,650 
GWh  87,160 
GWh  •Production per USD 1 million
invested is based on current
pipeli ne
•CEF investment assumptions as
above
•Indicators is for full lifetime of all
assets, assumed to be 20 years
•Yearly production of all assets
combined is 4,36 0 GWh/year
Output 2.2 
Construction and Operational & 
Maintenance 
Stage Jobs  Number of people 
employed  Annual 
Report  
0 17,200 26,460 •Jobs created per 1 MW installed
based on IRENA dat a
•CEF investment assumptions as
above.
•Includes MCI and O&M jobs.
•Please note that the equipment is
not manufactured in the country of
the project.
•The indicator will be further refined
throughout the implementatio n
period.
Activities  Description Inputs  Description 
Component 1 Development Fund


---
*Page 89*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 93 H
1.1.1 Capital 
raising for the 
Development Fund  CFM r aising concessional 
donor capital for the 
Development Fund  1.1.1.1 Donor 
capital raised on 
the 1st and 3rd 
close of the 
Fund.  Raising donor capital to provide scarce 
development funding for the highest risk stage of a 
renewabl e energy project. Activity Completed.  
1.1.1.2 
Fundraising 
completed at the 
final close of the 
fund.  Completing fund raising and scaling the 
Development Fund to provide funding for more 
renewable energy projects.  
1.1.2 Project Sourcing, due 
diligence and 
approval  CFM identifies investee 
projects  1.1.2.1 
Identifying 
potential 
investment 
opportunities  The CFM Investments Team identifies project 
opportunities and carries out an initial assessment, 
which is presented to the CFM IC.  
1.1.2.2 Due 
diligence  The CFM Investments Team carries out extensive 
DD on the project opportunity and third -party  co-
developers and sponsors  
1.1.2.3 Project 
approval  Projects are approved by the Development Fund 
IC 
1.1.3 Providing development 
loans  Providing development 
loans to Project Companies  1.1.3.1 Providing 
the loan to fund 
a development 
budget  The Development Fund provides development 
loans as agreed upon in the JDA to fund the project 
development budget alongside 3rd party co-
developer(s)  
1.1.4 Project development and project development 
support  CFM Team co- develops the 
project alongside other 
(local) project co-developers and co-
sponsors  1.1.4.1 
Establishing an 
SPV at the 
project’s 
location and 
development 
support / 
assistance  Once a Joint Development Agreement is signed a 
SPV is established in the country of the project. 
CFM manages the SPV via a seat(s) in the SPV 
Board. CFM deploys the expertise of its team to 
aid project development  
1.1.4.2 Further 
project 
assessment  The resource, terrain and other factors are 
assessed further to plan project construction. An 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment is 
conducted  
1.1.4.3 
Obtaining 
permits and land Land and various legal and regulatory permits are 
obtained  
1.1.4.4 Signing 
a PPA A Power Purchase Agreement is signed with the 
off-taker  
1.1.4.5 
Stakeholder 
engagement 
and Do Good Local stakeholder engagement is conducted and 
a Do Good programme for the local community is 
developed


---
*Page 90*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 93 H
programme 
development  
1.1.4.6 
Contracting 
EPC and OEM 
contractors  Contractor proposals are evaluated and the 
contractors are selected.  
1.2.1 Accelerating 
Project Development Process  By providing development 
loans and future equity 
financing (subject to 
successful development 
and CEF IC approval) 
project timelines are 
reduced  1.2.1.1 Providing 
whole- of-life 
financing 
solution  By providing a whole- of-life funding solution project 
developers do not have to inefficiently spend their 
time and resources on fundraising for construction 
capital and can fo cus on development. 
Furthermore, complex multi -lender negotiations 
are not needed with CIO’s financing, which 
reduces development timelines. 
In so doing CIO expects to develop projects faster 
than otherwise possible and observed in 
comparable markets and projects. Also In some of 
the target countries CIO expects to construct the 
first renewable energy projects of their kind and the 
first IPPs thus kickstarting sector development and 
accelerating the expansion of renewable energy in 
developing countries.  
Component 2 Construction Equity Fund
2.1.1 Capital raising for the 
Construction 
Equity Fund  To provide construction equity capital to projects 
CFM will raise CEF Tier 2 
and Tier 3 capital from commercial and institutional 
investors to add to the GCF 
and other Tier 1 Donor 
commitments in a 20:40:40 
proportion between Tier 1: 
Tier 2: Tier 3: respec tively.  2.1.1.1 CEF 
capital raised 
during first 
through third 
fund close  Raising capital in the three tiers of CEF and in so 
providing the CIO concept and being able to 
invest in renewable energy projects  
2.1.1.2 CEF 
capital raised on 
final fund close  Scaling CEF to invest in more renewable energy 
projects and fortify the CIO concept as a new tool 
in the development and climate finance toolbox.  
2.1(2).2 Project 
Investment and 
Construction  The CEF will provide all-
equity financing to construct the project 
alongside 3
rd party co-
developer(s) and sponsors. CFM manages the 
construction of the project 
along with co- developer(s)  2.1(2).2.1 Equity 
capital is 
invested  CEF provides Equity capital to construct the 
project  
2.1(2).2.2 
Project is 
constructed  CFM and the co- developer co- manage the 
construction process


---
*Page 91*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 93 
 
 
 H 
 2.1(2).3 Project 
Refinancing and 
exit Post-construction the 
project is refinanced with 
debt to replenish CEF 
capital and reinvest into 
other projects. Eventually 
CEF exits its equity stake in 
the project.  2.1(2).3.1  After a period of time post construction the all -
equity funded project will be refinanced with debt 
to reduce cost of capital. It is estimated that 50 – 
80% of equity will be replaced with debt. This will 
allow CEF to repl enish its undrawn capital and 
reinvest into mode projects, creating mode 
capacity and impact. After a period post 
refinancing CEF will exit its equity position, adding 
more capital back to CEF and reinvesting it into 
more projects.  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please indicate 
how the interim/mid- term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.  
 
Monitoring & Evaluation  
 
The midterm(s) and final evaluation will be outsourced to an independent evaluator after 5, 10, 15 and 20 years, 
respectively.  
 
Midterm Evaluations  
At the moment of the first midterm evaluation (5 years), it is not expected that significant development results will have 
been achieved, since the portfolio will not have reached full maturity at this point. Therefore, t he implementation of the 
investment strategy will be the focus of the evaluation at this point.  
 
Subsequent midterm evaluations thereafter will focus on the extent to which CIO is achieving its goals with regards to  
number of projects developed & implemented, GHG avoidance, energy production, installed capacity, private sector capital 
catalysed and amount of people served.  
 
Final Evaluation  
For the final evaluation (20 years) it is expected that development effects will have been fully realized. Therefore,  an ex -
post effectiveness study will be outsourced for the CIO Construction Equity Fund. The evaluation will be based on the 
DAC criteria which focuses on relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability.  
  
• Relevance: the extent to which the investments are suited to the priorities and policies of CIO  
• Effectiveness : the extent to which the objectives of CIO were achieved  
• Efficiency : the extent to which activities were cost -efficient and timely  
• Impact : determining the positive and negative cha nges produced by CIO, directly or indirectly, intended or 
unintended.  
o The focus will be on local social, economic, environmental and other development indicators as mentioned 
in the previous section (at output, outcome and impact level).  
o Baseline and end line data will be used.  
o It will be evaluated to the extent that these results can be attributed to CIO. There will be other factors 
which influence the results which need to be mapped.  
o If applicable, investments might be benchmarked against other similar investments in the region.


---
*Page 92*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 93 H
•Sustainability : the extent to which the investments of CIO are likely to continue operating after CIO has exited its
investments.
Ex-P
ost Effectiveness Study  
The study will include several case studies. Modelled result data used for the case study will be verified and compared 
with existing data for the indicator ‘total people reached’ (e.g. amount of people and to what extent these relate to those 
earning below the poverty lines). Special attention will be given to unintended effects (e.g. was there opposition from 
surrounding communities and how was this dealt with, were there issues with resettlement, etc.).  
F
or the case studies’ demonstration effects (examples of scaling up and replication) will be evaluated with qualitative 
methods. Finally, the final evaluation will look at the extent to which CIO has been additional in the field of energy financ e 
as a whole.  
Reporting
S
elected monitoring reports will be provided on a quarterly basis to all Donors, including information on the investments 
done and financial performance. On an annual basis a report will be provided to the Donors including audited financial accounts and detailed information on investments, investment valuations, fees and the impact indicators.  
F
inancial Re porting 
The financial year of the Fund shall begin on 1 January and end on 31 December of each year. The first financial year of 
the Fund will begin at First Closing and will end on 31 December 2016.  
Within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter ended 31 March, 30 June and 30 September, CFM shall prepare and provide all Investors with a quarterly report consisting of, inter alia:  
-An unaudited profit and loss account, balance sheet and cash flow statement of the programme for t he
pr
eceding quarter;
-Explanatory notes;
-An overview of the investment activity undertaken by the programme within the reporting period;
-An overview of each project company, including:
i.A description of the Project Company's business;
ii.The economic interest of the programme in the Project Company;
iii.The percentage of the Project Company owned by the Fund;
iv.A discussion of recent key events;
v.Selected financial information;
vi.If the Investment has been repaid or realized, the realized liquidation or disposal proceeds; and,
-Quarterly capital account statements.
Within one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days after the end of each financial year the Manager shall prepare and provide all Investors with an annual report (the "Annual Report") consisting of, inter alia:  
-The annual accounts of the programme, comprising at least a balance sheet, a profit and loss account a nd
ex
planatory notes thereto, as audited by the Auditor;
-A report of the Auditor on its findings resulting from its audit of the annual accounts;
-An overvi ew of each Project Company acquired, sold or otherwise disposed of during the reporting period;
-A valuation of each Investment;
-A report on KPI's;


---
*Page 93*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 93 
 
 
 H 
- A breakdown of fees received by CFM during the reporting period;  
- A breakdown of the programme's operating costs during the reporting period;  
- A schedule of Drawdowns and distributions effectuated during the reporting period;  
- The total amount of the Undrawn Commitments as per the end of the reporting period; and,  
- A report detailing the activities of the programm e during the reporting period.  
 
Environmental & Social Reporting  
An important aspect of CFM’s risk management process is the ongoing monitoring and review of each investment. 
Depending on which Fund that an investment is drawing from (Development  or Construction Equity), different monitoring 
requirements will be applied. Monitoring is commensurate with the risk categorisation, with physical visits to the location(s ) 
of higher risk projects during construction.  
All project companies drawing from the Construction Equity Fund are also required to monitor the performance of any 
contractors employed at the project site(s) and to participate in a Management Review held by CFM on a periodic basis 
during the lifecycle of the Fund to review overall E&S perfor mance.  
In addition, CFM will also ensure that any legal requirements for monitoring, for example that may be included in permits 
and licences for development, construction and operation, are incorporated into the project monitoring and evaluation 
plan. CF M requires all projects in receipt of Construction Equity Fund are to report in accordance with defined key 
performance indicators (presented below). In addition, the performance measurement framework indicators presented in 
H1.1 and H1.2 will be incorporated into fund- level and project -level monitoring and evaluation activities that will be 
managed by CFM.  
 
Calculation and Verification of Numerical Impact Indicators  for GCF  
CIO has four main numerical impact indicators: GHG emissions avoided, people reached, private sector funding leveraged 
and jobs created. These indicators will be calculated, verified and reported as follows:  
 
Additional Clean Energy Capacity Installed:  
This will be reported ex -ante according to estimates in Final Investment Proposals, Project Contracts and ex -post after 
construction according to project company report.  
 
Additional Clean Energy Suppliers:  
The number of additional suppliers and therefore projects will be reported as they are contracted and constructed as well 
as aggregate numbers at least annually.  
 
GHG Emissions Avoided & People Reached:  
Calculation: The numbers will be calculated using the FMO Energy Impact Scoring Tool, inputting electricity production 
estimates from the time the project is approved by the Development Fund Investment Committee to the time construction 
is completed. The estimates of electricity production can change as t he development and construction process progresses 
and will be updated annually. Once the project is operational actual electricity produced will be used to estimate the 
indicators.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 93 
 
 
 H 
Verification:  The electricity production estimates will be provided by th e relevant technical employee in the project 
company to CFM. CFM will then calculate the impact indicators using the FMO Energy Impact Scoring Tool and report  
them to FMO’s Development Impact and Sustainability team of the Strategy department. FMO will the n be requested to 
verify that the model is used correctly and that the numbers are accurate.  
 
Private Sector Funding Catalysed and Jobs Created  
Calculation: Ex-ante estimates  of these indicators will be done at CFM level for private sector funding catalysed and at 
project company level for jobs created.  Annual reports include commitments of DF and CEF for contracted and 
Development Fund Investment committee approved projects as well as any disbursements from both funds to projects 
under development or construction. The reports will include the shares of t he three tiers of CEF as well as funding 
contributed by private third-party  sponsors  and banks . It is often not possible to provide accurate job estimates prior to 
contracting the  project hence ex -ante estimates of jobs created per project will be made ava ilable as soon as the project 
company can provide that information. Ex -post, the number of people hired (and the gender proportions)  will be reported 
to GCF annually.  
Verification: Private sector funding catalysed will be provided in the Final Investment P roposal  document of each 
investment as well as the Joint Development Agreement and Shareholding Agreements between the developer and CIO. 
The number of people employed in the project company at all stages of the projects’ lifecycle will be provided and ver ified 
by the relevant staff in the project company.  
 
Performance will be reported to its various stakeholders, including investors,  donors, the CIO  investment committees and 
the CI One Funds Advisory Board.  
 
Key Performance Indicators  & Performance Reporting  
CFM has established requirements for performance reporting, at both the programme level and for individual projects. The 
content of these reports is defined below.  
1. Programme -Level  Annual Environmental and Social Performance Report  
  
- Name of the responsible E&S Manager;  
- Status / changes in E&S Management System;  
- Difficulties and/or constraints related to the implementation of E&S Management System;  
- Overview of current pipeline, status and expected categorisation;  
- Performance against  leading and lagging indicators as detailed in Section 8 of this ESMS;  
- E&S trainings undertaken/planned; and  
- Exclusion List: confirmation that no investments are undertaken in any of the activities listed in the Exclusion 
List (or, in cases where a Project  Company is found to be partly active in activities included on the Exclusion 
List, submit a plan to phase out such activities).  
2. Project -Level Annual Environmental and Social Performance Report  
- Categorisation of each investment and rationale behind that  categorisation;  
- Summary assessment of E&S risks identified;  
- For High Risk Activities (category A and B+), summary of qualified external E&S assessment undertaken 
and reference to qualification of external expert undertaking assessment;


---
*Page 95*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 93 H
-Status of E&S perfo rmance to date (including performance against the above referenced KPIs),
implementation of E&S Management System and agreed E&S Action Plan (if applicable);
-CO 2 equivalent emissions  (generated and / or avoided, reported in accordance with requirements set  out in
I
FC PS 3);
-Number of People served by the power generated by the project;
-Employment data, as follows:
-Total number and breakdown of staff employed
-Direct Employment (total number)
-Permanent number of males
-Permanent number of females:
-Details of any retrenchment of employees in the reporting period in terms of number of employees
affected and retrenchment plan (copy to be provided with report).
-Date of the last site visit for E&S purposes.
-Optional information that can also be reported by each Project Company:
-Any improvements in performance with a clear environmental benefit; and
-Any improvements in performance with a clear social benefit.
3.C
onstruction Equity Fund Quarterly  Environmental and Social Performance Report
All of CFM’s Construction Equity Fund projects are required to monitor and report against the following key performance 
indicators on a quarterly basis.  
Health & Safety Environment  Social / Labour  
-Number and severity of
injuries
-Number and nature of
incidents involving damageto plant or property
-Number and nature of nearmisses
-Number of hazardoussituations/safetyobservations
-Number of personsinducted;
-Number of E&S trainingsessions
-Lost time injury frequency,incidence, and severityrates-Number and nature of
environmental incidents
-Energy and waterconsumption
-Volume of solid wast e
di
sposal
-Liquid effluents discharge
-Emissions to air
-Improvements i n
per
formance with a clear
environmental benefit-Numbers of complaints and
grievances receiv ed by
internal and externalstakeholders
-Improvements i n
per
formance with a clear
social benefit
-Average working hours andwages paid
-Incidences of child labour;
-Incidences of disciplinaryand discriminatio
n
c
omplaints
-Employee demographicsmatching access  to training,
jobs, and wages
Reporting from  FMO  (the Accredited Entity ) to GCF:
Annual Performance Report  
On the status of CIO throughout the relevant reporting period, including a narrative report on implementation progress 
based on the logical framework submitted in the Funding Proposal and considerations on the ongoing performance of the


---
*Page 96*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 93 
 
 
 H 
 CIO against the GCF  investment framework criteria, including updates on the  indicators as per the guidance provided by 
the GCF  results management framework, and a report on ESS as well as gender. The APR shall be submitted to the 
Secretariat on an annual basis for the period ending on 31 December within sixty (60) days after the end of the relevant 
annual period, with the first APR required to be submitted following the end of the calendar year after the Effective Date , 
and the final APR (project completion report) will be submitted within six (6) months after the end of the relev ant reporting 
period;  
The Annual Performance Report should also provide the relevant breakdowns of CIO investments in GCF earmarked 
countries by energy sector and countries benefited, specifying the amount of funding provided (GCF and total) and 
progress t owards the relevant indicators (such as GHG emissions reduction by country and sector, capacity installed by 
sector and country, electricity generated by sector and country, jobs created by sector and country, among other 
indicators ./  
 
 
Interim and Final Evaluation Reports  
The Interim and Final Evaluations reports will set  out any necessary corrective measures (in the case of interim reports), 
an assessment of the performance of CIO against GCF  investment framework criteria, including financial/economic 
performances as part of the efficiency and effectiveness criterion, as well as the sustainability and scalability of results 
and impacts and lessons learned, during the relevant period. The Interim and F inal Evaluation Reports shall be prepared 
by an independent evaluator selected by FMO ( the Accredited Entity ) or by an independent evaluation unit/office of FMO. 
The reports will  be submitted on the dates or according to the preset schedule and copies of these reports shall be 
forwarded by the FMO  to relevant  NDA s or Focal Point s for information.  
 
Annual Self -Assessment Report  
A self -assessment of the AE’s compliance with the Fund’s Fiduciary Principles and Standards, ESS and Gender Policy; 
and a report on any action carried out or planned to be carried out in relation to the same.  
 
Financial Reporting  
FMO  will provide to GCF  copies of all financial statements and annual audited reports of the CIO  received by FMO  from 
CFM , which shall not be later than three (3) months after the end of the Fiscal Year for unaudited financial statements and 
five (5) months after the end of the Fiscal Year for audited reports. FMO shall also make available to GCF , in accordance 
with its policies and procedures, copies of all relevant financial information of CIO,  which shall not be later than three (3) 
months after the end of the Fiscal Year for unaudited financial statements and five (5) months after the end of t he Fiscal 
Year for audited reports.


---
*Page 97*
---

ANNE
XES
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 93 I
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents.I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  – Annex 1
☐ Feasibility Study
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment (If applicable)
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule,
etc.)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan
(If applicable)  – Annex 2
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable)
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (I f applicable)
☐ Map indicating the location of the project/programme
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation  inc luded in section C.8.
Ann
exes:
Annex 1: NDA No -Objection Letters (11) 
Annex 2: CIO Environmental & Social Management System Disclosure 
Annex 3: Gender Integration Action Plan


---
*Page 98*
---

Green Climate Fund – Funding Proposal Annexes
 
 Annex 1: NDA No-Objection Letters (11)
Annex 1: NDA No-Objection Letters (11)
Annex 2: CIO Environmental & Social Management System Disclosure
Annex 3: Gender Integration Action Plan
Page 94


---
*Page 99*
---

Page 95


---
*Page 100*
---

Page 96


---
*Page 101*
---

RepueLlouE DE DJIBoUTI
Ururrr-gcRlrrE-PAx
MtrutsrcRr DE L'HABIrAT,
or L'URBnTISME ET DE
t'EttvtRoNttEMENT
LE SECRETAIRE GENERALÿFæ Ev-F!15
Ê)I.-Jl -âlJlJl -âs3Jl
âi++ll3 ;ç^Jl3 UIS-,Yl e;t;,
ptrJt 4rYt
c,,
-è i"',-N. 39+ I
Djibouti, l"*;SG/2018
ITPî æ6
To: The Executive Director
Green Climate Fund ('GCFJ
Songdo International Business District
175, Aft Center- Daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004
Republic of Korea
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschapp'tj Voor
Ontwikkelingslanden N.V.(FMO) regarding Climate Investor One (CIO)
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the programme Climate Investor One in Djibouti project as included in
the funding proposal submitted by Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij Voor
Ontwikkelingslanden N.V.(FMO) to us on January 20t7.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministère de l'Habitat, de
l'Urbanisme et de l'Environnement, the National Designated Authoriÿ/focal point of
Djibouti.
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the
funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Djibouti has no-objection to the project as included in the
funding proposal;
(b)The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformiÿ with Djibouti's
national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project
as included in the funding proposal is in conformiÿ with relevant national laws' and regulations.
[ +2s3 35-8s-22 Èd+253 3s-t6-18 Hep rr dini.omarl 2@gmai l.comftrTX{UEPage 97


---
*Page 102*
---

We also confirm that our national process for asceftaining no-objection to the p0ect
as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be
implemented within the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Ministère de l'Habitat, de l'Urbanisme et de I'Environnement
GCF Focal Point-DjiboutiDiniPage 98


---
*Page 103*
---

Page 99


---
*Page 104*
---

Pagee 100


---
*Page 105*
---

Page 101


---
*Page 106*
---

Scanned by CamScanner
Page 102


---
*Page 107*
---

Page 103


---
*Page 108*
---

Page 104


---
*Page 109*
---

Page 105


---
*Page 110*
---

Page 106


---
*Page 111*
---

Page 107


---
*Page 112*
---

Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Climate Investor One  
Accredited entity  Nederlandse Financierings -Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden 
N.V. (FMO)
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 1 (I1)  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited  entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Environmental and Social Management Plan  (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -03-02 
Language(s) of disclosure  English , French , Vietnamese , Mongolian  and Amharic  
Link to disclosure  FMO’s Climate Investor One Web page: https://www.fmo.nl/project -
detail/52284   
Climate Investor One Website: 
http://www.climateinvestorone.com/nl/  
English: http://www.climateinvestorone.com/files/18 0301 -esms -v-
2e-clean.pdf   
French: http://www.climateinvestorone.com/files/180301 -esms -v-
2e-francais.pdf   
Vietnamese: http://www.climateinvestorone.com/files/180301 -
esms -v-2e-vietnamese.pdf   
Mongolian: http://www.climateinvestorone.com/files/180301 -
esms -v-2e-mongolian.pdf   
Amharic: www.climateinvestorone.com/files/180301 -esms -v-2e-
amharic.pdf   
Climate Fund Managers Website : 
http://www.climatefundmanagers.com/nl/  
English: http://www.climatefundmanagers.com/files/180301 -esms -
v-2e-clean.pdf  Page 108


---
*Page 113*
---

French:  http://www.climatefundmanagers.com/files/180301 -esms -
v-2e-francais.pdf   
Vietnamese:  http://www.climatefundmanagers.com/files/180301 -
esms -v-2e-vietnamese.pdf  
Mongolian:  http://www.climatefundmanagers.com/files/180301 -
esms -v-2e-mongolian.pdf  
Amharic:  http://www.climatefundmanagers.com/files/180301 -
esms -v-2e-amharic.pdf  
Climate Fund Managers (CFM) is the fund manager for the Climate 
Investor One (CIO) fund. As co -founder and initiator of CIO, FMO has 
also taken a significant ownership stake in CFM. In light of (i) the 
status of FMO being a 50 percent shareholder of CFM, as well as (ii ) the 
fact that all previous E&S safeguards -related information on CIO has 
been published on the CIO and CFM websites, the present ESMS 
disclosure is being done via the CIO and CFM websites instead of the 
FMO website. Links to the CIO and CFM websites may be found on 
FMO’s CIO web page.  
For further details on the ownership role of FMO in relation to CFM, as 
well as on the overall involvement of FMO in CIO as an initiator and 
investor, please refer to the below link to the FMO website:  
https://www.fmo.nl/news -detail/d5cd9d98 -884a -4dd6 -bc6a -
6c01b310037d/first -close -of-a-new -global -climate -fund -at-usd-412 -
million  
Other  link(s)  N/A  
________  Page 109