=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20180926132313+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 18.11.20063
/ModDate: D:20180926133647+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 18.11.20063
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Adde ndum  XVIII 
Funding proposal package for FP0 96 
 GCF/B. 21/10/Add. 18 
26 September 2018  Meeting of the Board  
17– 20 October  201 8 
Manama, Bahrain  
Provisional Agenda Item  17 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following  three  parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ DRC Green Mini -Grid Program ” submitted by the 
African Development Bank ; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal points ; and  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure ; 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respe ctively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “ DRC Green Mini -Grid 
Program ” submitted by the African Development Bank  is being circulated on a limited 
distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure 
confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive 
information of the entity.  
The funding proposal package for FP0 96 is being submitted for the first time for the Board's 
consideration at its twenty -first meeting.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.21/10/Add.18  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
               Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                                                       1 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal points                                                 73 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                                                                                                                75


---
*Page 3*
---

CONFIDENTIAL  
Project/Programme Title:  Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)  Green Mini -Grid 
Program   
Country/Region:  Democratic Republic of Congo  
Accredited Entity:  African Development Bank  
Date of Submission:  July 2018


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
RESTRICTED  
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
 Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Acc redited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
 
 
RESTRICTED  
 
 
 
List of Abbreviations  
 
A2E    Access to Electricity  
AfDB    African Development Bank  
AMA    Accreditation Master Agreement  
AMDA    African Mini -Grid Developers Association 
ANAPI    Agence Nationale pour la Promotion des Investissements  (National Investment 
Promotion Agency ) 
ANSER    Agence Nationale de l’Electrification et des Services Energétiques en Milieu 
Rural et Périurbain (National Agency for the Rural and Peri-urban Electrification ) 
ARE    Authorité de Régulation du secteur de l’électricité (Electricity Regulation 
Authority)  
AMLCFT   Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism  
BAU    Business -as-usual  
CAPEX    Capital Expenditures  
CDC    Commonwealth Development Corporation  
CDF    Congolese Franc  
CDM    Clean Development Mechanism  
CIF    Clean Investment Funds  
CNE     Commission Nationale de l’Energie (National Energy Commission)  
COD   Commercial Operation Date 
DFI    Development Finance Institution  
DFID    Department for International Development of UK  
DRC    Democratic Republic of Congo  
DSCR     Debt Service Coverage Ratio  
EBITDA   Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization  
EPC    Engineering, Procurement and Construction  
E&S    Environmental and Social  
ESIA    Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
ESMF    Environmental and Social Management Framework  
ESMP     Environmental and Social Management Plan  
EUR     Euro  
FAA    Funded Activity Agreement  
FiT    Feed- in-Tariff  
GCF     Green Climate Fund  
GDP    Gross Domestic Product  
GEF    Global Environment Facility  
GHG    Green House Gas  
GMG    Green Mini -grid 
GoDRC    Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo  
HOMER   Hybrid Optimization Model for Multiple Energy Resources


---
*Page 6*
---

 
 
 
 
RESTRICTED  
 
 
 
IDD    Integrity Due Diligence  
IMF    International Monetary Fund 
IPP    Independent Power Producer  
IRENA    International Renewable Energy Agency  
KYC    Know -Your -Customer  
LDC    Least Developed Country  
LLA    Lender’s Legal Advisor    
MERH    Ministère de l’Energie et des Ressources Hydrauliques  (Ministry of  Energy and 
Hydraulic Resources of the DRC)  
MIGA    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency  
MW    Megawatt  
MWh   Megawatt  Hour  
ND-GAIN   Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative  
NDC    Nationally Determined Contributions  
O&M    Operation and Maintenance 
OPEX    Operating Expenses  
PEP    Politically Exposed Persons  
PPA    Power Purchase Agreement  
PPP    Public -Private Partnership  
PRG    Partial Risk Guarantees  
PV    Photovoltaic  
RAP    Resettlement Action Plans  
RE     Renewable energy  
Regideso   Régie de Distribution d’Eau  (Water Utility ) 
RfQ    Request for Qualifications  
RPF    Resettlement Policy Framework  
SEFA    Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa 
SME    Small and Medium -sized Enterprise  
SNEL    Société Nationale d’Electricité ( National Power Company ) 
SPV    Special Purpose Vehicle  
TA    Technical Assistance  
TBD    To Be Determined 
UCM    Unité de Coordination et de Management  (Unit for the Management and 
Coordination)  
UNDP    United Nations Development Programme  
USAID    US Agency for International Development  
USD     United States D ollar


---
*Page 7*
---

RESTRICTED  
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 74 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) Green Mini -Grid 
Program  
A.1.2. Project or programme programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development  
National  Coordination of GCF  
Hans Andre Lohayo Djamba, GCF National Focal Point  
hansandredjamba@gmail.com  / +243822541031  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  African Development Bank  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  African Development Bank  
Beneficiar ies: Three green  mini- grid projects  in the DRC; 
Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources ( MERH )/Unit for 
the Management and Coordination (UCM ) and renewable 
energy  sector stakeholders in the DRC  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☒  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  July 2018  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Namho Oh, Senior Investment Officer  
Matthieu Jalard, Senior Investment Officer  
Organization  African Development Bank  
Email address  n.oh@afdb.org  
m.jalard@afdb.org  
Telephone number  +225 20 26 43 32  
Mailing address  Av. Joseph Anoma, 01 BP 1387 Abidjan 01, Côte d'Ivoire  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions  from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high- speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –  diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐


---
*Page 8*
---

RESTRICTED  
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 74 
 
 
 A 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives  and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
 
Climate change in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) is evident from the records, and severe biophysical 
impacts and socio- economic downturn are anticipated with projected changes. Effects on temperatures and rainfall 
patterns are exacerbating the vulnerability of rural communities, key productive sectors and t he overall socio- economic 
conditions. The DRC’s electricity generation largely relies on hydroelectric power (over 95% of the total generation), and 
the country is expected to face increasing uncertainty and fluctuations in power generation with the changi ng rainfall 
patterns in the long run. Unreliable power supply will not only hurt the industrial activities and livelihoods of people but 
will also likely have adverse effect by increasing reliance on fossil fuel and biomass energy. The latter option is lik ely to 
have implications for the forest and land use ecosystems, and their potential to contribute to emissions  associated to 
deforestation and forest degradation. This is particularly concerning as the DRC is the host of the second largest tropical 
moist forests in the world, with forested area covering about 67.3% of the country. This power sector vulnerability, and 
potential implications for other sectors with high potential to contribute to the country’s low emission development, would 
aggravate pre- existing socio- economic vulnerability of the population in the context of severe energy precarity.  
 
The DRC is the  second biggest and fourth most populated country in Africa, which spreads over 2,345,441km² with a 
population of 78.7 million. Yet the DRC has one of the lowest rates of electrification in the world. Only approximately 10% 
of the population has access to electricity, 35% in urban areas (44% in Kinshasa) and less than 1% in rural areas. The 
national utility company,  SNEL (Société Nationale d’Electricité), accounts for 94 % of the total installed capacity  (2,677 
MW)  and nearly all electricity  is produced from hydropower . The DRC has no nat ional -wide transmission network and 
only three regional grids are covering parts of  the country; hence there is a sizeable gap between the rate of electrification 
in Kinshasa and the rest of the country.  In off -grid areas , electricity  demands are met with small, scattered diesel 
generators , kerosene lamps  and battery torches . Their f ossil fuel dependence, which is unsustainable and costly, is 
expected to intensify  as the population and power demand grow . With limited grid expansion prospect s in near future, 
power sector development in the DRC  will continue to rely on inefficient  off-grid solutions with a high carbon footprint  if 
not triggered to shift to a low emission  pathway . 
 
Recently , green mini -grid is gaining attention as an alternative solution to reverse this trend and accelerate energy access. 
Since the liberalization of the electricity sector in the DRC (the 2014 Electricity Law) , a few local distribution 
concessionaires and individual mini -grid projects have emerged. Still, this has been done in a sub- optimal and 
heterogeneous manner primarily because of  the lack of clear  national regulation in the sector.  Private investment to mini -
grid has been slow, and clear barriers exist toward its full commercial viability  especially for renewable energy mini -grid. 
In response to this  challenge , the E ssor Access to El ectricity (Essor A2E), a technical assistance program financed by 
DFID,  is assist ing the Government  of the DRC  (GoDRC) to accelerat e, optimiz e and standardi ze the development of  
private- led and renewable- based mini- grids across the country by  building a robust , bankable and replicable structure.   
 
Targeting mini -grid projects selected under the DFID -Essor A2E initiative, the AfDB- GCF Green Mini -Grid Program for 
the DRC (the Program) will pilot an innovative mini- grid model powered by solar,  bringing clean and modern energy  to 
sizeable town s. The Program will finance three solar hybrid  mini- grid projects procured through a competitive tendering 
process in the towns  of Isiro, Bumba and Genema (with 487,500 inhabitants altogether) , each consisting of a hybrid PV 
power plant of 5 -10 MW , battery storage,  and associated distribution networks to reach consumers . The Program’s 
climate additionality is significant as it will ensure that the major portion of future electricity demands are met by a clea n 
source as opposed to a business -as-usual 100% diesel scenario. Mobile prepayment and smart metering technologies 
will ensure that consumptions are effectively monitored and controlled, while  prevent ing potential fraud and non- technical 
losses.  The overall number of connections (domestic and commercial ) is expected to reach approximately 12,400  
connections in Year 1 and 23,300 connections in Year 5 with a 24 hours -a-day service .  
 
The procurement of the three pilot concessions is to be handled by a public agency within the Ministry of Energy  Hydraulic 
Resources , namely the “Unité de Coordination et de Management” (UCM).  The total cost of three projects is estimated 
at USD 87 million at COD, of which up to US D 40 million would be from the AfDB and the GCF senior debt s to finance 
solar PV plant and battery storage, with the remainder financed by equity and quasi -equity  (including investment grant ). 
A financing package arranged by the AfDB  will be offered to pre- qualified bidders as a recommended option. Awarded 
sponsors will create individual special purpose vehicles (SPV) and will enter into c oncession agreements with the central 
government  for a 20-25 year  period1.  
                                                             
1 A twenty -year concession period was assumed in the financial model and pre- feasibility studies. The 
exact  concession period will be determined by the GoDRC before the launch of the tender.


---
*Page 9*
---

RESTRICTED  
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 74 
 
 
 A 
 
In addition, complementary technical assistance (TA) was designed to ensure that green mini -grids are scaled -up across 
the country beyond the pilot phase.  The AfDB has approved USD 1 million grant for the TA, from the Sustainable Energy 
Fund for Africa (SEFA) hosted by the AfDB , and GCF co -financing of USD 1 million grant  is requested. The TA activities 
will 1) strengthen the enabling framework for green mini -grid development  in the DRC  by building  institutional capacity to 
manage and implement green mini -grid projects , standards and tariff guideline development, and local renewable energy 
ecosystem building; and 2) support project -level preparation of three mini -grids, as wel l as pre-feasibility studies  and 
tender preparation for additional mini -grids in other sites in the DRC.  
 
Envisioned mini -grids will displace fossil fuel -based generation and provide access to clean, reliable and more affordable 
energy to approximately  150,000 people  who live off the grid, avoiding emission of 560,000  tCO 2eq over 20 years  (28,000 
tCO 2eq per year) . Long- term and concessi onal financing provided by the AfDB and the GCF is critical to enhance the 
commercial  viability of the selected projects while ensuring affordable tariffs for end consumers. Powering the entire off -
grid towns with sustainable energy, and further supported by the TA, this P rogram will enable the transfor mation of the 
DRC energy sector by opening up a market for green mini- grid investments and thereby accelerating low emission 
development . In addition, energy access  will strongly reinforce economic and social resilience of low income population 
living in climate vulnerable areas . The Program will be a test bed for an innovative mini -grid design, demonstrating a 
viable model for private- led, renewable based mini -grid financing which will be replicable in the DRC, other Sub- Saharan 
African countries and small island developing countries.  
 
 
 
 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  Q4 20182  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Q1-Q2 2020  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: Q1 2019  
End:  Q4 2023 
Project/programme lifespan  23 years3   
 
                                                             
2 AfDB contribution to the technical assistance (USD 1 million grant) has been approved in 2018.  
3 A five -year implementation period plus a (up to) 18- year loan tenor.


---
*Page 10*
---

RESTRICTED  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 74 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
 
Renewable- based green mini -grid is still a new business model in most parts of Sub- Saharan Africa including the DRC. 
As a mini -grid project is perceived risky and non- traditional, availability of debt financing has been limited and most 
projects relied on pure grant or equity. The financing barrier is even higher in the DRC where the overall private sector  
development is  early  and security concerns in some parts of the country still remain  high. Compounded  with legal and  
regulator y uncertainties  around mini-grid, this has inevitably  limited the number and scale of green mini- grid projects  in 
the private sector .  
 
The proposed AfDB -GCF debt financing envelop for three pilot solar hybrid mini -grid projects  under the Program  therefore 
fills the significant  financing gap identified and at the same time pilot a financing structure that will bring the projects to 
commercial viability.  Each project comes with two components –  Component 1 covering solar PV generation plant and 
battery storage, and Component 2 covering distribution network, connections and backup. The CAPEX for the three 
projects is expected to be USD 87 million overall, of which USD 45 million will be for the Component 1 including PV plant 
(USD 22.9 million) and storage (USD 22.0 million); and US D 42 million for the Component 2 including distribution 
network s (USD 26.1 million), connections and metering infrastructure (USD 8.1 million), emergency backup genset (USD 
2.6 million), and other costs including development cost and financing cost (USD 5. 2 million).  
 
USD 8 7 million of CAPEX  only covers the initial investment to install the grid and reach 23, 300 connections (for all three 
sites) in five years; it is expected that periodic re- investments will be made throughout the concession period ( 20-25 
years) to expand the generation capacity and connections  in response to increasing demand and to cover the battery 
replacement cost . Sponsors will be required to arrange re- investment financing as and when required.   
 
 
 
Figure 1. Preliminary financial structure of each mini -grid project  
 
The overall USD 87  million  (estimated)  CAPEX of the three projects is expected to be financed through a blended senior 
debt providing about  45% of the funds, and a tranche of equity, qu asi equity and investment grant  (Figure 1) . The GCF 
contribution amounting to USD 20 m illion is expected to contribute to half of the USD 40  million senior debt tranche which 
will finance generation and storage part of the projects (Component 1) . The AfDB proposes to be a Mandated Lead 
Arranger for the three selected projects and is under  discussion with potential co -financiers and donors. Table 1 below 
summarizes the Sources and Uses of Funds at the Program level for the three projects , and the Pr ojects Preparation and 
Technical Assistance costs to be borne by the AfDB and the GCF.  DFID’s  Essor Access to El ectricity (“Essor A2E”) 
program has supported the Congolese government to design a robust  tender  process  and standardi ze legal documents 
for mini- grid concessions.


---
*Page 11*
---

RESTRICTED  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 74 
 
 B 
It is important to note that GCF investment (USD 20 million) is only to cover  the financing needs for renewable 
energy assets ( i.e. solar PV and battery – Component 1 ) and not infrastructure and any other backup . Anticipated 
contributions  to the CAPEX from other development partners  in the form of grant or other quasi -equity (to be determined  
– discussions ongoing)  is to support financing of the emergency backup, distribution networks  and households connection  
(Component 2) , which will serve as public infrastructure to ensure reliability through 24 hours energy supply with maximum 
coverage across customer segments, including essential public services such as water supply and hospitals . Grant for 
the distribution infrastructure (including distribution lines, transformers, metering infrastructure) is also being considered 
from the perspective of tariff affordability , with a purpose to benefit low est income households among others.  Any quasi -
equity or grant will be subordinated to the AfDB- GCF loans  or other senior loans . Any additional debt financing, for the 
initial investment or re- investment, will follow the terms acceptable to the AfDB as an A ccredited Entity and E xecuting 
Entity.  
 
Even though the GCF and the AfDB are financing only Component 1, from the perspective of ensuring success of the 
overall green mini -grid model which is proposed to be piloted in the three locations, it is absolutely essential that the 
necessary distribution infrastructure (which is separately being financed as Component 2) is in place in a timely fashion 
to ensure that the consumers have access to clean energy and do not resort to accessing unsustainable energy sources. 
Therefore even though Components 1 and 2 are financed separately, they are integral to each other and to the overall 
green mini -grid pilot projects.  
 
Complementary technical a ssistance (TA) (USD 2 million grant) was design ed to ensure that green mini -grids are scaled-
up across the country beyond the pilot phase. The TA activities will 1) strengthen the enabling framework for green mini -
grid development in the DRC with institutional  capacity  building, standards and tariff guideline development,  and local RE 
ecosystem building;  and 2) support project -level preparation of three  target  mini- grids , as well as pre-feasibility studies 
and tender preparation for additional mini -grids in other sites in the DRC.  Project preparation support  for the three 
projects, solely financed by AfDB -SEFA,  is meant to supplement  the development costs ( under Component 2)  by cover ing 
legal advisory services and additional technical studies (detailed feasibility studies and engineering design, environment 
and social impact assessment) . GCF’s contributions to the TA will finance the capacity building activities for  the public 
sector  and the local RE ecosystem.  AfDB and GCF contributions through technical assistance will further strengthen the 
regulatory environment with necessary capacity building, and advance the preparation of mini -grid projects for the three 
target projects as well as for the subsequent rounds of tender.  
 
Project Cost – Three Green Mini -Grids  (Component 1 and 2)   
Uses of funds (USD M)      Sources of funds (USD M)    
Component 1: Three Green Mini -Grid Projects - Solar PV generation and battery storage  
PV Power Plant             23.0      Senior Debt            40.0    
Battery S torage             22.0        Of Which GCF            20.0    
      Of Which AfDB            20.0    
    Equity  5.0 
Total            45      Total             45    
 
Uses of funds (USD M)    Sources of funds (USD M)   
Component 2: Three Green Mini -Grid Projects - Distribution, connection s, backup and other costs  
Total Networks             26.1     Equity, Quasi Equity and Grant            42.0    
Connections and Metering               8.1        
Emergency Backup               2.6        
Other  Costs              5.2       
Total            42     Total            42


---
*Page 12*
---

RESTRICTED  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 74 
 
 B 
Three Green Mini -Grids – Source of Financing for Each Sub -Component  
 GCF  AfDB  Sponsors  Other  Donors/  
Financiers  
Component 1  
Solar PV  x x x  
Battery Storage  x x x  
Component 2  
Distribution & Connection   x x 
Emergency Backup    x x 
 
 
Technical Assistance  Cost (Component 3)   
Uses of funds  (USD M)      Sources of funds  (USD M)    
Sub-component 3.1             0.80      Grant  2.00      
Sub-component 3.2             1.20       Of Which AfDB              1.00    
      Of Which GCF              1.00    
Total             2    Total               2  
Table 1. Sources and Uses of Funds  
 
a breakdown of cost estimates  for total project costs and GCF financing by sub- component in local and foreign 
currency and a currency hedging mechanism:  
 
Component  Amount (for entire 
project)  Currency  Amount 
(for entire 
project)  Local 
currency  GCF funding 
amount  Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient  
Component 1: 
Three green mini -
grid projects –  
generation and 
storage  Up to 45  million USD 
($)   Up to 20  
million  USD 
Component 2: 
Three green mini -
grid projects –  
distribution, 
connection, 
backup and other 
costs  Up to 42  million USD 
($)   - - 
Component 3.1: 
TA - Green mini -
grid enabling 
framework and 
capacity building   0.8 million USD 
($)   0.5 million  USD 
Component 3.2: 
TA - Green mini -
grid project 
development 
support  1.2 million USD 
($)   0.5 million  USD 
Total project 
financing  Up to 8 9 million USD    21 million  USD 
* Please expand the table if needed.


---
*Page 13*
---

RESTRICTED  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 74 
 
 B 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  89 million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient   
(i) Senior loans   
 
 
(ii) Grant  
 20 
 
1 million USD 
($) 
 
million USD 
($) 15-18 years  
 
N/A Refer to the term 
sheet   
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii)  21 million USD 
($)   
Co-financing 
to recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
Loans   
20 
 million USD 
($) AfDB  
 15-18 
years  [3/6] month 
LIBOR + 
TBD4 senior  
 
Grant  
/Quasi -
Equity  
 
Equity  
 
 
Grant  
(TA) 325 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
1 million USD 
($) 
 
 
million USD 
($) 
 
 
million  USD 
($) Other 
investors  
 
 
Project 
sponsors  
 
 
AfDB  N/A 
 
 
 
N/A 
 
 
N/A TBD 
 
 
 
TBD 
 
 
N/A junior  
 
 
 
junior  
 
 
N/A 
Lead financing institution: AfDB  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution  
                                                             
4 Subject to the detailed credit assessment of individual projects.  
5 Investment grant, reimbursable grant or other forms of quasi -equity (TBD). Amount indicative only.


---
*Page 14*
---

RESTRICTED  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 74 
 
 B 
B.3. Financial M arket s Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non- concessional)  determined?  Please provide an overview 
of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which could be tapped to finance the 
proposed project/programme. Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1- year T -Bill, 5 -year government bond, 
5-year corporate bond (specify credit rating) and 5- year syndicate l oan6. 
 
The inflation rate in the DRC was highest in August 2017 at  70.8%, which was the peak  in recent 5 years , and continuously 
decreased with the latest inflation rate standing at  43.2% (April 2018) . The main instrument applied to curb the inflation 
rate was to increas e the interest rate. Since 2017, the interest rate has been on the rise, to 14% from 7% at  the beginning 
of 2017 , in order  to curb the escalating inflation rate. Although the policy implemented by the Central Bank has been 
effective, this has  come with higher interest rates on lending and a cost to domestic credit expansion.  As a consequence,  
domestic private sector investments struggle to access finance in the DRC.   
The country is ranked at 182nd out of 190 countries in the World Bank’s 2018 Doing Business report.  Financial 
intermediation is low in the DRC: most credit is informal and formal bank credit to the private sector accounts for less 
than 3 percent of GDP. Retail banking is  largely undeveloped, and most banks act as financial agents for the government 
or extend credit to international institutions operating in the country. Foreign commercial banks dominate the industry as 
providers of funding for the mining and petroleum sec tors. No stock market operates in the country, but a small number 
of private equity firms invest actively in the mining industry. The DRC’s capital market consists primarily of government 
securities. With no corporate debt market present in the country, the fixed income market is restricted to short -term 
government issued treasury bills with maturities up to 28 days, which are dematerialized and freely tradable through 
commercial banks.  
Borrowing options for small and medium -sized enterprises (SMEs ) are lim ited. Maturities for loans are usually 
limited to 3 -6 months, and interest rates typically hover around 16- 18 percent. The weakness  of the legal system  
discourages banks from providing long- term loans. Since  local banks have limited holdings in the domestic currency 
(Congolese Franc (CDF )), there are limited possibilities to finance major pr ojects in the domestic currency. Prior to 2016,  
the average CDF holding was roughly USD 12 million per bank, though the economic downturn prompted the Central 
Bank to mandate an increase in CDF holdings to USD 30 mil lion per bank by October 2017. Foreign currency deposits  
currently  account for almost 90 percent of bank holdings . 
The DRC has roughly USD 3.6 billion of deposits in the banking system, up slightly fro m 2015.  Estimated USD 10 billion 
of savings are existing outside the bank and most deposits reserved in the bank are U.S. dollar -denominated. A slight 
increase in bank penetration occurred after 2011 as the G oDRC switched public employee payments from cash to bank 
transfers. Bank penetration is roughly 6 percent, which places the country among the most under -banked nations in the 
world. According to the Banque Centrale du Congo ( BCC ) strategic plan, the aim is to reach more than 20 million bank 
accounts by 2030. Banks are increasingly offering savings accounts that pay approximately 3 percent interest, but few 
Congolese hold savings in banks. Of an estimated 65 percent of the population that saves, only 4.7 perc ent do so through 
a bank, according to the Banking Association of Congo (ACB). Most account holders withdraw their balance in full shortly 
after their salary is deposited.  
The banking sector consists of twenty licensed banks. These include well renowned international banks that operate 
across much of Africa: Procrédit, Rawbank, Bank of Africa, and Ecobank. The rest of these financial institutions are local 
banks. Though the rate of access to banking services remains quite low in the DRC, mobile banking is fast -
growing and spreading across the country, facilitating payments for multiple services, including for water and 
energy.  The government, with the IMF technical assistance, is currently working on a legislation to improve the regulation 
of the commercial banks and to foster a modernization of the central bank. This new legislation will seek to strengthen 
shareholder rights, develop the legal and regulatory framework for liquidations and also develop a legal basis for acting 
as lender of last resort.  
                                                             
6 US State Department's Office of Investment Affairs’ Investment Climate Statement   
(https://www.export.gov/article?id=Congo- Democratic -Republic -Financial- Sector ) 
Making Finance Work for Africa (MFW4A)  
(https://www.mfw4a.org/democratic -republic -of-the-congo/financial -sector -profile.html )


---
*Page 15*
---

RESTRICTED  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 74 
 
 B 
A review of the DRC’s financial market  and sector indicators  clearly illustrates a unique challenge in obtaining 
local , commercial  financing for any infr astructure project.  Local financial institutions do not have experience of 
offering debt financ ing to energy projects, not to mention renewable energy mini -grid projects. Their financial position and 
institutional capacity is extremely constrained to consi der such investment and the situation is not likely to change in the 
short to medium term.   
 
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.   
With a very limited national grid covering only a fraction of the country and the various logistic issues related to fuel 
supply, the development of “green mini -grids”, especially solar -based ones, represents an efficient way to improve access 
to electricity in the DRC in the short -to-medium term. Through the use of available renewable energy resources,  green 
mini- grids fit very well with the specific needs in the DRC for improving access to energy to a large number of its people 
independently from the national grid.  Following the liberaliz ation of the electricity sector, a few initiatives, mostly driven 
by the local private sector, have already been undertaken leading to the successful implementation of a couple of green 
mini- grids, though not in a coordinated way. A few private operators have started to develop mini -grids , mainly in the 
southern part of  the country , using mostly hybrid- technology combining hydro or solar power plants with diesel generators  
(Table 2). Most of these projects have been negotiated on an ad hoc basis with the central or provincial 
governments without a national policy framewo rk to facilitate these interventions . It may also be noted that most 
of these projects were set up in response to the industry demand, primarily mining,  in their catchment areas , as opposed 
to catering to needs of the local population.  Further, most of these projects have relied on donor finance as opposed to 
commercial financing, in view of the prevailing challenges in the domestic financial system . 
 
Area  Technology  Size Operator  
Tchikapa  Hydro  1.5 MW  STS 
Kananga  Solar -diesel hybrid  2.5 MW  PPP consortium  
Matebe Hydro  13.8 MW  Virunga Sarl  
Beni Butembo  Hydro  12 MW  STS 
Manono Solar  1 MW  Enerdeal  
Kakobola  Hydro  9.3 MW  Government  
Table 2. Examples of mini -grid project s in the DRC  
 
As may be observed from the Figure 2, it is evident that the existing mini -grids are concentrated in regions of relatively 
high economic activity, primarily mining and trading. The three pilot mini -grids are proposed to be set up in areas which 
do not have the same degree of economic activity, making them r elatively challenging from an economic perspective.


---
*Page 16*
---

RESTRICTED  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 74 
 
 B 
 
Figure 2 . Location of existing  mini- grids (orange  dots ) and proposed three mini -grids (black dots)  
 
Additionality of the AfDB -GCF Green Mini -Grid Program  
• Technology : Unlike most other mini- grid projects relying on hydro or diesel, the Program will pilot solar PV hybrid 
mini- grids.  A solar -based system is still more CAPEX intensive than alternative technologies, therefore 
developers have an incentive to go for a diesel -based system which requires lower upfront investment. The 
Program has an important role to play as it demonstrates a solar -based mini -grid business model, i ts 
technological advantage and financial  viability. This is going to be the key first step to trigger the proliferation of 
solar -based mini -grids in the DRC.  
• Location: Above -mentioned projects are all located in Southern or Eastern (Kivu) parts of the country where the 
infrastructure development is relatively advanced,  with a significantly higher degree of economic activity as 
compared to the rest of the country (Figure 2) . Three target projects under th is Program are located in Northern 
Congo, introducing clean energy services in under -developed areas.  
• Financing : Previously, mini -grid projects have been  predominantly  financed by small private companies or donor 
grants.  The Program aims to increase the volume of debt financing for green mini -grid projects  in the DRC , 
offering adequate price and tenor.  The financing package will in turn encourage private investment for mini -grid 
and help build a business case for other financiers to step into the sector.  
• Replicability : The Program is built on a  robust legal framework and a  competitive mini- grid tender process , which 
is the first time in the DRC,  enabled by DFID's Essor A2E. This is a structure designed for replication  across the 
country , moving away from individual and uncoordinated concession agreements . The Program will demonstrate 
how a government -led tender backed by a standardized concessions package can achieve cost efficiency and 
accelerate the deployment of green mini -grids.  Furthermore, technical assistance under the Program will 
strengthen the capacity and regulatory systems of the GoDRC in managing and imple menting green mini -grids , 
facilitating the model’s replication  beyond the pilot phase.


---
*Page 17*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 74 
 
 C 
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as t hese requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub- national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.  
 
Economic situation  
The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is the second biggest7 and the fourth most populated country in Africa, which 
spreads over 2,345,441km² with a population of 78.7 million.8 At the same time the DRC is a least developed country 
(LDC) and one of the poorest countries in the world with its GNI per capita  standing at USD 460 (in 2016, current US 
dollar)9. The country’s economy heavily relies on the extractive industry particularly copper and cobalt which account for 
80% of the country’s export revenue. The DRC is widely considered to be the richest in  natural resources in  the world, 
with large reserves of copper, cobalt, natural gas, iron ore, platinum, diamonds, gold and uranium. Growth in the extractive 
sector has driven the overall economic growth for the past few years, as demonstrated by the high average GDP growth 
rate between 2010 and 2015 (7.7%). However in 2016, the DRC’s annual economic growth plummeted to 2.4%, its lowest 
point since 2001, as a combined result of shrinking global demand for raw materials and their declining prices. Economic 
development has been further hampered by political tension and uncertainty. Boosted by increasing commodity prices 
and good performance of mining and manufacturing industries, the growth is on a recovery track since 2017 and this is 
projected to continue this year. Despite a moderate economy recovery, the inflation rate is still very high, reaching 43,2%  
at the beginning of 2018.  
The economic slowdown has had a direct impact on the level of public finance available. Government revenues, excluding 
grants, dropped from 13.6% of GDP in 2015 to 8.14% in 2017. Decreased government revenues subsequently caused a 
decline in the government  expenditure, from 15.8% of GDP in 2015 to 10.8% in 201710, in order to contain the deficit. 
Public consumption and investment have been inactive due to tight government spending. The DRC’s economic and 
social development still ranks among the lo west in the  world plagued by highest rates of extreme poverty. According to 
the most recent Human Development Index, the country is ranked at 178th out of 188 countries and it is estimated that 
over 77% of Congolese live on less than USD 1.9 per day11.  
 
Climate change context : [covered under Section C.2]  
 
Energy sector overview  
The DRC has one of the lowest rates of electrification in the world. Only approximately 10% of the population has access 
to electricity, 35% in urban areas (44% in Kinshasa) and less than 1% in  rural areas12. Number of people without access 
to electricity is 68 million in 2016, while the DRC targets universal access by 2050. Nearly 95% of the country’s electricity  
(total 2,677 MW)  is currently produced by hydropower plants  (Table 3). Total instal led capacity of hydropower is 2, 542 
MW which has seen little change over the past 30 years due to a lack of new investments.  Of this, only half of this 
potential is actual ly generated (producing about 8 ,349 GWh/year) due to breakdown,  maintenance issues and 
low-water level , in part also underscoring climate vulnerability of hydro generation capacity . As illustrated in T able 
4, most hydropower stations in the DRC are not operational at their full capacity as they suffer from the lack of spare 
parts and equipment maintenance . Moreover, the DRC has no national -wide transmission network. There are only three 
inter-provincial grids in the West (Central Congo and Kinshasa), East (North and South Kivu), and South (Haut -Katanga, 
Lualaba) of the country  (Figure 3 and Figure 4) . Some mining companies have developed their own power generation 
including small -hydro power, however, these do not supply electricity to surrounding population in most of the cases , as 
                                                             
7 CIA, The World Fact Book, 2014.  
8 World Bank Data, 2016.  
9 Ibid. 
10 IMF, AFR Regional Economic Outlook , 2018.  
11 UNDP , Human Development Report , 2016 . 
12 IEA, World Energy Outlook 2017.


---
*Page 18*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 74 
 
 C 
contrasted to proposed pilot mini -grids . In several towns, power is supplied by few formal independent power companies 
such as EDC in Tshikapa, Virunga SARL in Mutwanga and Matebe, Enerka in Mbuji -Mayi, but also by mining companies 
such as SOKIMO (connecting local communities as part of community engagement  initiatives) and faith- based and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs).  (For more information of  other mini -grid projects in the DRC, please see Section 
B.3.)  
 
 
Figure 3. DRC Population Density Map and Existing/Planned Grid  
 
 
Figure 4. Value Chain of the DRC Electricity Sector  
 
 
•SNEL mandated for generation, transmission, distribution and trading of electricity  
•The Electricity Law of 2014 broke SNEL’s monopoly  
Generation  
 Transmission  
 Distribution  
 End-user 
Generation Capacity  
•SNEL: 94%  
•Independent plant: 6%  
- Private power componies  
  (Virunga SARL, STS, etc.)  
- Mining companies  
- Religious and NGOs  
Transmission and distribution network  
•SNEL: Three inter-provincial grids  and limited 
regional networks  
(5,510km of HV, 4,484km of MV , 12,133 km of LV lines)  
•Others  
(e.g. Virunga SARL: 40km transmission line  
Enerdeal: several km of MV and LV lines ) 
End-user


---
*Page 19*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 74 
 
 C 
Power station  Type of plant  Owner  Installed capacity  (MW)  % 
Bas Congo      
Inga 1  Hydro  SNEL  351  
Inga 2  Hydro  SNEL  1,424  
Zongo  Hydro  SNEL  75  
Sanga  Hydro  SNEL  12  
Mpozo  Hydro  SNEL  2.2  
Katanga      
Mwadingusha  Hydro  SNEL  68  
Koni Hydro  SNEL  42.1  
Nseke & Nzilo  Hydro  SNEL  356.4   
Kyimbi  Hydro  SNEL  17.2  
Kilubi  Hydro  SNEL  9.9  
Piana Mwanga  Hydro  Congo Etain  29  
Kivu      
Ruzizi 1  Hydro  SNEL  28.2  
Ruzizi 2  Hydro  SNEL  43.8  
Ambwe/Kailo  Hydro  Sominki  2.2  
Belia  Hydro  Sominki  2.2  
Mangembe  Hydro  Sominki  1.8  
Lutshurukuru  Hydro  Sominki  5.1  
Kasai Occidental      
Lungudi  Hydro  SNEL  1.6  
Tshala&Lubilanji1  Hydro  Miba  8.6  
Orientale      
Tshopo  Hydro  SNEL  18.8  
Budana  Hydro  Kilomoto  13.8  
Nzoro  Hydro  Kilomoto  1.4  
Soleniama1  Hydro  Kilomoto  13.5  
Soleniama2  Hydro  Kilomoto  1.6  
Equateur      
Mobayi & Mbongo  Hydro  SNEL  11.4  
Total (Hydro)13  2,542 94.95  
Bas Congo      
Muanda  Thermal  SNEL  1.6  
Kasai Occidental      
Kananga  Thermal  SNEL  2.7  
Equateur      
Mbandaka  Thermal  SNEL  2.3  
Lisala  Thermal  SNEL  1.4  
Gemena  Thermal  SNEL  1.2  
Nord Kivu      
Kisangani  Thermal  SNEL  12.8  
Total (Thermal)14  135 5.05 
GRAND TOTAL   2,677 100 
Table 3. Major power plants installed and operating in the DRC15 
                                                             
13 This total amount is including small and micro- scale hydro power plants which are not on the list.  
14 This total amount is including small and micro- scale thermal plants which are not on the list.  
15 K. Kusakana, “A Review of Energy in t he Democratic Republic of Congo”, 2016.


---
*Page 20*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 74 
 
 C 
 
Name of the 
Station  Last year of 
construction  No. of turbine 
installed  Total installed 
capacity (MW)  No. of turbine 
in operation  Current available 
power (MW)  
Inga 1  1972  6 351 3 175 
Inga 2  1982  8 1,424 3 534 
Zongo  1975  5 75 1 13 
Mpozo  1938  2 2.2 0 0 
Sanga  1949  6 11.5 0 0 
Nseke  1957  4 248 3 186 
Nzilo  1954  4 108 4 108 
Koni 1950  3 42 0 0 
Mwadingusha  1954  6 68 6 68 
Kalubi  1954  3 10 1 3 
Ruzizi  1 1972  4 28 4 28 
Tshopo  1974  3 18 1 6 
Mobayi/ Mbongo  1987  3 11 3 11 
Kyimbi  1959  2 17 1 8 
Lungudi  1949  2 1.6 1 0.78 
 
Table 4. Operational status of hydropower stations in the DRC16 
 
A poor quality of electricity services is prevalent, with blackouts and generally low reliability of power supply all too 
commonplace in the DRC. Accumulated delays in investments in power infrastructure, the degradation of hydro power 
plants, an over -reliance in unaffordable thermal power generation in provincial towns together with a rapi d increase in 
electricity demand (which tripled over the last decade), resulted in large electricity shortages, which peaked at about 30% 
of power demand in 2012- 2013. This low level of access to reliable energy is an important barrier to economic growth.  
 
Energy sector major stakeholders  
The electricity sector is dominated by the Société nationale d'électricité (SNEL),  the formal national utili ty enterprise 
responsible for 94% of all electricity production with 50 + power plants (1 5 hydroelectric and 36 thermal)17. SNEL has a 
mandate for electricity generation, transmission, distribution and trading of power in the DRC. However, SNEL has 
underperformed for a long time with continuous operating losses. This is a result of not only the lowest average electricity 
tariff in Africa (7c$/kWh) that does not enable SNEL to cover its operational costs, but also the high rate of illegal 
connections and high rate of its unmetered customers (95%).  A significant portion of electricity consumers are  connected 
illegally or to informal grids, with the SNEL accounting for only 500,000 registered household connections. Lack of 
operational efficiency gave rise to large overdues from public institutions such as schools, health centres and public 
enterprises. To overcome long- term deficit, SNEL was transformed into a commercial limited liability company in 2011 
(the process begun in 2009). Nevertheless, they have suffered from continuous operating losses . SNEL has  not been 
able to improve the quality of its services or extend its network as it struggles with financial deficit caused by the imbalance 
between charges and revenues , and as a result, the DRC has one of the lowest rates of electrification in the world18. 
SNEL’s monopoly was broken by  the law n°14-011 dated 17th June 2014 (the “Electricity Law”) . The law opens the 
                                                             
J M Lukamba- Muhiya & E Uken, “The electricity supply industry in Democratic Republic of the Congo”, 
Journal of Energy in South Africa 17(3): 21- 28, 2006.  
USAID, DRC Power Sector Overview, 2017.  
16 K. Kusakana, “A Review of Energy in t he Democratic Republic of Congo”, 2016.  
17 USAID, Transmission and Distribution in the DRC, 2017.  
18 SE4ALL, Stratégie Nationale SE4ALL- RDC, 2013.


---
*Page 21*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 74 
 
 C 
electricity market to independent power producers to promote public -private partnerships and private investments19. 
However, legal framework to obtain concessions, leases, or management contracts are still under development  while 
some independent power companies have implemented pilot projects without guidelines.   
The main authority in the electricity sector is the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources (MERH ) which is 
responsible for the development of the national energy strategy and oversight for the production and distribution 
infrastructure development for water and electricity. The Unit for the Management and Coordination of the Ministry’s 
projects (UCM) under MERH  is coordinating the ministry’s electricity and water projects, implementing activities such as 
identifying renewable energy sites, selecting and preparing power plant projects through public -private partnership (PPP), 
analy zing regulations for t he project’s reali zation, and coordinating donor financing in the sector. The National Energy 
Commission (CNE) conducts studies on the energy sector and reports to the Ministry to inform energy policy decisions. 
The National Investment Promotion Agency (ANAPI) is mandated to promote investments and improve business climate 
in the country. The 2014 Electricity Law created new agencies, the Electricity Regulation Authority (ARE) and the National 
Agency for the Electrification of Rural and Peri -urban areas (ANSER). The ARE ensures fair competition and respect of 
all laws, norms and standards in the electricity sector while ANSER promotes planning and financing of rural electrification 
projects.  However , both ARE and ANSER have  not been operationalized yet.  
 
Key energy sector challenges and constraints (r oot causes and barriers )  
As described, the DRC’s energy generation is highly dominated by hydropower and the grid coverage is extremely limited. 
While off -grid towns rely on micro- scale diesel generation, off-grid solutions such as mini -grid and independent solar 
home systems powered by renewable energy are yet to get traction in the market as a viable alternative solution. As a 
result, a large part of the country remains without access to power infrastruct ure, limiting access to electricity to just above 
10% of the population with a high urban- rural divide. However, neither the public sector nor private investors are capable 
of actively investing in the DRC energy sector.  The country’s rapid growth  in popul ation and economic activities will add 
a tremendous  pressure on energy demand, which will lead to increased G HGs emission if no alternative is provided . 
Figure 5 illustrates vividly how  electrification has not kept pace with the population and economic growth in the DRC. On 
this aspect the performance of DRC has been much weaker than that of other developing countries.  Policy and investment 
incentives for sustainable electricity projects remain very weak , and a shift toward renewable- based low emission energy 
system is highly unlikely in near future without focused and substantial interventions.   
The government’s financial situation, political risk and regulatory weaknesses are pointed out as key barriers in expanding 
investment in the energy sector, both on-grid and off -grid. The government of DRC (GoDRC) is facing serious deficit in 
revenue so that they are not able to concentrate investments in the generation, grid expansion and rural electrification. 
On the other hand, private companies are reluctant t o invest because of volatile political situations that lasted over several 
years in different parts of the country. This has been a dominant disabling factor for business activities, discouraging 
private- led power projects even in the market liberalized under the new Electricity Law.  For off -grid projects, low income 
level of households and weak industrial base for commercial consumers undermine risk -adjusted returns expected by 
investors. They face additional challenge as the technology and business models  for off -grid solutions are still nascent 
not only in the Sub- Saharan African setting but globally. Inappropriate regulatory environment is another key barrier. The 
2014 Electricity Law created two national agencies,  the Electricity Regulation Authority  (ARE)  and the National Agency 
for the Electrification of Rural and Peri -urban areas ( ANSER ). However, neither of these two agencies are fully operational 
at this point while they have been expected to play a significant role in the development of rural elec trification projects.  
 
 
                                                             
19 AfDB, Mini Grid Market Opportunity Assessment: Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2017.


---
*Page 22*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 74 
 
 C 
 
Figure 5. Population growth and growth in population with electricity20 
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline,  key barriers, challenges and/or  
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario.  
 
Baseline:  Climate change in the DRC is evident from the records. Temperature has been increased b y 0.25ºC every 
decade in its warmest day and is projected to increase by 2.7- 3.2°C by 2100 as compared to the 1990 baseline21. Rainfall 
in the DRC has been decreas ing over the past decades  while the frequency of intense rainfall events increased. It is 
projected that most regions in the country will experience a decrease in rainfall of 0.8- 11.4 percent by the 2100s  and the 
southern region will have a shortened rainfall season22. During the dry season in 2017, water levels in the Congo River 
were at their lowest point in more than a century23. 
The DRC is one the most vulnerable countries to climate change in the world. The country is ranked at 170th out of 181 
countries according to the 2016 ND -GAIN Country Index for vulnerability to climate change24. While the DRC’s climate 
vulnerability is multifaceted, the impact for the power sector is expected to be severe.  As the DRC’s electricity 
generation largely relies on hydroelectric power (over 95% of the total generation), the country is expected to face  
increas ing uncertainty and fluctuations in power generation with the changing rainfall patterns in the long run25. Unreliable 
power supply will hurt the industrial activities and livelihoods of people. In addition, climate impact for the forest, 
ecosystem and natural resource is going to be significant as the DRC is a host to the second largest tropical moist forests 
in the world, with forested area covering about 67.3% of the country. The country sits on low lying central plains through 
which the Congo River f lows, surrounded by mountainous terraces in the west, savannas in the southwest and dense 
grasslands in the north. Further, changes in rainfall and temperature are likely to develop disease pathways, rendering 
the country more susceptible to vector - and water -borne diseases.  
 
                                                             
20 IFC, Off-Grid Solar Market Trends Report , 2018.  
21 USAID, DRC Climate Vulnerability Profile, 2012.  
22 Ibid. 
23 https://www.voanews.com/a/democratic -republic -congo- power -shortage- drought/ 3760562.html  
24 University of Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative, ND -GAIN Country Index, 2017.  
25 UNFCCC, Third National Communications of the DRC, 2015.


---
*Page 23*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 74 
 
 C 
The DRC’s  third National Communication to the UNFCCC  (2015)  reports that the country's total GHG emission for the 
period from 2000 to 2010 slightly d ecreased by 0.45%, from 242 Mt CO 2eq in 2000 to 241 Mt CO 2eq in 2010. Meanwhile 
the net CO 2 removals from the forest decreased from 321 Mt CO 2eq in 2000 to 204.5 Mt CO 2eq in 2010 (36.4% decrease). 
As a result, the net GHG emission/removal balance of the country has switched from net r emoval to net emission (36.5 
MtCO 2eq in 2010). Land- use change and forestry sector contributes to over 90% of the emission while agriculture and 
energy sector are other important components of the DRC's emissions profile26. Currently there is no precise  emission s 
inventory available in the DRC after  year 2010.  Further, the data gap in estimating fossil fuel use in off- grid areas 
makes it challenging  to calculate and report  potentially signific ant GHG  emissions from the use of diesel, 
kerosene and biomass.  
Nevertheless,  it is evident that most of the off -grid towns  in the DRC are relying on expensive, unreliable and inefficient 
scattered diesel generators and kerosene lamps offering electricity  to a very limited number of people, or inefficient diesel 
based mini -grids operated by the national utility –  SNEL . Such 100% diesel/fossil fuel baseline situation will continue to 
prevail if no intervention is made to introduce sustainable energy solutions.  
 
Actions proposed  by the GoDRC under the Nationally Determined Contributions : The DRC’s Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) indicates climate change as one of the major threats to sustainable development in the country27. 
The GoDRC is conditionally committed to reduce its greenhouse gas  (GHG)  emissions by 17% by 2030 compared to the 
business -as-usual (BAU) scenario (which is estimated at 430 MtCO 2eq), avoiding over 70 MtCO 2eq per year of emissions  
(Figure 6). However,  GHG emissions ( MtCO 2eq) per capita of  the DRC has decreased from 0.98 in 1990 to 0.55 in 2013 
due to slow infrastructure development while  the population doubled. Renewable energy development including 
hydropower is identified as a key sector for mitigation with its potential emissions  reduction of 9.65 MtCO 2eq by 2030 
(Figure 7). The total cost required to reach the mitigation goal s is estimated at USD 12.54 billion.  
 
 
Figure  6. Emissions reduction scenario28 29 
 
                                                             
26 Ibid. 
27 UNFCCC, Nationally Determined Contributions  of the DRC. 2015.  
28 Ibid. 
29 The second line (bottom) illustrates the emission scenario for the land use and forestry sector only.


---
*Page 24*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 74 
 
 C 
 
Figure  7. Potential of emissions reduction by sectors (MtCO 2eq) estimated in the NDC  
 
The AfDB- GCF Green Mini -Grid P rogram is consistent with the objectives of the Nationally Determined Contribution and 
development plans of the DRC. The DRC is committed to avoid near 10  MtCO 2eq per year GHG emissions by 2030 
through the deployment of renewable energy. In order to achiev e the target, the central and provincial government of the 
DRC are supporting strategic reforms in the power sector that includes liberalization, increased transparency, and  
attraction of a greater number of national and international private and public p artners.  
 
The Program aims to deploy green mini -grids in a cost-effective manner and with the objective of providing the lowest 
end user tariffs possible while still making the investor  returns attractive. The contribution of the AfDB and the GCF 
through the Program will improve the commercial viability of the projects and enable them to provide low emission  
electricity to consumers who have been left out of the basic  energy service. Solar PV based mini -grids , which are easy 
to implement on a decentralized basis without a significant planning,  will directly reduce emissions by displacing the 
extensive potential future use of diesel generators in the target areas . Additionally , the business model built from  this 
Program will  improve the investor’s confidence and help kick-start private- led mini -grid investment across the country.  
This process will be further facilitated by strengthened regulatory framework and project  development support from this 
Program’s TA. Therefore the Program’s potential contribution to the DRC’s mitigation roadmap implementation 
is highly  substantial.   
 
Without the P rogram’s interventions,  the baseline scenario (micro- scale diesel generation and kerosene lighting in off -
grid towns) will continue to prevail, as s ignificant barriers  exist to investment in renewable energy such as solar  PV. With 
high perceived country and economic risks, entr epreneurs are very likely  to go for diesel generation where the upfront  
investment cost is lower.  Timing of expe nses and risk profiles will naturally encourage the path toward  the baseline 
scenario.  
 
In addition, clean and stable electricity provided to off -grid households and SMEs will build the economic and social 
resilience of beneficiaries how are often vulnerable to changing climatic  conditions. Climate change and variability will 
severely affect the agricultural productivity, water availability and ecosystem services, and its impacts will hit the poores t 
population hardest. People  reside remotely from developed and indus trialized par ts of the country without access to 
modern energy are the most vulnerable among all groups. While the adaptation benefits from the P rogram are clear from 
this perspective, benefits  are often difficult  to quantif y or track due to lack of credible data.  Therefore this P rogram will be 
considered as a mitigation project without reporting its adaptation results.  
 
Afforestation and 
reforestation, 15
Sustainable timber 
management , 8.4
Rehabilitation of mineral 
exploration of oil companies , 0.6Fight against 
bushfires , 0.2Rural and urban 
hydroelectification, 9.65
Promotion improved stoves 
and carbonization, 0.15Industrial plantations 
of wood energy , 0.2Improvement of 
urban transport , 10Intensive agriculture 
and livestock , 17Small -scale food 
agriculture, 16.4


---
*Page 25*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 74 
 
 C 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic 
framework in section H.  
 
Component 1 and 2 . Three Green Mini -Grid Projects -  Overview  
 
The DRC Green Mini -Grid Program  will pilot an innovative, private- led electrification approach with renewable- based 
mini- grid solutions , and thereby bring clean power to sizeable cities  without any access to modern energy  and reduce 
emissions by displacing the potential future use of diesel and kerosene. High solar irradiance, speedy implementation 
and the possibility to locate the power plants near the demand areas thus m inimizing transmission -related issues make 
this solar power solution the best option to achieve low-emission  energy access. By doing so, the Program will fulfil 
recognized basic human needs for thousands of Congolese people, and accelerate the country’s transition toward a low 
carbon development pathway. As the Program targets populated areas with vibrant economic activities,  a significant  
amount of fossil fuel use will be avoided over the next 20- 25 years as a direct outcom e of the Program. A s tandardized 
mini- grid package and tender process  piloted under this Program will lay the ground for replication across the country , 
which will eventually enable the emissions  reduction at scale beyond the three projects.  
 
The preparation of the mini -grid projects have been led by the DIFD -supported Essor Access to Electricity  (Essor A2E)  
initiative  which aims at supporting the development of green mini -grid solar projects in the DRC  over the next few years. 
Phase I will procure three solar PV mini -grids  through a competitive tendering process (to be launched in Q 4 2018) in the 
town s of Isiro, Bumba and Genema, while subsequent tenders will replicate the scheme and scale up investment to the 
sector. Envisioned mini -grids would consist of two components: the first component including solar PV power plants  and 
battery storage,  and the se cond component with emergency back up generation, distribution and LV networks to reach 
scattered consumers , and connections  (Figure 8) . Anchor customers such as R egideso (water supplier) and SMEs will 
be identified for each mini -grid, while the payment by end-users will be based on a prepaid system with mobile money to 
improve payment collection. Total estimated CAPEX of three projects, at COD, is up to U SD 87 million and additional 
financing may be required for the expansion of generation and distribution capacity  over the lifetime of the installed 
systems . The AfDB is engaging closely with the DFID- Essor team  to provide debt financing and arrange co- financing 
from the GCF and others for  the three selected projects as a lead arranger.   
 
The AfDB -GCF financing envelope under this funding p roposal will provide up to USD 4 0 million of blended debt 
finance  to the C omponent 1 of the three mini -grids (solar PV and battery storage) whereas the second component  
(distribution, connections , backup and other costs ) will be financed by equity, quasi -equity and grants from other co-
financers.  
 
Figure 8. Green Mini-grid Business Model - Preliminary Design


---
*Page 26*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 74 
 
 C 
 
Figure 9. Selected Project Sites  
 
DFID’s Essor Access to Electricity (A2E)  
 
The overall strategy and objective of the DFID’s Essor Access to Electricity (A2E) initiative  is to decrease perceived risks 
from investors toward green mini -grid projects through the provision of pre- feasibility studies, credible processes, 
standardized concession agreements, and a stapled financing package to selected projects.  
 
The DFID-Essor  has provided advisory services to the GoDRC and provinces for the procurement of the projects  with an 
aim to develop a coherent and predictable long- term strategic gov ernance framework to encourage private sector 
investments in mini -grids . It is expected that initiatives will eventually lead to lower the entry barriers to mini -grid 
investment thereby increase competition in the market, which will ultimately ensure lower tariffs for end- consumers.  
 
In addition, the Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA) housed- in within the AfDB has approved the grant for project 
preparation supports for finalizing project -level feasibility studies and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments. 
Further, t he SEFA grant will help build an enabling framework and stakeholders’ capacity for green mini -grid development 
and management . The GCF’s TA grant contribution will co- finance and scale- up SEFA- funded activities.  
 
Three pilot sites with strong unmet demand potentials have been identified for the Phase I through a market assessment  
(Figure 9) . Demand studies and technical pre- feasibility studies have been performed for the three sites, proposing a 
technical solution that balance the cost, sustainability and reach of the mini -grids. The tendering processes will be run for 
those areas on the bas is of the pre- feasibility studies undertaken and the concession s agreement  template  prepared. 
The sponsors for each of the mini -grid will be selected through a competitive two steps process, including an open 
Request for Qualification and a Request for Proposal in line with the AfDB guidelines. Bidders will be provided with the 
pre-feasibility studies including detailed demand stud ies, technical stud ies, normalized financial model s including key 
assumptions, and a standard concession agreement template. A m inimum number of connections and minimum share 
of PV generation will be set as requirements for bidders. The main selection criteria will be end- users tariffs, but technical 
experience and connection targets will be considered.  
 
The Ministry of Energy  and Hydraulic Resources, at central level, will be awarding the C oncession Agreement - 
“Délégation de Service Public (DSP)” under the 2014 Electricity Law to preferred bidders. Generation and distribution will 
be bundled within one single concession for a 20- 25 years30 period held by one special purpose vehicle (SPV), covering 
the financing, construction, ownership and operatorship -  BOOT model. It is considered that provincial governments will 
sign the Concession Agreements together with the central Ministry t o ensure local ownership. The concessionaire will 
                                                             
30 A 20-year concession period was assumed for the purpose of financial modelling and pre- feasibility 
studies. The exact concession period will be determi ned by the UCM/Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic 
Resources in due course.


---
*Page 27*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 74 
 
 C 
have key performance obligations (number of connections, COD, etc.) to be checked by an Independent Engineer on 
behalf of the conceding authorities. No guarantee will be provided on commercial risk such as low demand and 
inability to collect revenues  and it is clarified for avoidance of doubt that these risks are ultimately assumed by 
the private sector developers of the three mini -grids .  
 
The key features of the DFID Essor A2E initiative are:  
• A pilot project comprising three Congolese towns of approximately 150,000 people each (Gemena, Bumba and 
Isiro), targeting a combined number of 12,400 connections in Year 1 and 23,300  connections in Year 5 with a 24  
hours -a-day service –  with plots of land being secured upfront with the support of the local authorities;  
• Providing upfront technical pre- feasibility studies based on solar hybrid technology;  
• Identifying targeted demand volume: anchor customers (industries, water stations, etc.), SMEs (craftsmen, 
banks , etc.) and a few thousand households, based on a thorough and on- the-ground demand assessment;  
• Providing a standard single C oncession Agreement covering both generation and distribution of electricity , and 
embedding an ad- hoc regulatory structure;  
• Mobili zing upfront attractive financial resources and possible guarantee instruments;  
• Guaranteeing a transparent selection process supported by both central and local governments, while closely 
monitored by external parties, due to start in the fall of 2018;  
• Pilot projects are to be tendered together to achieve critical mass with an incentive  to bid for the three  concessions 
within one lot, while leaving the door open for awarding the projects to more than one bidder.  
 
The Program  seek to deliver on the main following outcomes:  
• Lower barriers to entry for the market and attract investors  for the development of privately led mini -
grids  through a well -structured and transparent tendering process. Most of the development risks are being 
borne by DFID and the AfDB funding for the necessary technical studies and legal and financial advisor y services 
for the structuring of the tendering process. From this pilot round, a business model and technical design for a 
solar hybrid and battery -supported mini- grid will be demonstrated in  the market and lessons gained for the next 
phase of green mini- grid investment  in the DRC .  
• Improve environmental sustainability  of electricity generation  and reduce GHG emission  in the DRC  
through renewable energy generation,  which produces considerably less emissions than diesel or fossil fuel 
alternatives with minimal social impact as it is not anticipated that these solar mini -grids would lead to any 
resettlement.  
• Increased access to electricity  is expected after a full roll out of the project s by providing energy network 
servicing a large number of clients independently of the national grid. This first phase will provide access to clean, 
reliable and more affordable energy to at least 150,000 people with no or limited access to energy in the DRC.  
• Increased productive use of energy  that will drive local development. In fact, more affordable and reliable 
electric supply will lead to more efficient allocation of precious resources toward ot her uses such as new 
investments, leading to additional productivity, economic growth and job creation.  
• Provide opportunities for local communities and participate in building resilient societies through 
inclusive and green growth.  The Program will strongly reinforce economic and social resilience of low income 
population living in climate vulnerable areas. The Program will consider promoting local employment as well as 
consider how opportunities for girls and women may be maximized and potential negative impacts may be 
avoided.  
 
This will eventuall y help the DRC to scale up and optimize the development of a sustainable power  solution involving the 
private sector, all in a timely manner. By significantly lowering the barrier of entry and offering balanced concession terms  
to private operators being appointed through a transparent process, the initiative aims at setting up a replicable structure 
to be spread across other places in the DRC, once the pilot projec ts have been successfully awarded, leading to a 
significant in crease of access to electricity  in a sustainable manner.


---
*Page 28*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 74 
 
 C 
Overall timeline   
  
During a pre- structuring and market testing phase, which took place in late 2016- early 2017, the DFID Essor A2E initiative 
was introduced to the private sector market as well as to the main Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) active in the 
African energy sector. The market respons e was very positive with twenty expressions of interest received from both 
local and international private investors, developers and operators, many of whom were large and reputable utility 
companies. Following this conclusive testing phase, the GoDRC and DFID approved the launch of the pilot phase in May 
2017. The preparation of the tender for the three pilot projects has then consisted of (i) selecting the three pilot sites 
based on both desktop studies and on- the-ground site visits, (ii) drafting a standard and balanced Concession Agreement, 
(iii) designing a robust tendering process, (iv) carrying out the technical and demand pre- feasibility studies in the three 
pilot sites and (v) developing a preliminary financial structure and mobilizing potential financiers, with the objective of 
obtaining the best financial conditions  (Figure 10) . A five -year implementation period for this Program (2019- 2023) is 
proposed to allow sufficient time for the tender ing, negotiation and financial close with selected bi dders, and construction 
of mini -grids,  in consideration of unexpected factors that  may slow down and delay the process.   
 
 
Figure 10. DFID’s Essor A2E Timeline  
 
Site selection  
 
Following an initial screening of potential pilot sites conducted during the preliminary phase of the DFID- Essor A2E 
initiative, it was possible to develop a list of twenty -seven towns throughout the DRC which could serve as potential sites 
for the pilot projects. This shortlist was further whittled down to six, based on the following discriminating factors:  
• The security situation of the area;  
• If the SNEL was known to already be active;  
• The level of solar irradiance;  
• The economic activity, and;  
• Logistical issues affecting access to the site.  
Preliminary site visits were organiz ed in six shortlisted towns to assess each potential site along the following criteria:  
• Population  
• Economic potential  
• Security  
• Logistics and connectivity  
• Presence of industrial activity


---
*Page 29*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 74 
 
 C 
• Solar irradiance  
• Presence of the financial sector  
• Existing activity of the SNEL 
• Estimated willingness to pay  
Following the visits of t he six  shortlisted sites, three towns were retained based on the abovementioned criteria. These 
are Bumba, Isiro and Gemena.  This shortlist received a full and formal endorsement from the MERH . 
 
Bumba  
While Bumba is not the provincial capital or “chef -lieu” of the Mongala Province (which is Lisala), it is considered to be as 
important, if not more so. It has a population of some 180,000, and is home to important economic activit ies with the town 
acting as a stopping point for traders on the Congo River between Kinshasa and Kisangani. With short dry seasons, and 
an average solar irradiance of 5.23kWh/m2/day, the site presents a good level of solar irradiance.  
 
Gemena  
Gemena is the capital of the Province of Sud- Ubangi with an estimated population around 170,000. The town benefits 
from an average solar irradiance of 5,21kWh/m²/day, and the solar potential is good throughout most of the year. The 
town economy is geared towards agricultu ral production and trade, with goods, people and finances commonly 
transfer red through the town on the way to Zongo or Mogalo. The town is also relatively easy to access with flights 
(including freight) from Kinshasa directly to Gemena, or from boat from K inshasa to Akula and from there to Gemena via 
a relatively well -maintained road (albeit a non- asphalted road).  
 
Isiro  
Isiro is the “Chef Lieu” of the newly created Haut -Uele province, which, as with other new administrative centres , makes 
it a politically attractive site for an electrification project. The town has an estimated population of 137,500 and was once 
very prosperous with a burgeoning coffee industry, but economic decline, war and insecurity in areas of the province 
have s een it regress. While there were security concerns about operating in the Province, a detailed assessment of the 
situation was made by the Essor Security team ruling that the level of risk to operate in the town was in fact acceptable. 
As the other sites I siro benefits from a good level of solar irradiation (5,0kWh/m²/day,).  
 
 Bumba  Gemena  Isiro  
Solar irradiance (kWh/m2) in 2018  5.23 5.21 5.00 
Population  180,000  170,000  137,500  
Number of shops and services  557 211 1,098  
Number of public institutions  292 152 170 
Security situation  Good  Very Good  Medium  
Logistics and connectivity  Weak  Good  Medium  
Table 5. Key characteristics of the target towns  
 
Key principles of the tendering process  
 
The purpose is to conduct a tender as transparent and clear as expected for such international auctions. The following 
procurement principles, as established by the World Bank  and the AfDB , will be applied:  
• A wide -reaching advertisement is done providing potential bidders with detailed information and enough time for 
preparation of proposals;  
• Prequalification of potential bidders is done using well designed criteria;  
• Bidding documents are well -prepared, clear and non -discriminatory bidding documents;


---
*Page 30*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 74 
 
 C 
• Procedures for bid submission are clear and bid opening is public;  
• Bid evaluation criteria are transparent, well -defined in the bidding documents;  
• Negotiation of the final contract, if required, is done only within the parameters defined in the bidding document;  
• Selection of firm (s) for award of contract is done based on t he most economically advantageous offer (given the 
complexity of this offer, other criteria will also be taken into account but the economic criteria will be key); and 
• Appropriate complaint handling mechanisms exist.  
 
The criteria of selection will consider the tariff, the number of connections proposed by the bidder, the Equity IRR targeted 
to fund additional investments such as the grid extension post Y ear 5.  A weighted average tariff would be calculated if 
there is a multiple- tariff framework. It is envisaged  that the tariff framework includes a mechanism to lower the  tariff 
for basic consumption  (social tariff) to ensure affordability  for all sections of the society .  
  
The Concession Agreement  
 
The private operator will be entitled to produce and distribute electricity under a Service Concession Agreement 
(Délégation de Service Public) signed by the relevant conceding authority, which is the Central Government. It is expected 
that the Province in  which the p rojects will be located will also acknowledge the award of the Concession Agreement.  
 
The proposed C oncession A greement, which will be part of the tendering package, is designed with a view to be balanced 
and is to include robust mechanisms in line with the international best practice in the sector (regarding risk allocation, 
state risks, force majeure, arbitration, etc.). The C oncession Agreement will consist of a standard generic part to be used 
for all projects and a specific part taking into account each project’s specificities where required. Given that the generation 
assets and the distribution grid will be located very close to each other, the Concession Agreement does not need to 
include any considerations with respect to the transmission of electricity.  
 
Pre-feasibility studies  
 
One of the key concerns of the projects developers, investors and operators  is the difficulty to get accurate and reliable 
demand estimation (anchor off -takers, SMEs, and households), viewed as a “volume risk”. Reliable estimates will be 
necessary to set up reliable financial forecasts, to adequately size the power plant facilities and the distribution grid, to 
assess the expected demand growth and to define the appropriate financial structure. Robust pre- feasibility studies  
(demand and technical studies), performed to the level of standard expected by international investors and DFIs , have 
been carried out and will be provided to the bidders as part of the tender package.  
Demand studies require as much granularity as possible with a preliminary geographical scanning of the population  and 
on-the-ground surveys based on statistically si gnificant sample sizes of the different demand segments. The main 
outcomes were detailed for the main customer segments such as anchor customers (significant local industrial players), 
households and small businesses over the concession period on: i) the estimated electricity demand (kWh) as a function 
of the tariff and the service offer, ii) peak load demand (MWp) iii) the willingness -to-pay and iv) forecasting of the demand 
growth. Demand studies also provide a sensitivity analysis and an estimation of pr ice elasticity.  
 
For the demand study, historical and current industrial activities and socio- economic profiles  of the three towns  have 
been analyzed in- depth through field visit, survey and desk research, and this has formed the basis of the 20- year demand 
forecast. In order to have a comprehensive view of the demand forecast, multiple simulations were developed: including 
a baseline model with realistic assumptions of growth in consumption, and an optimistic model characterized by a strong 
economic dynamism. For each town, an optimistic model was built assuming high suppressed demands and anticipating 
new industrial development (suc h as agro- processing, chemical and manufacturing) as a result of stable electricity 
access.


---
*Page 31*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 74 
 
 C 
Based on the demand studies, the technical studies aim ed at establishing the technical system design including the sizing 
of the equipment and a preliminary design of the distribution network, as well as highlighting the potential  technical issues 
(including environmental and social ones) and options to mitigate them.   
 
CAPEX estimation  
 
An indicative capital expenditure schedule was established on the basis of these preliminary technical outputs. At 
inception, the backbone of MV/LV lines and transformers would be built to support the connections schedule over 20 
years. The power plant is based on a technology mix which matches the energy needs forecasted in Year 5. Extension 
CAPEX  are regularly needed throughout the concession life to extend  consistently the distribution network and power 
plant capacity  (not part of the initial CAPEX estim ation) . The additional connections would take place on a yearly basis. 
It is assumed that the power plant would be extended every five years to cover the electricity consumption for the following 
five years. Should no other extension CAPEX (both in terms of new connections and additional capacity) take place after 
Year 5, the plant designed at inception would be able to match the electri city consumption forecasted in Y ear 20 based 
on the number of connections achieved in Year 5, taking into ac count a consumption growth of  1.5% per annum.  
 
Component 3. T echnical Assistance grant (USD 2  million  by AfDB and GCF ) 
 
The enabling environment, institutional capacity and finance are critical challenges facing renewable energy 
development. The Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources ( MERH ) and its project coordination and management 
unit (UCM) have huge task but lack the capacity to take projects through their necessary cycles. Creating attractive 
conditions for private sector involvement is one of the key pillars to mobilizing renewable energy investments and 
improving the country’s electrification rate  while reducing GHG  emissions . Well -conceived policies (with appropriate 
strategies) and regulatory frameworks are key factors in attracting private sector investments into the renewable energy 
mini- grid space in the DRC. At the moment, the country lacks this institutional, legal and regulatory framework for green 
mini- grids, and lacks the necessary awareness and capacity among all relevant stakeholders.  
 
The country has fairly recently passed a new Electricity L aw (2014) that has liberali zed the power sector, however, the 
law still remains generic and lacks details on incentive, potential subsidy framework, tariff framework, technical standards 
for mini -grids and grid management. These discourage investor interest in the sector. A lack of i nstitutional capacity to 
promote and develop green mini -grids is another challenge in the DRC. The existing institutional framework is still 
undergoing a learning curve. The government has recently established a dedicated unit for coordination and management 
of energy projects, especially off -grid and mini- grids, however the unit has insufficient  capacity to drive projects through 
the process of investment to financia l close and commissioning. The Law (2014) also created the rural energy agency 
and the sect or regulatory authority, though neither institution is as yet operational. This calls for capacity building to those 
key institutions, enabling them to promote and manage mini grid investments in the country.    
 
There are currently a few examples/business  models of public -led or private sector operated mini -grids in the country  
(see section B.3 .).  It is critical for the UCM to demonstrate that those types of schemes can be viable. This will in turn 
serve the institution in building its capacity, create ne w avenues for public -private development of the off -grid sector, and 
strengthen the overall position of this institution.   
 
The Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA), in- housed in the AfDB, has already set asi de USD 1 million grant for the 
technical assistance  (TA) and the GCF is request to top- up USD 1 million to share the cost . The proposed TA grant will 
establish the necessary framework to attract private/PPP investments into green mini -grids , enabling the sustainable 
deployment of green mini -grids  in the DRC. Private sector -led investment in green mini -grids is the best solution for the 
country given its large size, limited public financing capacity  and infrastructure challenges. To demonstrate the concept 
and validate a  potential business model for green mini -grids  (with the objective of stimulating rapid replication) the grant 
will supplement  the already on- going Essor A2E initiative . In addition, the TA will promote the local technical ecosystem 
for solar PV and mini -grid, by training local technicians and SMEs for their operations, maintenance and repair  capacity.


---
*Page 32*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 74 
 
 C 
 
The AfDB is an Executing Entity  (EE) for the TA component, with UCM as a partner for implementation  of 
activities.  During the project appraisal  for the SEFA grant request , it was established that UCM has the capacity to 
implement the project, as UCM has gained substantial procurement experience through implementation of other donor -
funded projects in the energy sector. UCM has worked/are still working with the  World Bank, DFID, KfW and AfDB.  The 
GoDRC, through the MERH /UCM, will contribute for the  project coordination unit cost (USD 55,000) . The TA 
implementation arrangement is described in Section C.7.  
 
The proposed TA has two major sub- components  (Table 6):  
 
Sub-
component  Key activities  Budget 
(AfDB/SEFA)  Budget 
(GCF)  
1. Green mini -
grid e nabling 
framework and 
capacity 
building  
 (i) Develop green mini -grid strategy and regulations  
(ii) Develop mini -grid standards and guidelines  
(iii) Establish green mini -grid tariff guideline  
(iv) Train key institutions to be able to manage and implement green 
mini- grid projects development (UCM, MERH , ANSER and 
benefiting provincial governments)  
(v) Train  project developers  (for the subsequent rounds) on green 
mini-grid projects devel opment and management  USD 0.3 M  USD 0.2 M  
(vi) Build a local RE ecosystem by training local technicians and 
SMEs for operations and maintenance of green mini -grid 
(vii) Gender action plan implementation  - USD 0.3 M  
2. Green m ini-
grid project 
development 
support  
 (i) Support three solar based mini -grids under the Essor A2E 
(detailed technical studies and legal cost)  USD 0.35 M  - 
(ii) Conduct feasibility studies for other selected potential green 
mini- grid sites (up to five)  
(iii) Develop an investment and tender plan for UCM’s green mini -
grid pipeline  USD 0.35 M  USD 0.5 M  
Total  USD 1 M  USD 1 M  
Table 6. Components of the Technical Assistance  
 
Sub-Component 3.1: “Green Mini-Grid Enabling Framework and Capacity  Building”  
This component will build on existing regional best practices in terms of policy, institutional and regulatory frameworks 
and financial incentive measures that guide green mini -grid projects.  
 
• Key activities and outcomes  
 
1) Drafting and validation of a mini -grid strategy , regulatory framework and standards:  
Drafting and validation of a mini -grid strategy document that defines the strategic direction and policy 
alignment of the developing green mini -grid sector, and outlines the institutional arrangements, financial 
incentive measures, and regulatory framework. Once this outline is validated by sector stakeholders,  specific 
regulatory texts (e.g. decrees, orders), frameworks (e.g. guidelines for tariff models to be used by the 
regulators and licensing framew orks) and institutional documents (e.g. strategies) will be drafted and 
validated through rounds of stakeholder consultations. The preparation of these documents will closely refer 
and align with the already established pieces including the existing Electr icity Law 2014.  
 
2) Guidelines for green mini -grid tariff framework and financing mechanisms : 
This activity will involve undertaking a comprehensive sector/ green mini -grid analysis  to develop the viable 
cost-based tariff framework  for green mini -grid projects and recommending appropriate financing


---
*Page 33*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 74 
 
 C 
mechanism suitable for green mini -grid development in the DRC. It will also include preparation of the 
tool/guideline for determining tariff  for the green mini -grids. This guideline will inform the regulator  on the 
appropriate tariff determination models  and assist them in assessing for the projects that are procured 
competitively. The tariff guideline will  cover for both off -grid and grid connected scenarios.  
 
3) Capacity building of UCM staff s and other relevant stakeholders : 
This activity will equip UCM staffs  with necessary  knowledge and ensure that skills are in place to perform 
their roles determined in the green mini -grid framework  once it is launched. A “needs assessment” will  be 
carried out at the program  inception to inform a “training program ” to be delivered. The beneficiaries are 
primarily the public officials who will  administer the process of green mini -grid project development, currently 
employed within the UCM or the  MERH . Provincial governments under the three pilot sites will also be part 
of the beneficiaries of the capacity building program . Other training/advisory services will be given to private 
sector green mini -grid developer s, targeting the subsequent rounds . Key t raining themes will include: (i) 
Implementation of  the green mini -grid framework including the relevant regulations (targeting the UCM, 
regulator, and MERH , and selected provincial governments); (ii) Training on feasibility and Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment ( ESIA)  studies, project  management, finance, technology, green mini -grid 
operations and maintenance (targeting UCM staff s and private sector developers ); (iii) Training of local 
technicians and SMEs , through private sector developers,  to build local capacity for solar hybrid mini -grid 
operations, maintenance and repair.  This activity will also support gender -responsive programming in the 
renewable energy and mini -grid sector, through the implementation of the Gender Action Plan.  
 
Sub-Component 3.2: “G reen Mini-Grid Project Development Support ”  
The Program  will undertake key project preparation work geared towards attracting and supporting private investments 
into green mini -grids.  The support is two- fold, one to provide technical assistance to the three E ssor pilot sites and 
secondly,  to the new selected sites across the country. This technical assistance will simultaneously serve as capacity  
building opportunities for UCM staff s and the benefiting provincial governments, learning by doing.  
 
• Key activities and outcomes  
 
1) Support three solar based mini -grids under E ssor A2E initiative : 
Grant support comes in after the investors have been selected under the competitive bidding process. 
Technical assistance under the grant will cover the finalizing of pre- investment activities, moving the 
projects towards actual  implementation. The TA will include legal advisory services (concessional 
agreements, land acquisition and rights) and technical studies (ESIA, detailed feasibility studies and  
engineering design).  
 
2) Project preparation support for the new selected sites : 
In additional to the E ssor A2E project sites, the TA will support additional sites to be implemented in the 
country under the leadership of  UCM. The sites will be selected jointly by the government in consideration 
of the work that has been done by other partners to identify potential projects which can be supported for 
further development.  TA support to these new addit ional green mini -grid projects will also serve as capacity 
building opportunities  for UCM staff, including via carrying out detailed feasibility studies, detailed 
engineering designs,  ESIAs and financial modeling. As part of the support for a wide uptake of green mini -
grid implementation in the DRC, UCM will be assisted to initiate new innovative processes to promote mini 
grid projects  which will include such approaches as business plan competition which will be able to identify 
the private sector appetite in investing in the mini -gird space. This activity will go hand in hand with  
identifying appropriate financing mechanisms for mini grids, es pecially those in micro scale.  A call  for green 
mini- grid project concepts will be communicated widely throughout th e DRC through such channels  as the 
Chamber of Commerce and the national association of NGOs. Projects selected through the competition 
will likely be smaller in size than the E ssor-supported green mini -grids (perhaps measured in kilowatts 
instead of megawa tts) and will more likely be the concepts of local Congolese developers  rather than 
international firms.  
 
3) Roll-out plan to attract investments in the green mini -grid projects :


---
*Page 34*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 74 
 
 C 
In addition to the green mini -grids supported  under the E ssor A2E and those identified via the business 
plan competition, the UCM has a pipeline of other green mini -grids to be developed. These include water 
sector related green mini -grids being developed with the GIZ, up to fifteen green mini -grids to be developed 
under the World Bank EASE program, a number of  green mini -grids around airports supported by the AfDB, 
and others. This sub- component of the TA  will organize these future green mini -grid projects into an 
investment pipeline. Key activities include: (i)  elaboration of project concepts focusing on technical and 
economic criteria to inform potential  investors; (ii) preparation of key parameters for investment decisions, 
including licensing and permitting processes, relevant fiscal/financial incentives available to investors,  as 
well as possible co- financing instruments/facilities available; (iii) structuring, administering and procurement 
processes  that will be used to attract qualified developers to the selected sites. It is anticipated that this 
“roll-out plan” will test th e tendering business model established under the E ssor A2E, and increase 
investors’ confidence in the DRC green mini -grids sector.   
 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and f inancial profile of the Sponsor ( Executing Entity ) 
and how it  will support the project/programme in terms of equity  investment , management, operations, production and 
marketing.  
 
Institutional background  
 
Established in 1964, the African Development Bank (AfDB) is the premier pan- African development institution,  promoting 
economic growth and social progress across the continent. There are 80 member states,  including 54 in Africa (Regional 
Member Countries). The Bank’s development agenda entails  delivering the financial and technical support for 
transformative projects that will significantly reduce poverty through inclusive and sustainable economic growth. I n order 
to sharply focus the objectives of the Ten Year  Strategy (2013 – 2022) and ensure greater developmental impact, five 
major areas (High 5s ) have been identified, namely: energy, agro- business,  industrialization, integration and improving 
the quality  of life for the people of Africa.  
 
The Vice Presidency for ‘Power, Energy, Climate and Green Growth’ is a Sector Complex focusing on the Bank’s Ten 
Years Strategy and one of the High 5s priority of “Light up and Power Africa”. In order to translate this strategic goal into 
concrete actions, the AfDB launched the “New Deal on Energy for Africa”  strategy  which  is built on five inter -related and 
mutually reinforcing principles: (i) raising aspirations to solve Africa’s energy chall enges; ii) establishing a t ransformative 
partnership on e nergy for Africa; (iii) mobilizing domestic and international capital for innovative financing in Africa’s 
energy sector; (iv) supporting African governments in strengthening energy policy, regulation and sector governance; and 
(v) increasing the African Development Bank’s investments in energy and climate financing31. 
 
New Deal on Energy for Africa: The AfDB’s energy strategy, central to implementing the New Deal, focuses on seven 
areas, which are: (i) setting up an enabling policy environment, (ii) transforming utility companies for success, (iii) 
dramatically increasing the number of bankable energy project s, (iv) increasing the funding pool to deliver new projects, 
(v) supporting ‘bottom of the pyramid’ energy access programs, particularly for women, (vi) accelerating major regional 
projects to drive integration and (vii) rolling out waves of country -wide e nergy ‘transformations’. The Bank will implement 
these priorities through a series of flagship themes  such as: IPP procurement, power utility transformation, early stage 
project support and related catalytic programs, mobile payment initiatives, and a regi onal project acceleration program. 
The overall goal is to help the continent achieve universal energy  access by 2025 with a strong focus on encouraging 
clean and renewable energy solutions. This will require providing 160 GW of new capacity, 130 million ne w on -grid 
connections, 75 million new off -grid connections and providing 150 million households with access to clean cooking 
solutions. It is estimated that the investment needed ranges  between US D 60 billion and US D 90 billion per year. The 
Bank intends to invest US D 12 billion of its own resources in the energy sector during 2016 -2020 (Figure 11). 
 
                                                             
31 AfDB, New Deal on Energy for Africa strategy, 2016.


---
*Page 35*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 74 
 
 C 
 
Figure 11. New Deal on Energy for Africa  Targets  
 
 
 
Figure 12. Power, Energy, Climate and Green Growth Complex  organizational structure  
 
Under this strategic framework, t he Power, Energy, Climate and Green Growth  Complex’s objectives are (i) to develop 
enabling sector policy and strategy; (ii) to provide deep sector technical expertise to the regions by gathering pool of 
experienced individuals who can be consulted for their expertise on complicated transactions; (iii)  to develop new 
financing instruments;  and (iv) to act as spokesperson to represent the Bank with external  stakeholders on all aspects of 
“Light Up and Power Africa”. This AfDB- GCF  Program will be executed by the Power, Energy, Climate and Green Growth 
Complex of the AfDB, following the Bank’s established rules and procedures for the project and financial management  
(Figure 12). The Climate Change and Green Growth Department , which is part of the Power, Energy, Climate and Green


---
*Page 36*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 74 
 
 C 
Growth  Complex, is in charge of the Bank’s climate change strate gy and climate finance programs . The AfDB will 
constitute a n implementation team to undertake  due diligence and execution of individual sub -projects as well 
as the management of the  overall Program .  
 
AfDB renewable energy (RE)  and climate investments overview and project examples (2011- 2017) : Over the last 7 years 
(2011- 2017), the AfDB has invested around UA32 1.25 billion from its own resources in support of renewable energy (in 
addition to ~UA 390 M in co- financing channeled by the Bank). Operations range from project preparation to infrastructure 
investment using  various Bank instruments –  loan, grant, line of credit, partial risk/credit guarantee and equity. The Bank’s 
investment during 2011- 2017 in RE (excluding early stage project preparation support) will contribute towards ~3 GW in 
addit ional RE generation capacity (of which ~1 GW from hydro, ~900 MW from wind, ~ 860 MW from solar, ~175  MW 
from geothermal and ~75  MW from biomass). Further, u nder its climate finance mobilization efforts, the AfDB is committed 
to increasing its annual climate financing to r each USD 5 billion a year by 2020 – 40% of its total new investments by 
2020.  This will be implemented by the "Africa Thriving and Resilient: The Bank Group’s Second Climate Change Action 
Plan, 2016- 2020 (CCAP2)"  approved by the Board of Directors  in 2017. The strategic vision of CCAP2 is to enable the 
achievement of ‘low -carbon and climate- resilient’ development in Africa with four Pillars: Mitigation, Adaptation, Climate 
Finance and a Cross Cutting Pillar that addresses technology tr ansfer, capacity development, institutional reforms as well 
as other cross -cutting activities that will create of the enabling environment for its successful implementation.  The AfDB’s  
climate finance portfolio 2011- 2017  has well over 300  projects with cli mate mitigation and/or adaptation benefits based 
on the joint MDB climate finance tracking methodology . This  portfolio is dominated by mitigation project s; the CCAP2 will 
aim to raise adaptation finance to reach parity with mitigation.  
 
The AfDB commitment to RE has grown from UA 655 million  in 2008 -12 to above UA 1 billion  in 2013 -17. The share of 
RE in power generation investments increased from 20% to over 65% between  the two periods. The AfDB has been 
associated with the landmark RE transactions in Morocco, South Africa, Egypt, Kenya, and other countries (details 
provided in Section E.5.2). Most recently, in 2017, 100% of the UA 465 million invested by the African Development 
Bank in power generation supported renewable energy projects , which wi ll contribute to 1.4 GW of additional 
renewable generation capacity (950 MW from solar, 473 MW from hydro) while reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions by over 2.3 million tons annually .  
 
The AfDB also uses its various trust funds to support African Governments and private sector developers in scaling- up 
renewable energy across the continent. For example, the AfDB’s Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA) supports 
small - and medium -scale renewabl e energy projects and energy efficiency through project preparation and technical 
assistance grants. In 2017 alone, SEFA approved 7 project preparation grants (aiming to add an additional 166 MW of 
renewable energy and leverage USD 340 million) and 5 techn ical assistance grants to help African countries create a 
conducive environment for more private sector investments in the off -grid and mini -grid sub- sectors. Following its fifth 
year of operations, SEFA has cumulatively committed the vast majority of its USD 95 million capitalization across a 
portfolio of over 30 projects in approximately 20 countries, including multinational projects.  
 
AfDB- GCF Zambia Renewable Energy Financing Framework   
 
Zambia Renewable Energy Financing Framework is the AfDB’s first collaboration with the GCF, approved by the GCF’s 
Board at its 19th meeting in February 2018 (USD 50 million concessional loans and USD 2.5 million grant for technical 
assistance ). It is designed to 1) arrange debt financing for 5- 6 small -scale (up to 20MW each) renewable energy 
independent power producer (IPP) projects selected under the “Global Energy Transfer Feed- in Tariffs” (GETFiT) Zambia 
Program, and 2) provide complementary technical assistance to develop the ecosystem and value chain for renewable 
energy -based electrification in Zambia.  The AfDB- GCF financing envelope aims to provide USD 100 million of senior debt 
and standby loan facility (as a tenor extension instrument for commercial banks’ loans) to the selected GETFiT projects. 
As a co -financer and an executing agency, the Bank has committed up to USD 50 million of senior loans and USD 1.5 
million of grant for technical assistance. Discussions with other potential co- financiers (commercial banks, National 
Pension Fund of Zambia (NAPSA), etc.) are ongoing.  
 
                                                             
32 Unit of Account, equivalent to the IMF's Special Drawing Right.


---
*Page 37*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 74 
 
 C 
The Framework is expected to catalyze private investment in the Zambian renewable energy sector, thereby accelerating 
the achievement of the country’s electricity generation targets and diversification of its energy mix. By doing so, it aims 
to fast -track Zambia’s transition toward a low -emission sustainable development pathway. It will be a test bed for a 
renewable energy financing model that crowds in local commercial banks and institutional investors, further supplemented 
with the proposed technical assistance grant facility. This i s expected to have a strong demonstration effect across Sub-
Saharan Africa.  
 
AfDB support to G reen Mini-Grids  
 
The AfDB is currently the focal point for all mini -grid activities on the continent.  Through its Green Mini -Grids Market 
Development Program  (GMG MDP), the Bank offers technical assistance to mini -grid developers and mini -grid policy 
makers through its Green Mini -Grids Help Desk ( http://greenminigrid.se4all -africa.org ).  The AfDB is  currently providing 
support to more than 60 green mini -grid developers in 30 countries, as well as to several Ministries of Energy.  
  
The Green Mini -Grid Africa Strategy, drafted by the GMG MDP, was endorsed in 2017 by the African Union 
Commission.  The Green Mini -Grid Africa Strategy is a document that prescribes the baseline policy principles required 
to foster private sector investment into mini -grids development in a particular country.  These principles include simplified 
licensing, the liberty to apply cost -reflective tariffs, predictable outcomes in the case of main- grid arrival into a mini -grid 
market, integrated energy sector planning (between main grid, mini -grids and off -grid solutions) and capacity building at 
all levels.  The Market Development Program conducts country specific green mini -grid opportunity assessments, with 
studies already concluded for Mozambique, Ethiopia, Burkina Faso, Cameroo n, the DRC, Nigeria, Uganda, Madagascar 
and Mali.  The program is introducing the National Renewable Energy Laboratory’s Quality Assurance Framework33 for 
mini- grids to 12 green mini -grid developers in Nigeria.   
  
The AfDB is the current Chair of the Mini -Grids Partnership (MGP), a body of sector stakeholders that coordinates 
concepts and interventions related to mini -grids development.   Other MGP Steering Committee members include DFID, 
Power Africa, the World Bank , EUEI, GIZ, IRENA, the Rockefeller and UN Foundations, the Alliance for Rural 
Electrification, the Clean Energy Solutions Center, Club- ER (the association of African rural electrification agencies), 
SNV, Power for All and African Mini -Grid Developers Association ( AMDA ). 
 
While the AfDB does not have a record of direct investment to private sector mini -grid projects  yet, the AfDB has 
accumulated a wealth of sector experience and knowledge through the above- mentioned support programs and public 
sector operations for rural electrification. T he proposed AfDB- GCF Program is built on the collaboration with DFID (Essor 
A2E) drawing on both organizations’  expertise.   
  
AfDB’s energy sector involvement in DRC  
 
The AfDB has been one of the key development partners working with the GoDRC to tackle existing challenges and 
enhance socio- economic development. Under the DRC Country Strategy Paper of 2013- 2017, the AfDB’s support 
focused on lifting the DRC out of its f ragile state status and creating the conditions for strong and inclusive growth driven 
by the increased dynamism of the economy’s productive sectors. Energy is a key focus under the pillar related to attracting 
private investment through the creation of a favorable business environment. The AfDB has also financed a peri -urban 
electrification project (Projet d’Electrification Peri -urbaine et Rurale) to strengthen part of the transmission network 
supplying Kinshasa and the northern zone of the Kinshasa distri bution network. Recently approved financing for a new 
electricity access and sector governance improvement project would expand the rehabilitation of the distribution network 
in Northern Kinshasa, develop the Lungundi II Hydropower Plant to add supply in T shikapa (Kasai Province), and assist 
MERH to improve sector governance.  Through its Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA), the AfDB has awarded a 
project preparation grant for two hydropower mini grids (combined 12 MW capacity).  For this Program, AfDB will act 
as an Executing Entity for both mini- grid project loans (financial and technical due diligence of sub -projects) 
and TA grant components.  
                                                             
33 The Quality Assurance Framework is a monitoring and reporting framework related to mini -grid 
performance.


---
*Page 38*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 74 
 
 C 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.   
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any).  
 
A review of the DRC electricity sector and market conditions reveal s that the grid coverage by the utility (SNEL) is 
extremely limited and it is unlikely that the grid will be expanded nation- wide in short - to medium -term future. Electricity 
supply to the grid is highly dependent to large hydro power, which is vulnerable t o climatic variability. Off -grid towns, some 
of them with large population (more than 100,000) and sizeable industrial activities, rely on micro- scale diesel generators 
and kerosene lights for their energy use. This calls for an alternative approach such as renewable- based mini -grid 
financed by private investment.  
 
In July 2017, the AfDB published a report “Mini -Grid Market Opportunity Assessment: Democratic Republic of 
the Congo”  as part of the Green Mini -Grid Market Development Program activities. It provides a comprehensive and 
detailed review of the mini -grid market potential in the DRC. Following paragraphs are brought from this report to provide 
an overview of the green mini -grid market in the DRC.   
 
Mini- grid development in the DRC   
 
The DRC has a significant green mini -grid market potential. The country is home to nearly 80 million people, populated 
over a vast land area where most of them suffering from lack of electricity access.  Only 20 million people are living within 
15km of the current grid and more than 50 million people are living beyond the reach of the current grid.  The size of the 
country makes it difficult and expensive to expand the existing power grid. Besides three regional grids covering major 
cities in the DRC34, only few towns are s upplied by mini -grids operated by SNEL (please see section B.3) and other 
power producers.   
 
Based on current grid coverage, an annual potential market of USD 921 million for mini -grid and off- grid solutions 
is estimated35. This assumes that 61 million people will be connected to mini -grid and off -grid solutions. The potential  
market size could be even larger as modern decentralized solutions may also be feasible in areas within grid proximity  
where population centres close to the grid are not yet electrified due to limitations of the national power network assets.  
The same analysis, conducted taking into account the planned grid extensions scenario, yields an annual market size of  
47 million people, representing US D 721 million per year.  
 
Main cities and towns across the country represent an obvious priority target for mini -grid solutions.  The main 170 
population centers across the country with a total population of about 31 million represent a priority target for mini -grid 
solutions. Of these, 20 million people living in 29 towns are situated within 15km of the existing power network. The 
remaining 141 populated towns situated beyond the current grid are the primary targets for electrification through 
mini- grid solutions, who se theoretical market size is estimated at about USD 153 million per year36.  
 
Off-grid developments and support for energy access  
 
The opening up of the power generation and distribution sectors to private operators has been a remarkable achievement 
of the 2014 Electricity Law. Several independent mini -grids have come on- line in relation to the development of the 
electricity law  and a number of green mini -grid projects are at the development stage. Mining companies such as the 
Société des mines d’or de Kilo -Moto (SOKIMO) and Société Minière de Bakwanga (MIBA) own hydro plants and inject 
                                                             
34 The western grid covers the Central Congo and Kinshasa province, the eastern grid covers North Kivu 
and South Kivu provinces and the southern grid covers the Haut -Katanga and Lualaba provinces.  
35 Calculation s based on the World Bank Global Consumption Database. The data is from 2010 in USD. 
Nominal 2010- 2016 GDP growth rates from the IMF were applied to calculate a 2016 approximation. 
Total market size is estimated based upon household energy market size whic h assumes that 60% of 
household energy spend is on electricity, and the household spending comprises 60% of the total 
revenue of a mini -grid. 
36 Calculations based on the World Bank Global Consumption Database.


---
*Page 39*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 74 
 
 C 
excess energy in local grids.  Existing SNEL mini -grids, mostly hydro and diesel, offer additional opportunities for 
privatisation and rehabilitation.  The Modern Villages program by the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources  aims to 
electrify 100 villages using hydro green mini -grids, but implementation has been slow.  
 
DFID and the World Bank are committing significant funding to further development of mini -grids. DFID’s Es sor program  
plans to support the construction of up to 30 solar green mini -grids by 2021 through the “Access to Electricity” work 
stream. The World Bank’s Energy Ac cess and  Services Expansion (EAS E) program, with a budget of USD 147 million, 
aims to electr ify provincial capitals using green mini -grids. In addition, it aims to rehabilitate the Mobayi hydro plant and 
the Gbadolite grid. The program will also support the creation of a Credit Support Facility (CSF), administered by a 
financial institution, and a Rural Electrification Fund (REF), administered by UCM and ANSER. These Facilities, once 
operational, will provide much needed capital in the form of lines of credit, subsidies and grants for private rural 
electrification projects.  
 
Renewable energy potential for mini -grids   
 
Through the use of available renewable energy resources, green mini -grids fit very well with the specific needs in the 
DRC for improving access to energy to a large number of its people independently from the national grid. Hydro  and solar 
powered mini -grids have the largest potential to accelerate electrification rates. The United Nations  Development 
Program (UNDP) produced a Renewable Energy Atlas in 2014 that identified 317 potential small hydro sites37. According 
to this data, 51 out of 141 towns identified above are located within 20km of a potential hydro site. These towns have a 
total population of 2.7 million and a few major towns (e.g. Thsikapa) are already being served with hydro mini -grids, while 
others are being served b y diesel mini -grids. These sites and town could be primary targets for electrification through 
hydro powered mini -grids. Some of the mini -grids can go large enough to provide electricity to tens of thousands of 
people. Solar powered mini -grids have potenti al to electrify most of other towns, or even those towns in proximity to 
hydropower sites if solar makes better economic and technological justification.    
 
• Hydro: The DRC has significant hydro power mini -grids potential across the country. Several existing isolated 
mini- grids are hydro powered, such as the Electricité du Congo (EDC) grid in the city of Tshikapa (1.5MW), the 
Virunga SARL grids in Mutwanga (0.4MW) and Matebe (12.6MW), the Société d’énergie du Kasaï (Enerka) grid 
in Mbuji -Mayi (18.48MW ) and the Société des Mines d’Or de Kilo- Moto (SOKIMO) grid in Bunia and Mongbwalu 
(11MW). SNEL also operates two hydro mini -grids in the cities of Kindu and Kisangani. Nevertheless, most of 
the potential remains untapped. 183 small hydro sites with a combined theoretical capacity of 1,110MW have 
been identified across 19 provinces. 57 sites with a potential of 165MW are located within 15km of the existing 
power network, and could contribute to develop the capacity and distribution network of the main gird.  Beyond 
the 15km buffer, 126 sites with a potential of 945MW have been identified that could contribute to the 
development of hydro- based mini grids.  
• Biomass: The DRC has solid potential for energy production from forestry and agricultural waste and methane, 
although no comprehensive studies exist. The DRC Renewable Energy Atlas provides high level estimates for 
land cover, distribution of crops, estimated energy from agricultural residue, livestock and biogas potential from 
livestock waste. On methane pote ntial, Lake Kivu has an estimated 50 billion m3 of methane reserves. Agricultural 
waste has potential as well, with an estimated 25 million hectares of cultivated arable land in 2013 (FAO). Manioc 
is the primary crop, with maize, cassava, plantain and sugarcane also grown. Agriculture is generally dominated 
by subsistence production and characterised by low crop productivity, low diversification and limited participation 
of formal private businesses. Livestock waste is a further potential source of energy. A 2010 CIAT survey in Kivu, 
which has a population of approximately one million, showed that 25% of households had sufficient livestock for 
implementing a biogas digester.  Utilization of these sources however, is limited by poor distribution channels, a 
lack of existing waste collection mechanisms, a lack of technical expertise and low average household income 
relative to technology costs.  Despite the significant potential of biomass for power production, only three biomass 
projects have been identified.  
• Solar: Solar energy is abundant in the DRC with higher potential in the south. Average daily irradiation ranges 
from 3.5 to 5.5 kWh/m2. In the provinces with the highest irradiance such as Kwilu, Lomami, Haut -Lomami, Kasaï -
Oriental, Lualaba, Tanganyka and Haut -Katanga the average daily solar irradiance reaches 5kWh/m2/day and 
up to 6.75kWh/m2. Solar energy has not been tapped to supply the main grid, but offers significant potential to 
                                                             
37 UNDP, SNV, SEforALL, DRC Renewable Energy Atlas, 2014.


---
*Page 40*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 74 
 
 C 
power mini -grids over the next few years. The main existing solar project is a 1MW hybrid plant developed by 
ENERKAC and powering SNEL’s  Kananga mini -grid in the Kasaï Central province.   
 
 C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange 
regulations.  
 
Existing regulatory regime  
The GoDRC is supporting strategic development and reforms in the power sector, which is in the midst of a significant 
transition. Key objectives have been outlined for the energy/electricity sector that include liberali zation , increased 
transparency, and the attract ion of a greater number of national and international private and public partners.  
The law n°14- 011 dated 17 June, 2014 (the Electricity Law,  “Loi sur l’Electricité”) regulates the electricity sector. It 
provides the background inter alia for a diversific ation of the energy mix; a focus on a greater energy productivity through 
energy conservation and efficiency measures; and energy pricing policies that reflect economic costs for both suppliers 
and users in the domestic energy market. The 2014 Electricity Law liberali zes the generation, transmission, distribution 
and export of electricity. SNEL was transformed into a commercial limited liability company in 2011. The 2014 Electricity 
Law has put an end to the de facto monopoly of SNEL in the generation, transmission, and distribution of power and the 
DRC energy market is now open to independent power producers subject to the compliance with the provisions of the 
Electricity Law .  
This law introduced the creation of two institutions under the supervision of the Ministry of Hydraulic Resources and 
Energy (Ministère de l’Energie et d es Ressources Hydrauliques ): 
• The Regulatory Authority (Autorité de Régulation de l’Electricité, “ARE”): will have the mandate of monitoring sector 
reforms and private sector participation (including tariff settlement). Decree n°16/013 dated 21 April 2016 provides 
for the creation, organisation and functioning of the ARE.  
• The Rural Electrification Agency (Agence Nationale des Services Energétiq ues Ruraux , “ANSER”): Will have the 
mandate of increasing access to energy services in rural and peri -urban areas and will be in charge of accompanying 
the private or community project leaders. A Decree n°16/014 dated 21 April 2016 provides for the creation, 
organisation and functioning of the ANSER.   
These two agencies are still in the process of being created. A preparatory committee has been established to set up the 
constitution of ARE. Meanwhile all the decisions that should be taken by ARE will  be directly taken by the MERH . A 
specific provision in the Concession Agreement states that ARE, once created and fully operational, will not be able to 
contest the tariffs agreed in the three concession agreements. It is assumed however that if any change in tariff occurs 
during the concession lifetime, it will have to be discussed with ARE if the latter is functional.  
  
Mini- grid c oncessions awarding authority  
The existing law does not state precisely who should be the Awarding Authority in the case of a  mini- grid (which covers 
both generation and distribution). Following a thorough analysis, the most suitable mechanism is through a service 
concession agreement or “délégation de service public”, which allows to have both the generation and distribution 
covered within the same concession contract and which makes the State the Awarding Authority rather than the Province.  
The Program  is to be handled by a single state agency within the MERH . This role should have been played by Autorité 
de Régulation de l’Electricité (ARE) but it is still in the process of being established. In its absence, this role is being 
carried out by UCM under the Ministry. This unit  is in charge of elect ricity projects in the country and has been actively 
associated with the DFID -Essor  A2E project.  UCM will be responsible for the oversight and management of the tendering 
process with the support of the DFID -Essor. The idea of centrali zing the process within the MERH  is key to this project 
since the objective is to simplify the upstream administrative process for the developer s during the tendering process and  
once the concession is awarded.   
 
Permits, licenses and land


---
*Page 41*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 74 
 
 C 
As mentioned above the private operator that will be selected will be entitled to produce and distribute electricity under a 
Service Concession Agreement (Délégation de Service Public) signed by the relevant conceding authority, which is the 
Central Government. The local authorities at the Provincial level where the mini -grids will be located will also acknowledge 
the award of the Service Concession Agreement. Furthermore, Under the 2014 Electricity Law , the plant and the grid 
connection assets are to be ow ned by the State and be financed and managed by the Concessionaire under the terms 
and conditions of the concession agreement. They will be built on the public domain (the rights of the Concessionaire to 
occupy the public domain will be granted under the c oncession agreement).  
 
Currency regime 
The local currency is the Congolese Franc (CDF), although the economy is highly dollari zed with around 90% of the 
banking sector deposits and lending conducted in US Dollars. In addition, most goods, services and financial activities 
are indexed to the US dollar.  As a multilateral development institution the AfDB enjoys a preferred creditor status which 
gives preferential access to foreign currency in case the country is imposing any restrictions in regard to the f oreign 
currency conversion. The currency conversion risk is low in the DRC as the economy is highly dollarized and US dollar 
is widely used in daily transactions.  
 
Privileges and Immunities  
Chapter VII of the Agreement Establishing the African Development Bank  describes the agreements among the  AfDB's 
member countries with regard to the status, immunities, exemptions and privileges.  This includes immunity of the Bank’s 
assets and archives, freedom of assets from restriction, privilege for communications, and exemption from taxation. The 
GCF resources will enjoy an equal treatment with the AfDB resources in terms of privileges and immunities.  The parties 
acknowledge that the Accredited Entity’s privileges and immunities bestowed upon it by the Agreement Est ablishing the 
African Development Bank are applicable to the GCF Proceeds and o ther GCF Funds held in trust and/or disbursed by 
the Accredited Entity for implementation of the activities  under this funding proposal . 
 
Tax regime  
Discussions about the tax structure that should apply to the projects are still ongoing with the MERH  and Ministry of 
Finance. The “Agence Nationale pour la Promotion des Investissements” (“ANAPI”) already defines a tax frame for 
projects related to energy . Import duties and VAT on equipment,  tools and spare parts destined exclusively for the 
production of electricity have been reduc ed. According to the law n° 004/2002 du 21/02/2002 of the investment code, a 
5-year exemption applies to  
• Corporate tax  
• Property tax  
• Entry tax on equipment goods  
 
Tariffs  
Under the 2014 Electricity Law , private operators are authorized to propose specific tariffs for each project. These tariffs 
will be established so that the project offers a reasonable tariff for the consumers while also offering a reasonable return 
to the operators. In the course of t he tender process, proposed tariffs will be submitted by the bidding operators to UCM. 
These tariffs will be captured in the Concession Agreement. The latter will indicate that the tariffs is to be calculated in 
USD but invoiced and paid in Congolese Franc s and will specify a clear indexation formula reflecting the local inflation 
and changes in the CDF/USD conversion rate. The indexation mechanism will take place on a quarterly basis thereby 
partially mitigating foreign exchange and inflation risks.  
 
Insur ance  
The AfDB, as a lender of record, will ensure that the each project is adequately insured as per standard industry practices.  
Specific insurance instruments may be sought  to protect the project/ sponsors from  classical political risks (e.g. MIGA).


---
*Page 42*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 74 
 
 C 
 Enabling Factors  Limiting  Factors  
Planning and 
institutional 
setting  • Private sector is allowed to operate in the 
energy sector.  Some private sector led mini -grids 
are operational.  
• The 2014 E lectricity  Law aims to foster private 
investment  and streamline administrative 
processes by transferring responsibilities to 
provincial governments.  • Complex institutional setting, with multiple 
agencies involved in planning and delivery 
including at the provincial and central  
government levels.  
• Limited p lanning capabilities hamper 
development of nationwide  electrification 
strategies.  
Data  
availability  • A Renewable Energy Atlas for DRC was 
produced in 2014 by UNDP and is currently 
being updated. The Atlas  is available in PDF 
format online.  • The information contained in the RE Atlas is not 
made available in any GIS -friendly format.  
• Many ministries and agencies do not have a 
website and relevant sector information is not 
available online.  
Licensing  • Private operators can build and operate mini -
grids,  subject to a government concession.  • According to the E lectricity  Law 2014 all 
transmission and distribution activities require a 
concession, which in the case of local projects 
are granted by the provincial authorities. No  
provisions are made to s treamline the installation 
of small rural  mini- grids.  
• Concessions must be an object of public 
tenders, limiting the  ability of new entrants to 
deploy small -mini grids in rural areas.  
Tariffs  • Mini -grid operators can propose tariffs that 
guarantee an appropriate return, but these are 
subject to government  approval.  
 • Tariff affordability for poor consumers. This will 
be partly mitigated by the introduction of a social 
tariff structure (see section F.1) . It is also 
expected that a competitive tender process will 
effectively drive down the overall tariff level.  
Subsidies 
and 
incentives  • Import duties and Valued Added Tax (VAT) 
have been lifted for generation equipment 
including renewable generation.  • No specific incentives for mini -grid projects 
exist.  
Power 
purchasing 
agreements  
(PPA)  • There is limited experience with PPAs for small 
scale  plants. Hydroforce and Enerkac sell 
electricity to the SNEL in Kananga  • Standard PPAs and provisions for green 
generation projects  do not exist, although a 
standardized Concessions Agreement for green 
mini- grid is developed with the DFID -Essor A2E 
support  
Arrival of the  
grid • Mini -grids are subject to government 
concessions of up to 30 years.  
• Most of the country is not covered by the 
national grid and will remain so for the 
foreseeable future.  • No provisions exist ed specifically protecting 
mini- grids from the arrival of the main grid.  
(However , a standardized Concessions 
Agreement for this P rogram will include clauses 
specifying the arrangement upon arrival of the 
main grid. ) 
Technical  
rules  • There are general norms and standards to be 
respected for any electricity project . • The general norms and standards are 
appropriate for utility  scale  mini- grids, but are too 
stringent and limit the potential  activities of 
modern mini -grid companies targeting rural 
areas.  
Mobile  
services  • Mobile money service is available through 
various  operators.  • Mobile coverage must be strengthened.  
Table 7. Summary of the DRC’s regulatory and policy  environment for mini -grids38 
                                                             
38 Adjusted from the AfDB’s Mini Grid Market Opportunity Assessment: Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, 2017.


---
*Page 43*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 74 
 
 C 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the 
organization structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, 
executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure. Also describe which of these structures are 
already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish 
them.  Describe construction and supervision methodology with k ey contractual agreements.  Describe operational 
arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction. If applicable, provide the credit 
analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural mitigant s to cover the counterparty risks.  
 
 
 
The AfDB will be responsible for the overall oversight of the framework implementation and will report to the GCF per the 
terms to be agreed under the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) . For 
managing the GCF resources, a GCF Account  will be set -up within the AfDB as a stand- alone facility and the Bank’s role 
will be to administer the funds. Under this scheme, the AfDB will be a direct lender to the projects in its capacity  as an 
Accredited Entity  (Figure 13, Figure 14 ). 
 
The pipeline mini- grid projects will be selected through a competitive tendering process (tendering process and criteria 
outlined in detail under Section C.3). The AfDB will apply its credit evaluation, due diligence and approval procedures in 
appraising potential clients, and only those sub- projects qualified under the AfDB’s internal criteria will be eligible for 
investment under this framework.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Overall  structure  of the AfDB -GCF Program  and the flow of funds


---
*Page 44*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 74 
 
 C 
 
Figure 14. Relationships between the Project Company (SPV) and parties involved39 
 
For the TA grants component, the AfDB (Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Department) will be the Executing  
Entity whereas the activities  will be implemented in partnership with UCM under the MERH . Fund management and 
procurement will follow relevant policies and rules of the AfDB , guided by the grant agreement  to be signed between 
UCM and the AfDB. While TA grantee  will procure and contrac t consultants and service providers, the AfDB will hold and 
manage the grant resources and make a direct payment to consultants/service providers (more detail under section F.4) 
(Figure 15).    
 
 
Figure 15. Technical Assistance implementation structure  
                                                             
39 In addition, each SPV will enter into the EPC and O&M agreements with the contractors.  
 
    
SPVState/Ministry 
of energyLenders Sponsors
Households
SM Es / shops
AnchorsConcession 
agreement
Independent 
engineer•Handles t he tendering process
•Signs t he agreement
•Handles land rights and 
easement s with local authoritiesLocal 
Authorities
Appoints and hiresAppointsConnection 
and sales 
agreement


---
*Page 45*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 74 
 
 C  
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation40 
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable  in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below  is used, please refer to the act ivities as numbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed.   
 
 2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  202341 
TASK    Q0 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q 
10 Q 
11 Q 
12 Q 
13 Q  
14 Q 
15 Q 
16 Q 
17 Q 
18 Q 
19 Q 
20 
Component 1  and 2 . Three  Green Mini-G rid Projects  
GCF Board Approval     X                     
AfDB Board Approval     X                     
Projects Tendering –
Requ est for Qualification     X X                    
Offer of AfDB -GCF 
financing  package42      X                   
Projects Tendering – 
Reques t for Proposal       X X                  
Evaluation & Selection of 
project sponsors        X X                 
Financial Close          X X               
Construc tion           X X X X X X X X X X X    
Commercial Operation 
Starting Date                      X X   
                                                             
40 In addition to this timetable, financial and operational reporting schedule will be specified in the term sheet.  
41 The Program is designed with a five- year implementation period (2019- 2023), to allow sufficient time to deal with possible delay in projects selection, 
financial close and construction up to commercial operations.  
42 AfDB- GCF financing package and its indicative terms will be made available to pre- qualified bidders, at the Request for Proposal stage, in order to 
encourage sponsors’ participation to the Program.


---
*Page 46*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 74 
 
 C 
Component 3. Technical A ssistance Grant  
GCF Board Approval     X                     
Grant agreement      X X                   
3-1. Green mini -grid 
enabli ng framework 
and capacity building       X X X X X X X X X X X X        
(i) Develop GMG  
strategy an d regulations       X X X X X X X X            
(ii) Develop mini -grid 
standards and guidelines       X X X X X X X X            
(iii) Establish GMG  tariff 
guideline       X X X X X X X X            
(iv) Train key institutions  
to be able to manage 
and implement GMGs       X X X X X X X X X X X X        
(v) Train project 
developer  on GMGs       X X X X X X X X            
(vi) Build a local RE 
ecosy stem by training 
local technicians/ SMEs            X X X X X X         
(vii) Gender action plan 
implementation        X X X X X X X            
3-2. Green mini -grid 
projec t development 
support       X X X X X X X X X X X X        
(i) Support three solar 
based mini -grids  under 
the Essor A2E       X X X X X X X             
(ii) Conduct feasibility 
studies for other 
selected potential  GMGs             X X X X X X X        
(iii) Develop an 
investment  and tender 
plan for UCM ’s GMGs          X X X X


---
*Page 47*
---

RESTRICTED  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 74 
 
 C 
Reporting schedule 43 
APR          X    X    X    X    
Inception report       X                   
Interim evaluation                X X         
Completion report (fi nal 
APR)44                        
X 
Final evaluation45                         
X 
                                                             
43 In addition to the proj ect reports, financial reports will be submitted as per the agreed AMA and FAA.  
44 Completion report is due within 3 months after the end of the relevant reporting period.  
45 Final Evaluation report is due within 6 months after the project completion.


---
*Page 48*
---

RESTRICTED   
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 74 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme , in consideration of  other alternatives . 
 
NDC implementation:  The DRC’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) indicates climate change as one of the 
major threats to sustainable development in the country. The Go DRC is conditionally committed to reduce its GHG  
emissions by 17% by 2030 compared to a business -as-usual (BAU) scenario (which is estimated at 430 MtCO2eq in 
2030) thereby avoiding over 70 MtCO2eq per year of emissions. Albeit the large share of the emission reduction potential 
of the country is in the land use and f orestry sector, providing clean and aff ordable electricity to underserved areas will 
not only contribute to greening the future power supply of the country but will also contribute to avoiding emissions  from 
alternative polluting electricity sources such as diesel and kerosene.   
 
Barriers to renewable energy ( RE) investment :  There are several obstacles for investment in the RE sector in the DRC, 
ranging from lack of a robust legal, regulatory and institutional framework to poor investment climate and complex trade 
barriers that have prevailed in the country. In terms electricity provision, the government have mainly focused on the 
promotion and development of medium - and large- scale  hydropower project spearheaded by the utility SNEL with little 
to no incentives for national and international private sector operator s in the RE  sector to enter the market and contribute 
to national electricity expansion. A few local private companies  are operating several diesel -based power plant and a 
few small hydropower plant s to provide electricity service to households and anchor customers in the mining sector. 
However , these are site specific and do not meet the need of the population throughout the country . Solar PV hybrid 
mini- grids can be deployed relatively quickly and at a competitive  cost compared to the alternative diesel genset  solution. 
Albeit the cost of Solar PV has dropped in the past decade the initial investment cost is still relatively high in the DRC 
and thus out of reach from most of the electricity -starved population.  Policy and investment  incentives for sustainable 
electricity projects remain very weak, and a shift toward renewable- based low emission energy system is highly unlikely 
in near future without focused and substantial interventions.  
 
Justification of GCF funding request : The public sector has limited fiscal capacity to expand the infrastructure for 
electricity generation, transmission and distribution while private sector investors are reluctant to invest in the DRC 
energy sector due to high risks perceived. As a result, only approximately 10% of people have access to electricity 
nationally and the regional disparity is high. Some of the key barriers to electrification in the DRC include the 
government’s poor financial situation, political insecurity and weak regulatory env ironment. The barriers for deploying 
renewable energy are even higher, as the technology is still new to the market and there has been no demonstrated 
renewable energy -based business model in the country, for both on- grid and off -grid. The national utility  company, SNEL 
(Société Nationale d’Electricité), is in a financially vulnerable position hence not capable of driving the national 
electrification efforts.  
All these circumstances combined, it is extremely challenging to develop a bankable energy project  in the DRC market. 
Green mini -grid led by private sector  is a solution with high potential but the concept and business model needs to be 
tested to give comforts to most of the investors including debt financiers. Even if financiers decide to bear the ris ks and 
make investment, high interest rates from commercial investors will inevitably raise the end- consumer tariff to an 
unacceptable level so that end- users will not be able to afford to pay. This is exactly why the GCF is needed:  primarily 
to fill the f inancing gap in terms of volume and price. Involvement of the GCF will enable a financing scheme that 
will offer long -term and reasonably priced loans to innovative green mini -grid projects in the DRC. This will 
make the project bankable with affordable ta riff as risks decreased and investors are crowded -in with 
confidence.  
The Program aims to ensure cost -effectiveness and efficiency by introducing an adequate financial structure that is 
carefully designed to meet multiple needs. The AfDB -GCF blended debt will be offered at a reasonable cost and a long 
tenor to ensure that the  end-user tariff is acceptable. The GCF’s concessional financing in terms of pricing is critical for 
the entire structure to be financially viable since the cost of the project and ass ociated risks are high by its nature. 
Without the GCF’s concessional loan, there will be a direct impact to the tariff and the project will have to bear significan t 
market risks while transferring economic burden to the consumers. Hence, the GCF’s participation will be a key enabler 
for the projects to gain bankability at an acceptable tariff.


---
*Page 49*
---

RESTRICTED   
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 74 
 
 
 
 D 
By enabling the projects, GCF’s involvement will directly contribute toward emissions reduction in the target 
towns where the use of micro -scale diesel generators an d kerosene light dominate the electricity sector.  
Furthermore, once a green mini -grid business model backed by a standardized legal framework and a robust tender 
process is demonstrated with GCF’s supports, a vibrant green mini -grid market with private inv estment will be opened 
up for the entire country and the model will be replicated. GCF’s value addition at this early phase is thus 
transformational.  
 
D.2. Exit Strategy   
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability  will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support  from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long- term financial viability 
demonstrated in E .6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable) . 
 
 
Qualifying projects under the P rogram will be fully evaluated using the AfDB’s internal credit approval process to ensure 
the soundness of the projects in the long term. The evaluation will include the financial assessments, strategic fit, 
regulatory compliance, environmental, social and gender considerations all aimed at ensuring that approval for the 
projects is based on a comprehensive due diligence exercise. Legal documentations covering the loan structure and 
covenants will ensure the repayments of the loans are made on time and acc ording to schedule.  
  
Once the funds have been disbursed and the loans are running, the projects will be monitored by the AfDB’s portfolio 
management department to ensure that project is being executed as planned and the mini- grids are being managed in 
a way that does not jeopardi ze the investments of the Program. Such periodic monitoring activities allow the AfDB to 
intervene and offer support as and when required to ensure the objectives are achieved. The debt will be paid over a 
period of 15- 18 years th rough payment made by end users comprises of households, businesses and anchor customers 
such as water suppliers  (Regideso)  and industries. The use of prepaid metering infrastructure with mobile money will 
mitigate collection risks of consumers.  
 
In terms of replicability, this P rogram seeks to set a precedent in the field of private sector led green mini -grids 
deployment in a country where there is big market potential for green mini -grid. The demonstration effect is expected to 
promote private sector participation in further developing green mini -grids in the DRC , enabling market transformation 
and paradigm shift.


---
*Page 50*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where relevant and 
applicable.  This sec tion should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub- criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework . When applicable, specify the degree to which the 
project/programme avoids lock -in of long- lived, high emission or cl imate -vulnerable infrastructure.  
 
 
The proposed Program will finance three solar PV -based mini- grid power plants of around 5 to 10 MW each with battery 
storage and distribution network s. The Program  is estimated to avoid 560,000 tCO2eq over a 20 years operation lifespan 
(see methodology in E.1.2)46. The emissions reduction will directly contribute to attain the DRC’s commitment outlined in 
its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to reduce emissions by 70 MtCO2eq/year by 2030 with appropriate 
international ass istance as compared to the BAU (430 MtCO2eq in 2030). Its replication to other towns in the DRC will 
provide further contribution to the NDC emissions reduction objectives of the country.  
 
The Program presents an environmentally viable and economically cost effective alternative to speedily 
implementable decentrali zed diesel power. The Program also  prevents a shift to the intensified use of diesel 
generator and biomass in off- grid towns by providing an alternative solution.  This business model  has a high 
potential to be  replicated and scalable in the country and in the region. Ten million people in 141 towns in the DRC are 
the priority targets  (see Section C.5) , who are living with limited electricity access relying on the diesel generators  and 
kerosene l ights . The model  can be replicated  to other non- priority towns in the future and it is estimated that up to 51 
million people in the DRC  can be connected to mini -grids once a viable model is established. F urther supported by the 
TA, this P rogram will enabl e the transfor mation of the DRC energy sector by opening up a market for green mini -grid 
investments and thereby accelerating low emission development. In addition, t hrough the provision of constant, affordable 
and sustainable electricity, the Program  will support socio- economic development of these towns . Essential service 
providers and industrial players (e.g. water suppliers and SMEs) will be connected to green mini -grids in addition to 
households, which will unlock the potential for local economic growt h and bring high development impacts.   
 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 
eq) to be reduced or avoided  Annual  28,000  tCO 2 eq (average)  
Lifetime  560,000 tCO 2 eq 
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries , disaggregated by gender  (reduced 
vulnerability or increased resilience);  Total  At least 150,000 people  directly 
benefited from low -emission 
electricity  
                                                             
46 A 20 years concession period is assumed but it could be extended to up to 25 years, subject to the final 
decision by the GoDRC.


---
*Page 51*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
Percentage 
(%) Less than 1%  
(out of 78.7 million47) 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  • Proportion of low -emission power supply in a jurisdiction or market  
• MWs of low emission energy capacity installed  
• Number of additional green mini -grid projects developed and reached financial close following 
technical assistance  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
 
GHG  accounting methodology : In order to estimate the total GHG emissions reduction of the three projects, the off -grid 
electrification methodology of CDM Standard baseline AMS -1.A and AMS -I.L (for electrification of rural communities using 
renewable energy) is applied. These methodol ogies are suitable for this project given the fact the three localities are not 
connected to the national grid and are not likely to be connected in the short to medium term. Also historically, the 
electricity provided in these towns by SNEL and the munici pality was through the use of diesel generators only functioning 
for a few hours and only covering a small portion of the town. It is worth noting that these SNEL- owned diesel system s 
have stopped providing electricity for more than 10 years ago and businesses and households supply themselves using 
their own gensets . 
 
GHG accounting assumptions  and calculation  
 
Assumptions  
 
Given the current electricity access rate is extremely low, one must compare the CO 2 emission implied by the project's 
technology mix to the CO 2 emission levels which would be produced if the same amounts of electricity were produced 
by diesel. A detailed demand study was performed for each town with three scenarios being developed:  
• A low growth scenario with only 16 hours of electricity generation and consumption throughout the 20 years of 
operation  
• An optimum scenario with 24 hours of electricity generation and consumption including steady demand growth  
• A high cas e scenario with 24 hours of electricity generation and consumption with rapid demand growth  
 
The optimum scenarios data were used to calculate both the baseline emissions and the project emissions. Given the 
historical use of diesel generator to provide el ectricity and the relative low capital expenditure for generation, the baseline 
emissions is computed assuming that diesel genset s provide all of the electricity generated to meet the optimum scenario 
demand.  
 
The following assumptions were made to estimate the baseline and project emissions :  
• An emission factor of 0.8 tCO 2/MWh has been assumed and which correspond to relatively efficient gensets.  
• Final electricity consumption and PV penetration modelled with the HOMER software (one of the leading 
software for mini -grid power plant sizing) based on the optimum scenario elaborated for the three towns  
• The yearly electricity generation is calculated for the 20 years of operation.  
 
Baseline and Project emissions reduction per site:  
 
Bumba  
• Baseline average annual emissions = 17,756 tCO 2eq/year    (a) 
• Project average annual emissions = 3,149 tCO 2eq/year     (b) 
• Project average annual emissions reduction = 14,600 tCO 2eq/year   (a-b) 
                                                             
47 World Bank data, 2016.


---
*Page 52*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
• Project total emissions reduction (over 20 years)  = 292,000 tCO 2eq/year  20*(a -b) 
 
Gemena  
• Baseline average annual emissions = 5,558 tCO 2eq/year                 (c)  
• Project average annual emissions = 1,080 tCO 2eq/year     (d) 
• Project average annual emissions reduction = 4,470 tCO 2eq/year                  (c -d) 
• Project total emis sions reduction (over 20 years)  = 89,530 tCO 2eq/year               20*(c -d) 
 
Isiro  
• Baseline average annual emissions = 10,596 tCO 2eq/year    (e)  
• Project average annual emissions = 1,657 tCO 2eq/year     (f)  
• Project average annual emissions reduction = 8,940 tCO 2eq/year                (e -f) 
• Project total emissions reduction (over 20 years)  = 178,785 tCO 2eq/year  20*(e- f) 
 
The project s should generate an average  of about 5,900 tCO 2/year and a total of 118,000 tCO 2 over 20 years. Should 
the same electricity generation profile come from a 100% -based diesel power plant, the emissions would go up to 678, 000 
tCO 2 over 20 years (with an average of 34,000 tCO2/year). Therefore, the project is estimated to avoid a total of  
560,000 tCO 2 eq. 
 
 
Expected total number of beneficiaries : The project is expected to connect 21,200  households and 2,100 SMEs over the 
first five years with AfDB -GCF direct investment. Average size of household in the DRC is 5.3 people48. It is estimated 
that each enterprise has 20 employee on average, which is close to the definition of a micro -enterprise than a SME ( A 
SME is commonly defined as  an enterprise employing less than 250 people). With this number, it can be estimated that 
at least 1 50,000 people will  benefit directly from the clean electricity generated from the project s. 
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s  expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate- resilient 
development pathways could be scaled- up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish 
it. 
 
The country is facing serious energy deficit whereby the population with access to electricity from the national grid is less  
than 1% in rural areas and around 10% nationally, while the average in Sub- Saharan African is 24.6%. The DRC’s 
electricity generation heavily relies on hydropower, rendering the whole system vulnerable to variabilities in rainfalls. The 
government’s efforts have mainly focused on large on- grid hydro project s, and r enewable based off -grid projects such as 
solar PV mini -grid still face a high barrier for financing and implementation. Off -grid towns, some of them with large 
population and sizeable industrial activities, rely on micro- scale diesel generators and kerosene lights for their energy 
use. New transaction models need to be developed, since weak utility off -taker (SNEL) would not allow to structure a 
bankable private operation in the DRC  and there exists  no clear plan for grid expansion.  
 
The AfDB -GCF Green Mini -Grid Program for the DRC will provide senior debt to selected private mini -grid projects under 
the DFID -supported Essor A2E Phase 1. This Program will reduce current and future emissions in the target towns and 
enable the transformation of the DRC energy sector by accelerating low emission energy access which will bring  together 
high development outcomes. As a direct outcome, total 2 3,300 households and SMEs will be connected to electricity , 
benefitting from sustainable energy and moving away from diesel and kerosene. The Program will be a test bed for an 
innovative mini -grid design, demonstrating a viable model for private -led, renewable based mini -grid financing 
                                                             
48 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2017.


---
*Page 53*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
which will be replicable in  the DRC , other Sub -Saharan African countries  and small island developing countries . 
At the same time the experience will strengthen the GoDRC’s institutional and regulatory systems to adequately manage 
mini- grids  and associated technologies (e.g. battery storage)  and to crowd -in private financing. Over time, this will enable 
the DRC to increase energy access for the off -grid population with renewable energy solutions  without capital -intensive 
grid expansion or large hydro development , leading the country t o a low carbon development pathway.   
 
A standardiz ed and robust financial and legal package is being structured for this initiative, which will allow similar project 
tenders to be easily r epeated across the DRC, using a harmonized approach. The ambition of  the Program  if the pilot 
phase proves to be successful is to replicate the tender offer to 10 to 15 other large towns in the DRC.  The replication 
phase would benefit from the experience of the pilot phase, taking into account key lessons learned, and from  its 
international publicity with DFIs and other investors, unlocking further capital funding.  A number of potential provinces for 
replication have already been identified and detail studies will be conducted in due course, which will be supported by 
this Program’s TA . With a large number of cities and towns remaining without access to electricity and far from the main 
grid, there is a huge potential to scale up this green mini -grid experience throughout the country.  
 
 
 
Figure 16. Theory  of Change  
 
Aligned with the investment program, AfDB- GCF TA  will invest  in making enabling framework for green mini -grid projects 
in the DRC, capacity building for key stakeholders, and next rounds of mini- grid project development.  Through this grant, 
key stakeholders will be able to manage and implement green mini -grid projects and especially UCM’s tendering capacity 
enhancement is expected so that private- led green mini -grid projects can be boost ed up in other regions in DRC as a 
standardized model. On the policy side, green mini grid strategy, regulations and guidelines will be prepared so that a


---
*Page 54*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
sustainable green mini -grid market will be built.  The TA also aims to build local technical capacity for the RE and mini -
grid management , creating a foundation for the local green mini -grid ecosystem.  
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions.  
 
The Program will generate knowledge that will inform the design and implementation of similar green mini -grid programs 
across the country and in the region. An innovative  large (MW -scale) green mini -grid tendering program structure that 
leverages internat ional financial institutions, key government institutions (UCM, MERH , ANSER and benefiting provincial 
government), and investors will have a high demonstration effect and set the bar for replication in urban/peri -urban 
settings and  in islands . Together  with learning from the TA component, lessons learned from the green mini -grid tendering 
process  and financing will be distilled and shared systematically through the AfDB and GCF knowledge network. Primarily 
this will involve the knowledge sharing with the DRC, inviting all the relevant stakeholders in the energy, financial and 
climate change sector.  
 
During the implementation of this  pilot program, knowledge will be generated and embedded within the institutions that 
are responsible or have critical roles to play for scaling- up sustainable energy generation and distribution in  the DRC. 
Capacity building under the TA component will ens ure that public officials and relevant stakeholders capacity are 
enhanced to integrate green mini -grid into the national energy system.  
 
The AfDB and DFID’s Essor A2E have a plan to scale up and replicate this model in other DRC regions and/or other 
countr ies where needs are identified. This Program  is critical to build a commercially viable model for future AfDB 
engagement in the sector. The experience in the DRC will demonstrate what works and what does not work  - the 
knowledge that scarcely exists in the Sub-Saharan African context. The AfDB is determined to play a role of knowledge 
broker, to ensure that the ambitious goals under the New Deal on Energy for Africa can be attained with continuous 
learning and scaling up.  
 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program. Describe how 
the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include:  
• Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region  
• Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme  
 
Innovativeness : The objective of this initiative is to improve access to electricity with low -emission technologies  for people 
across large urban areas in the country, located remotely from main grid connect ions in the South (Inga- Kolwezi) and the 
Eastern parts of the country (Goma area) and counting between 100,000 and 300,000 inhabitants  each, through the 
auctioning to the private sector of new concessions covering the design, financing, construction and operation of large 
urban independent grids supplied by solar hybrid power generation systems. Such concessions are the first of a kind in 
terms of business model, as the size of the projects exceeds typical mini -grid projects which have been developed so far 
in the DRC and in other African countries, rather targeting rural areas.  The current initiative has an implicit objective of 
accelerating, optimizing and standardising the development of mini -grids across the country,  through providing bankable 
opportunities to the private sector, based on a robust structure which can be replicated to various locations.  
Sustainability of outcomes and results beyond completion of the intervention:  Through this P rogram, the capacity of key 
sector institutions, especially Project Management Coordination Unit (UCM) under the MERH  will be enhanced. UCM’s 
role in coordinating and conducting green mini -grid project tendering process will equip them with requisite skill s and


---
*Page 55*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
enable them to coordinate and replicate private -led mini grid projects in the future by their own capacity. This Program is 
in line with the Electricity Law of 2014 that allows for the concession of generation and distribution to the private sector.  
This has yet to be applied in the area of green mini -grid and the P rogram will help reinforce the framework in place and 
make the sector attractive for private investors and developer s by decreasing perceived and real risks through the 
implementation of a clear, robust and transparent tendering procedure. In the long term, it will demonstrate the capacity 
of the government to process tender to procure private concessionaires, establish the needed contractual documents 
and agreements in a satisfactory and ba nkable way thereby reducing uncertainties and costs . The complementary TA 
will add further support for  the enabling framework, capacity building and mini- grid project dev elopment.  
  
Mobilization of other relevant actors : This pilot Program  will mobilize the participation and collaboration from a diverse 
and comprehensive range of actors in the country’s energy, climate and financial sectors. This includes the public 
authorities, RE project companies and industry players, investors, civil society groups, research and sector experts, and 
development partners including DFIs.  
 
Market development and transformation: As described above, the P rogram makes a crucial contribution to the creation 
and development of green mini -grid market in the DRC.  
 
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, 
and/or improve climate- responsive planning and development.  
 
 
The GoDRC  has made policy reforms to address the challenges of the electricity subsector. The Growth and Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP 1  and 2, adopted in 2006 and 2012 respectively) underlines the importance of the 
energy sector in the socio- economic development of the country. The ultimate objective is to ensure that access to reliable 
electricity reaches the entire nation. In order to achieve this objective, the Ministry ( MERH ) drew up a "Five -Year Action 
Plan 2007 -  2011" under which it formulated a new energy policy and regulatory framework to facilitate rapidly expanded 
access to energy services for the entire population. In 2014, the government approved a new electricity regime (Electricity 
Act 2014) aimed at attracting private sector investment through measures including sector liberalization, the 
establishment of the sector regulatory authority and the agency for rural energy servic es. The government is now in the 
process to operationalizing those two institutions with technical assistance from the USAID.  
 
Through this Program, the capacity of key sector institutions, especially Project Management Coordination Unit (UCM) 
under the MERH will be enhanced. The TA aims to  create enabling environment by developing green mini -grid strategy, 
regulations, standards and guidelines in the DRC. This will involve drafting and validation of mini -grid strategy document 
that defines the strategic di rection and policy alignment of the developing green mini -grid sector, and outlines the 
institutional arrangements, financial incentive measures and regulatory framework.  To this end, the TA will facilitate the 
replication of the green mini -grid model across the country.  The improvement of the mini -grid regulatory framework and 
policies will be also guided by the learnings from the three pilot projects under this Program.   
 
 
  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact


---
*Page 56*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
 
Environmental co- benefits:  The implementation of these green mini -grids will allow the reduction of GHG emissions from 
diesel -based generation and will reduce indoor air pollution from the use of kerosene lamps for lighting. Pollutant 
emissions such as nitrogen oxides, non- methane volatile organic compounds and sulphur dioxide from diesel combustion 
will be reduced altogether .  
 
Social co -benefits:  The availability of electricity will have positive social and welfare impact, particularly promoting 
education and health by powering pu blic facilities such as schools and hospitals. Lack of power will no longer constitute 
barriers to practical teaching methods that require electrical appliances for optimal learning, thus higher education 
outcomes can be expected. Access to electricity wil l further allow for a wider use of ICT and facilitate access to information 
and knowledge. Electricity also has positive effects on the time available for children to study with improved lighting.   
 
For the impact on health, healthcare centers will benefit  from the projects as the current poor access to electricity 
compromise the frequenc y of medical interventions and the conservation of medical products. Indirectly, a better access 
to electricity may have a positive impact on health by improving the munici pal water system run by Regideso. With access 
to a viable source of electricity, R egideso should be able to provide a continuous service and expand its network through 
the city. The source of household drinking water has important public health implications. Water from springs/lakes/rivers 
or wells may be contaminated with disease- causing bacteria. This is less likely for water distributed from a municipal 
water system.  Reduction of toxic emissions from diesel and kerosene also brings substantial health benefit. In addition, 
electricity will lower the fire risk from the use of kerosene lamp and wood for lighting, and reduce the incidence of 
respiratory and eye diseases.  
 
Economic co- benefits:  The availability of electricity will allow for a number of households and businesses to access a 
more reliable and affordable source of power when compared to the current alternatives.  These three towns rely mostly 
on small auto producers with diesel generators, on barely operating SNEL network and solar home systems for  a few 
households. The electricity supply depends on diesel , making the kWh price reach between 1.20$/kWh and 1.50$/kWh.  
Local businesses will be able to increase production and reduce energy related cost in their daily operations, while 
households will r educe the use of inefficient and expensive means of lighting such as kerosene lantern and dry batteries 
lamps thereby inducing economic savings. Further, the P rogram will create job and income opportunities related to 
operation, repair and maintenance of t he system; and reduce vulnerability of households and businesses to fossil fuel 
price fluctuations. On a macro level, the GoDRC will benefit from savings in direct investment in electricity expansion.  
 
Gender -sensitive development impact:  Various studies i ndicate that female- headed businesses generally face more 
impediments than men in accessing grid electricity – experiences suggest that women entrepreneurs can face 
discrimination e.g. in the form of delays in obtaining electrical connections, and/or the expectation that they will be willing 
to pay bribes to access those services.  Women - especially poor ones living in rural areas -  generally face specific energy 
constraints within the household: as they tend to be primarily responsible for chores, they are generally tasked with 
fetching wood, charcoal or other forms of fuel, and burning it to prepare food for all family members –  this not only 
generates significant demand on their time, but also exposes them to increased health risks derived from unsafe bur ning 
practices.  
 
Access to energy allows for more efficient products to be available in the household, from basic ones such as solar 
lanterns to more sophisticated appliances -  these can significantly reduce the burden on women, and release their time 
for more productive, income- generating activities including outside the household. In terms of comfort and protection, 
electrification can lead to the installation of public lighting which in turn increases the perceived level of security of 
households, espec ially of women. Improved access to electricity can also then positively affect women’s educational 
outcomes, which in turn are key for their employment and economic advancement prospects as lighting increases the 
availability of time for studying.  In order  to ensure gender -balanced green mini -grid and energy sector development, a 
Gender Action Plan is developed and implemented as part of this Program .


---
*Page 57*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
N/A 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
• Need for strengthening instituti ons and implementation capacity  
 
Electrification and development levels are very uneven in the DRC. The population with access to electricity is 44% in 
the capital city, Kinshasa, while less than 1% in rural area. In the DRC, the accumulated delays in investments in 
power infrastructure, degradation of hydropower plants, over -reliance in unaffordable thermal power generation in 
provincial cities together with a rapid increase in electricity demand resulted in large electricity shortages. Most cities 
(with population over 100,000 inhabitant s) in the country are not connected to the national grid, and are not likely to 
be in the mid- term. Economic activities of the targeted towns, primarily driven by agricultural production and agro-
industrial processing with individuals or small businesses , are hampered by the lack of stable electricity supply. This 
is an important barrier to economic growth, as it poses a major constraint to businesses  and productive activities of 
households . Access to electricity to these underserved urban areas is therefor e a pressing issue to be dealt with as it 
will contribute to improve the living conditions of these population and be a vector for growth. Public investment 
capacity by the GoDRC to expand energy access is seriously constrained due to its tight budget situation. Political 
and economic instabilities have deterred participation from private companies and investors as well. Overall there is a 
lack of capital for power projects in the DRC, which is more severe when it comes to mini -grid projects marked by high 
perceived risks.  
 
There are barely 2,000 connections (household and non- residential consumers) in the three target  towns  currently. 
These three off -grid towns rely mostly on small auto producers with diesel generators, on barely operating SNEL 
network and solar home systems for a few households. These are individuals or small traders who once having 
acquired a generator for their own needs, sell their excess electricity within their local neighborhood. The electricity 
supply depends on diesel , making the kW h price reach between 1.20$/kWh and 1.50$/kWh. For their day -to-day 
needs, households mainly rely on coal and wood for the cooking and on kerosene lamps and battery torches  for the 
lighting . Without any alternative energy solutions, fossil fuel and biomass  dependence will only intensify in the se towns.  
 
 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional 
framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
 
The Program is consistent and closely aligned with the objectives of the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 
and developmental plans of the DRC. The DRC is committed to avoided over 70 MtCO 2eq per year GHG emissions 
by 2030 through the deployment of renewable energy. In order to achieve the target, the central and provincial 
government of DRC are supporting strategic reforms in the power sector that includes liberalization, increased 
transparency, and the attraction of a greater number of national and international private and public partners.


---
*Page 58*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities  with respect to the 
activities that  they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
The African Development Bank (AfDB) has an extensive experience in financing RE projects in Sub- Saharan Africa. 
While the summary of the AfDB’s energy sector involvement both in the continent and in the DRC  is prov ided in Section 
C.4, below are some of the key highlights of  recent RE financing led by the AfDB:  
• The Ouarzazate Concentra ted Solar Power (CSP) Complex in Morocco for which the AfDB has committed 
EUR 134 million  as well as USD 219 million  from the Clean Investment Funds (CIF) for the two phases 
respectively in 2012 and 2014, aims to produce 500 MW of solar power. The 160 MW first phase was 
inaugurated in 2016 while the second phase of 350 MW is under construction – which will make Ouarzaza te 
one of the largest solar complexes in the world.  
• Three Solar PV IPPs in Egypt with a total installed capacity of 50 MW each for which the AfDB has approved 
UA 34 million  from its own resources and UA 5 million  mobilized from the Global Environment Faci lity (GEF) 
in 2017, in support to  the implementation of the government’s Feed- in-Tariff (FiT) Progra m. The program was 
first conceived by the AfDB in late 2016 and the three projects were  approv ed by the  Board of Directors in 
September 2017.  
• The initial development of Kenya’s Menengai geothermal steam field for which the AfDB has committed 
around UA 80 million  as well as USD 25 million  from the CIF in 2011, has the potential to produce steam for 
around 105 MW of generating capacity. Building on this support, Kenya has selected the first group of the 
IPPs in the Menengai field that are working towards financial close by 2018. The Bank is continuing to support 
this by providing partial risk guarantees (PRGs) to backstop the obligations of the state -owned entities vis -à-
vis the IPPs. The PRG program of USD 12.7 million  was approved by the Bank in 2014.  
• The 100 MW Sere Wind Farm that was developed by South Africa’s national utility, for which the AfDB has 
provided USD 45 million  as well as USD 50 million  from the CIF through its sovereign lending window,  
commenced operation in 2016.  
• The 100 MW Xina concentrated solar IPP in South Africa –  that has a storage component to help meet peak 
demand in the evening – is now in commercial operation. In 2014,  the AfDB has approved a senior loan of 
USD 100 million  along with a senior loan of USD 41.5 million  from the CIF.  
• The 120 MW Itezhi -Tezhi Hydro Power Plant is situated at the existing Itezhi Tezhi dam on the Kafue River in 
Zambia. The plant is developed b y a joint venture SPV equally owned by ZESCO and a private sponsor. The 
SPV has a 25- year concession and a 25- year off take agreement with ZESCO. The AfDB has provided a mix 
of financing: the public sector funds (around USD 50 million ) contributed to finan cing half of ZESCO’s equity 
participation in the SPV, technical assistance to ZESCO, as well as co- financ ing of  the 276 km transmission 
line to evacuate the power, while the AfDB’s  private sector funds provided a USD 38 million  senior debt to the 
SPV.  
• The 42 MW Achwa 2 IPP is a run- of-river hydro power plant in Uganda that will have an annual output of 162 
GWh. The Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited will purchase the power under a 40- year PPA. 
In 2016, the AfDB has approved a senior loan of  up to USD 20 million  towards the investment cost of USD 
110 million . 
• The 33 MW Segou Solar IPP is Mali’s first utility -scale solar project. The plant will generate 52.7 GWh annually 
(~10% of the country’s current generation) which will be bought by Mali’s  national utility under the aegis of a 
25-year PPA. In 2016, the AfDB has approved a senior loan of USD 8.5 million  along with a senior loan of 
USD 25 million  from the Climate Investment Funds (CIF) towards the investment requirement of approximately 
USD 5 2 million . 
• The AfDB has approved the financing package of USD 100 million , comprising USD 50 million  equity and 
USD 50 million  convertible senior loan,  to the Facility for Ener gy Inclusion (FEI) in late 2016.  FEI is positioned 
as a global facility with two distinctive windows managed by two separate fund managers: (i) the On- Grid 
window (USD 400 million ), and (ii) the Off -Grid Window (USD 100 million ). Fund raising and pipeline building 
activities will continue over the next months.


---
*Page 59*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
The AfDB’s power sector  support to its regional member countries is far -reaching, with a concrete track -record of 
sovereign projects for improved energy access, transmission and distribution infrastructure, power sector reform and 
capacity building. S ome of the examples that can be highlighted include:  
 
• Kenya Last Mile Connectivity Program : The project aims at extension of the low voltage network to reach 
around 1.2 million people. The total project cost is estimated at UA 108.6 million, out of which the Bank is 
contributing UA 95  million  (~USD 130 million ). The population located in rural areas, low income groups as 
well as small businesses will particularly benefit from this project.  
• Burkina Faso  - The Electrification Project for Semi -Urban Areas of Ouagadougou and Bobo- Dioualasso: The 
project aims to restructure and expand the medium and low -voltage distribution networks in the country’s two 
largest towns and establish 17,500 connections to households. The project also comprises several activities 
intended to strengthen SONABEL’s operational capacity. The total project cost is UA 37.76 million. The project 
will be co -financed by the AfDB (72%), SONABEL (15%) and the GoBF (13%).  
• Lesotho - Electricity Su pply Project ( UA 10.85 million  loan/grant) : The project is approved in 2009 and the   
Implementation has completed in 2014. Project Completion Report was approved in 2016. The project helped 
increas e the country’s power supply and its reliability, as well as increas e electricity access with t he 
rehabilitation of the 2 MW Mantsonyane mini -hydropower station, installation of 200 individual home solar 
systems, and reinforcement and expansion of the distribution network to additional 6,230 consumers.  
 
Collaboration with the GCF : The AfDB has recently launched the “Zambia Renewable Energy Financing Framework ”, 
co-financed with the GCF. The AfDB -GCF financing envelope for the Framework  aims to provide USD 100 million of 
senior debt and standby loan facility (as a tenor extension instrument for commercial banks’ loans) to the renewable 
energy feed- in-tariff projects (smaller than 20MW each) in Zambia. USD 4 million TA is arranged to develop the 
ecosystem and value chain for renewable energy -based electrification in Zambia. The implementation is expected to 
start in Q4 2018.  
 
The AfDB mini -grid sector support : The AfDB is currently the focal point for all mini -grid activities on the continent. 
Through its Green Mini -Grids Market Development Program (GMG MDP), the Bank offers technical assistance to mini -
grid developers and mini -grid policy makers through its Gre en Mini -Grids Help Desk . The AfDB is providing support 
to more than 60 green mini -grid developers in 30 countries, as well as to several Ministries of Energy. (see more detail 
under Section C.4.)  
 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations  and other relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with 
NDAs on the funding proposal and the no- objection letter.  Please also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement  
plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal was developed.   
 
The AfDB’s engagement with the DRC energy sector stakeholders for green mini -grid development started years ago 
with its Green Mini -Grids Market Development Program . Under this support, a green mini -grid market opportunity 
assessment has been produced (July 2017) which formed the evidence basis for the preparation of this P rogram. The 
AfDB’s enabling envi ronment support s for the GoDRC  has recently  led to the approval of USD 1 million technical 
assistance grant for institutional capacity building and mini -grid project preparation (which is seeking co- financing from 
GCF under this P rogram). Building on this long time engagement and collaboration with country and sector 
stakeholders , it was proposed that the AfDB -GCF arranges a financing envelop for the DFID Essor Access to Electricity  
(A2E)  projects .  
 
The country ownership for the Program is ensured by close collaboration with the NDA and key sector stakeholders 
in the DRC during the preparatory stage. The c oncept has been developed with close consultation with the Ministry of 
Energy and Hydraulic Resources  (MERH ) - Project Management Coord ination Unit (UCM) who is responsible for 
tendering and granting concessions to mini -grid projects to be financed, as well as with the DFID -Essor team 
supporting UCM for the entire preparatory works. Stakeholders and beneficiaries in the prospective projec t sites have


---
*Page 60*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
been consulted during the site selection and subsequent pre -feasibility studies. The engagement with a wider scope 
of national and local stakeholders took place during the development of the Funding Proposal. As a result, a No-
Objection Letter from the NDA was received in July 2018.  
 
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment.  
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 ( core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
 
The Program aims to deploy green mini -grids in a cost effective manner and with the objective of providing the lowest 
end user tariffs possible while still making the returns attractive. In order to achieve this, a preliminary financial struct ure 
envisaged a 45% blend ed senior debt tranche from the AfDB and the GCF and a 55 % tranche of equity and quasi -
equity in the form of reimbursable/investment grant from the sponsor and other financiers. The contribution of the AfDB 
and the GCF through the Program will improve the commercial viability of the projects and enable them to provide 
electricity to a wider share of connections at affordable rates. While operating under the principle of minimum 
concessionality, the GCF’s concessional financing in terms of pricing is critical for the entire structure to be financially 
viable. In term of efficiency the indicator can be derived from the total i nvestment cost (USD 8 7 Million ) and the 
expected lifetime emission reductions ( 0.56 MtCO 2eq) giving an efficiency indicator value of 1 55 USD/tCO 2eq. 
 
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co- financing ratio (total amount of co- financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long- term low emission investment.  
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
 
 
Expected co- financing ratio is 1 : 3.35 (GCF providing close to one fourth of the project cost). A relatively low co-
financing ratio needs to be understood in co nsideration of the unique challenge of the DRC’s renewable energy and 
mini- grid market, where private sector co- financing for mini- grid project is almost non- existent. For the TA  and 
project preparation component, the total estimated budget for the various assignments will be up to USD 2 million 
which will be co -financed by GCF and AfDB  in the ratio of  1:1.  
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F .1. 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  Please describe the GCF’s financial 
exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.).


---
*Page 61*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
A preliminary financial model was produced to analyze the impact of the GCF’s funding on the project’s DSCR and  
IRR. The terms presently reflected in the model are based on the base case of P90 solar radiation and energy yield  
assessment for the DSCR analysis, which means that the estimates will be met or exceeded 90% of the time on an  
annual basis.   
 
With the GCF funding included,  the financial model presents a convincing financial case for the project . Given that t he 
current market conditions in the DRC are not favorable and that commercial banks are risk adverse, the GCF’s 
participation will be critical  not only to fill the financing gap with adequate price and tenor but also to bring other  
investors onboard  (see more under Section F.1).   
 
 
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
 
The AfDB will ensure to apply the best available technologies . Competitive bidding will ensure the use of most efficient 
and advanced industry t echnologies and practices.  In such way, t he implementation of the Program  will bring the best 
international practices as well as technologies for  the solar hybrid mini -grid systems well-adjusted for the project 
environment in the DRC. These best practices include the assessments of financially and technically feasible 
technologies as well as  the high- standard procurement principles which will also bring desirable environmental and 
social benefits.  
 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total project  financing  USD 87 million   
(b) Requested GCF amount  USD 20 million   
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  560,000  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  USD 155 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  USD 36 / tCO 2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators  (d) and (e)  above.  
Assumptions:  
  
The baseline calculation is computed assuming that the most likely technology to be used to meet the 
electricity needs estimated in the demand study, which in this case would be a diesel or heavy  fuel oil 
power plant. The following assumptions and parameters are used for the GHG emissions estimations:  
• Emission factor of 0.8 tCO 2/MWh assuming efficient diesel gensets are being installed,  
• Total electricity generation and PV penetration modelled with the software HOMER (one of the 
leading software for mini -grid power plant sizing) based on the detailed electricity demand study 
elaborated for the three town ,


---
*Page 62*
---

RESTRICTED  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 74 
 
 
 E 
• The yearly electricity generation is calculated for the 20 years of operation . 
 
 
Expected co-financing ratio  1 : 3.35 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-
benefit generated as a result of the project/programme)  N/A


---
*Page 63*
---

RESTRICTED  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 74 
 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the  detailed economic and financial analysis  (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3).  Based on the above analysis, please 
provide economic and financial justification  (both qualitative and quantitative)  for the concessionality that GCF 
provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2.  
 
A preliminary financial model was built for each project  site based on the outputs of the demand and technical studies 
performed.  The CAPEX estimated for Bumba, Gemena, and Isiro are expcted to amount to USD 40. 1 million, 21.8 
million and 25 million respectively , total USD 87 million.  
For the modelling purpose, the following tariff structures were computed. Bidders will have the freedom to define their 
own tariff structures, although it is anticipated a ceiling will be set and a social tariff will be introduced  as requirements . 
These indicativ e structures are based on consumption thresholds, which allows low -income and medium -income 
households to benefit from lower rates. A social tariff is applied to the lowest level of consumption ( e.g. 0 to 
15kWh/month; enough to service lighting and other b asic uses such as phone charging), and tariffs range increase with 
the level of consumption.  
An estimated range of the mini-grid tariff is comparable to other operating mini -grids in the DRC and the region49. While 
the tariff is still higher than that of the national utility, it is considerably lower than what people would currently pay for 
the use of diesel gensets in the target towns ( in the range of 1 .2-1.5$/kWh) . It is also expected that a competitive tender 
will effectively drive down the overall tariff level.  
Sensitivity analysis  
 
Without GCF’s investment, it is assumed that an all -in rate of debt goes up significantly.  Under this scenario, the tariff 
should increase by 6c$/kWh in order to maintain the same level of IRR.  If demand was to be lower than expected, the 
impact on IRRe would be -3% in the case of a 10% demand decrease, and -6% for a 20% demand decrease. The 
Concession Agreement comprises an adjustment mechanism if such decrease was to take place during the first five 
years.  However, such tariff increase should be limited given the elasticity of demand to prices.  
 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  
 
Through the pre- feasibility study  for the three target sites, a very thorough and det ailed demand and technical 
assessment for the mini -grid projects have been undertaken . The outcome of the pre- feasibility study will be provided 
to prospective bidders.  
                                                             
49 World Bank ESMAP. Benchmarking Study of Solar PV Mini -Grids Investment Costs, 2017.  
IFC, Operational and Financial Performance of Mini -Grid DESCOs, 2017.  
USAID Power Africa, Tariff Considerations for Micro- Grids in Sub -Saharan Africa, 2018.  
Nigeria Rural Electrification Agency, Nigeria Minigrid Investment Brief, 2017.


---
*Page 64*
---

RESTRICTED  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 74 
 
 
 F 
Technical quality  and compliance with the technical specifications  will be  an important  part of the evaluation criteria 
during the selection and due diligence process, with detailed technical  assessment to be conducted for each selected 
sub-project.  
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and 
Action Plan.  
 
The Environment and Social Management Framework  (ESMF) and the Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
documents  are developed for  this Funding Proposal . No Category A project will be financed under this 
Program.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
Since specific locations of investments will be determined during project design under this  Program , an E nvironmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared that defines the environmental and social (E&S) 
planning, review, and clearing processes in compliance with national and AfDB  safeguard guidelines. The ESMF will 
ensure that energy is produced and utilized in an environmentally sound manner; and provide a corporate 
environmental and social safeguard policy framework, institutional arrangements and capacity available to identify and 
mitigate potential safeguard issues and impacts of RE projects. T he ESMF will specify the following procedures:  
(i) Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) to identify key environmental and social impacts 
and corrective measures for each sub- project  once exact intervention locations are known.  
(ii) Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to translate the ESIA into coordinated activities at 
local level, with detailed checklists and mitigation measures in order to address expected environmental 
and social impacts.   
(iii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) followed by Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), if relevant, to 
present legal and institutional framework, eligibility criteria, methodology for asset valuations and 
mechanisms for stakeholder consultatio ns and grievance redress.  
Stakeholder consultations . 
The ESMF contains detailed checklists and generic mitigation measures to ensure that potential impacts are addressed 
in the E&S assessments and sub- project management plans. In preparing the required detailed E&S studies (e.g., 
ESIA, ESMP, and RAP), the sub -project operators must ensure that participatory stakeholder consultations take place 
as required by  the E&S policies, guidelines, and standards of the AfDB. Participatory consultations will be held with all 
stakeholders (including ministerial officials, representatives of local governments, the private sector and associations 
of civil society, including women associations) in order to:  
• provide adequate information about the nature, timing, and scope of the relevant project impacts and mitigation 
measures;   
• highlight gender issues (in order to improve women’s access to lower -cost and cleaner energy ); and  
• guide E&S study development.  
Responsibilities


---
*Page 65*
---

RESTRICTED  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 74 
 
 
 F 
Projects operators will be responsible, in compliance with national law and regulations and the AfDB safeguard policies, 
guidelines and standards, for conducting the required detailed E&S studies (e.g., ESIA, ESMP, and RAP), obtaining 
clearances and licens es from relevant authorities, organizing stakeholder consultations, implementing all required 
mitigation measures, and conducting monitoring activities.  
The detailed E&S studies must be submitted to both the National Authority in charge and the AfDB for r eview and 
approval. The authority’s approval is based on the Congolese laws and regulations, while that of the AfDB is based on 
the A fDB’s E&S policies, guidelines, and standards. The authority in charge of environment will be responsible for the 
review an d clearance of ESIAs and ESMPs for sub- projects. It provides a one- stop clearance process by involving all 
other key governmental agencies in the approval process.  
Gender Considerations  – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
The gender assessment  for the P rogram  provides a summary of the gender equality situation in the DRC  with a specific 
focus on women’s incl usion in the energy sector. The assessment identifies potential entry points to promote women’s 
participation as business leaders and owners in renew able and clean energy, and proposes a series of actions that will 
ensure t he participation of women.   
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.  
Due Diligence  
The AfDB team  responsible for project origination will carry out due diligence and assessments of financing proposals  
for each sub- project . The origination team’s findings and recommendations undergo a rigorous internal review process 
before they are cleared by Senior Management to be presented to the Bank’s Board of Directors for approval.  This 
includes various interdepartmental committee reviews.  
The AfDB will,  through its Anti -Corruption and Integrity  department,  provide Integrity Due Diligence (IDD) for the project 
operations through a structured, systematic analysis to identify, assess, mitigate, manage and monitor potential loss 
from integr ity risks and riskier exposure. This is to ensure that funds  are used for their intended purposes and with due 
attention to considerations of economy, efficiency and competitive trade. The Bank will use the following assessment 
criteria to safeguards its investment. ( See also the Bank’s  IDD Policy for further infor mation.)  
• Identif ication of b eneficial ownership  
• Assessment of c ivil and r egulatory backgrounds  
• Identification of sanctioned persons and e ntities  
• Identification of P olitically Exposed Persons (PEPs) and other h igh risk r elationship 
Corporate financial transactions are closely monitored through the MDB harmonized treatments of corporate groups 
and also through the AfDB’s established guidelines on anti -fraud, anti -corruption and anti -money laundering policies  
(AMLCFT)50. The AfDB  continues to ensure that its financing operations and investments are not used for illegal or tax -
                                                             
50 Relevant frameworks and policies within the AfDB include:  
- The Bank's revised Strategic Framework and Action Plan on the Prevention of Illicit Financial Flows in 
Africa and Policy on the Prevention of Illicit Financial Flows ,  
- Strategy for the Prevention of Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing in Africa (ADB/BD/ 
WP/2007/70 and ADF/BD/WP/2007/46),  July 2007 , 
- Integrity Due- Diligence Policy for Non -Sovereign Guaranteed Operations  (ADB/BD/ WP/2014/96 - 
ADF/BD/WP/2014/64),  June 2014,  and


---
*Page 66*
---

RESTRICTED  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 74 
 
 
 F 
evasion purposes. In addition, measures are currently in place to address the issue of tax havens and the 
accompanying risks.  
The AfDB will lead standard KYC  due diligence process including anti -money laundering and other evaluations of 
sponsors.  
Financial Management  
For the senior loan s, financial management will follow the AfDB ’s “Guidelines for Financial Management and Financial 
Analysis of Projects ”, which describes  and explains  the AfDB ’ policies, procedures and approaches to the financial 
management and a nalysis of projects and program s that the AfDB finances.  
Disbursement  
Loans : The borrower is entitled to request disbursements of funds from the AfDB, for amounts spent or planned to be 
spent for the purposes set out in the financing agreement between the two parties, subject to fulfilment of conditions 
outlined in the financing agreement. Except with the AfDB ’s consent, no disbursements shall be m ade (a) on account 
of expenditures procured in violation of the AfDB’s Procurement Rules; or (b) to finance expenditures incurred prior the 
date of the financing agree ment other than those that are expressly permitted. Requests for disbursement shall be 
made promptly and in conformity with the AfDB’s disbursement rules and procedures.  
Supervision  and Portfolio Management  
The AfDB is responsible for fulfilling the reporting obligations to the donors. Reporting is based on the progress of 
indicators included in the Results Measurement Framework. The AfDB management will ensure that the project portfolio 
are diligently managed,  through close dialogue with clients  and periodic  monitoring and evaluat ion. T he objective is to 
enhance the prospects of: (a) delivering expected development outcomes; (b) minimi zing harmful environmental and 
social impacts over the course of projects’ economic life; and (c) meeting debt repayment obligations  for the loans . At 
least, bi -annual supervision missions will be organized to review implementation progress and performance of the 
activities under the framework .  
Procurement  
To ensure that financing is applied in ways that adequately secure the AfDB’s mandate while max imizing development 
effectiveness, the Bank encourages and promotes sound, fair, transparent and well performing procurement systems.  
The Bank Group’s “ Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations ” (dated August 2015) applies  to the 
framework . This Policy sets out the principles that apply to Borrowers’ procurement of goods, works and acquisition of 
consulting services financed in whole or in part by the AfDB. It is supplemented by three additional documents: (i) 
Methodology for Implementation of the Procurement Policy of the African Development Bank (Methodology); (ii) 
Operations Procurement Manual for the African Development Bank (OPM); and (iii) Procurement Toolkit for the African 
Development Bank (Toolkit). Collectively, the Policy, the Methodology, the OPM and  the Toolkit are referred to as the 
“Procurement Framework”. The Policy is the overarching document and in the event of a conflict between it and any 
other documents of the Procurement Framework, this Policy will prevail. In the event of  any inconsistency between the 
remaining documents comprising the Procurement Framework, the following hierarchy shall be followed: the 
Methodology, the OPM, and the Toolkit.  
Audit  
The framework  will be subject to the AfDB’s nor mal internal audit policies, meaning it will be audited annually by external 
auditors. The utilization of the AfDB ’s and the GCF resources will be subject to audit by an independent external auditor 
                                                             
- Integrity Due- Diligence Guidelines for Non- Sovereign Guaranteed Operations 2014.


---
*Page 67*
---

RESTRICTED  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 74 
 
 
 F 
acceptable to the AfDB  every year and at the completion o f the activity for which support has been provided. 
Beneficiaries  of externally executed grants shall recruit an auditor for these as per the terms of the grant agreement to 
be signed.  The cost of audit services shall be incorporated into the cost estimates for each approved project /activity .


---
*Page 68*
---

RESTRICTED  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 62 OF 74 
 
 G  
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Political instability:  Developers feel at risk from the 
overall political situation. Any disturbance to the peace 
would impact or otherwise halt the construction or 
operation of the project.   
 Other  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
In addition to the provision of the Concession Agreement, specific insurance instruments from DFIs ( e.g. MIGA) will 
be sought  to address classical political risks for the sponsors.  
 
Selected  Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Change of regulations : Developers are concerned 
with the risk of any non -respect of the Concession Other  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G .2. 
The main risks of the project will b e linked to the political situation and the market risk to be borne by the project.  
 
Political instability and change of regulations : Developers feel at risk from the overall political situation in the DRC. 
Any disturbance to the peace would impact or otherwise halt the constructi on or operation of the project. D evelopers 
are also concerned with the risk of any non- respect of the Concession Agreement, and a political entity appropriating 
the assets of the project. To mitigate this risk, standards concession agreem ents have been negotiate d and political 
risk insurances will be consider ed as described in more details below.  High corruption risk also prevail in the country 
and will be addressed by the institutional setting of the project handled by one stop -shop within  the GoDRC  (MERH  - 
UCM) . 
 
Market risk: The mini -grids projects are developed on a merchant basis without any demand guarantee from the 
provincial authorities or offtake agreem ents with the SNEL. As such, the project s rely on a detailed demand projection 
taking into account the willingness and ability to pa y.  Foreign exchange risks  will be  mitigated through a quarterly 
update of tariff.  
 
Other risks, including construction, O&M risks, environmental and social risks, payment risks  are expected to be of 
lower magnitude and will be addressed by specific provisions as detailed below.


---
*Page 69*
---

RESTRICTED  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 63 OF 74 
 
 G 
Agreement, and a political entity appropriating the 
assets of the project.   
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Standard Concession Agreements are currently under negotiations with the Government. The political risk is covered 
in the Concession Agreement by a broad definition of the State Risk and by the Change in Law c lause. Compensation 
payments will be agreed in the Concession Agreement for termination upon event of default by Project Company or 
Conceding Authority, force majeure, and political event. It is expected that all permits and authorizations required for 
the projects will be delivered in due time before construction. Legal compliance will be further reviewed during due 
diligence by the Lender’s Legal Advisor (LLA).  The Concession Agreement includes protection for new or changes to 
taxes applicable to the Concessionaires . 
 
Selected  Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Demand risk : The demand risk lies with the difficulty to 
get accurate and reliable demand estimation (anchor 
off-takers, SMEs, and households). These estimations 
are necessary to set up reliable financial forecasts, to 
adequately size the power plant and the distribution 
grid, to define the expected demand growth and to 
define the appropriate financial structure .  Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  High  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk is expected to be mitigated as selected mini -grid projects will primarily target the areas with significant 
economic activities and a large population basis without access to modern energy. They currently rely on small scale 
individual diesel generator with a cost higher than 1 $/kWh. Individual projects are expected to supply power to 
consumers (households and businesses) with a competitive tariff, depending on financing conditions. Anchor 
customers such as the government, water supplier, and SMEs will be identified for each site . 
 
In order to limit the risk borne by the Concessionaire, pre- feasibility studies were undertaken in line with the level of 
standards expected by international investors. These were done to a hig h level of granularity with a preliminary 
geographical scanning of the population, on- the-ground surveys based on statistically significant sample sizes of the 
different demand segments (anchor off -takers, SMEs, and households). These studies also assess t he willingness to 
pay, revenues and energy needs .  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Payment risk  
 Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The risk attached to the payments by households and SMEs/shops shall be offset by the use of Pay -As-You-Go 
systems with meters.  The use of prepaid metering infrastructure with mobile money will mitigate collection risks of


---
*Page 70*
---

RESTRICTED  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 64 OF 74 
 
 G 
consumers.  Payment risk for larger private customer s is assumed to be reduced as non -payment would result in the 
disconnection of their electricity service.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Environmental and Social risks  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
By essence, solar PV technology has minimal physical and economic displacement. For the battery treatment after its 
life time, a recycling obligation will be included to the list of technical requirements The AfDB and the client are jointly 
working on an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) including an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP). Appropriate measures including the Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared in line with 
the AfDB’s requirements  if relevant . The safeguards and compliance department of the AfDB will review available 
documentation and provide the necessary guidance to ensure compliance with the Integrated Safeguard System’s 
requirements . A detailed analysis of potential environmental and social risks and their management framework is 
outlined in the Environment al and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for this Funding Propos al. 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Construction , Operation and Maintenance risks  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Risk will be borne by the Concessionaire with traditional insurance tools .  
 
The construction of a PV power plant, distribution networks and storage facility involves a proven technology. 
Construction risks will be mitigated trough a turnkey EPC contract. Adequate completion guarantees and liquidated 
damages will be requested by the lenders. Construction and interference risk will be further assessed during due 
diligence. Large provisions for transport cost, amounting to 8% of total CAPEX for each site, have been earmarked to 
cover risk related to transportation of materials.  
 
The operation and maintenance of the solar PV power plant itself is usually relatively simple as it consists of cleaning, 
regular inspections, minor repairs and measurements, data verification,  reporting and site security. At the mini -grid 
level, the management of the intermittent source of energy will have an impact on the operation. Consequently, any 
large fluctuation of power from the solar plant will require a quick compensation from the storage facility and/or the 
spinning reserve to maintain the stability of the network. These risks will be mitigated with the implementation of an 
adequate power management system and the definition and implementation of operating/dispatch measures to be 
followed by the operators. Lenders will thus assess the capacity of the sponsors to provide backup generation, 
maintain the required spinning reserve and manage power fluctuations and the measures to be put in place, as 
needed.


---
*Page 71*
---

RESTRICTED  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 65 OF 74 
 
 G 
Selected Risk Factor  7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Foreign Exchange and Inflation  Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The foreign exchange and inflation risks will be partially offset by the fact the tariffs will be calculated in USD but 
invoiced and paid in Congolese Francs and will be adjustable every three months . Non- convertibility of Congolese 
Francs or the impossibi lity to transfer USD outside DRC is listed as a case of State Risk in the Concession Agreement. 
If this event was to occur for more than 60 consecutive days, the Concessionaire would be entitled to terminate the 
Concession Agreement for default of the Awar ding Authority.  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Corruption risk  Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
A robust tender process has been established with the DFID -Essor support and the proceedings of the tender will be 
documented and shared with lenders. A centrali zed one-stop- shop which handles all administrative procedures 
should limit of the risk of corruption borne by multiple administrative layers . The AfDB will ensure compliance with its 
anti-corruption and integrity policies and as per the AMA with the GCF.  
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring) .  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries  or the pool of potential contractors . 
 
 
Final approval of financing for individual sub- projects is subject to the AfDB’s project -specific risk screening  and 
comprehensive due diligence covering technical, commer cial, financial, legal, social and environmental, procurement, 
insurance aspects of the mini -grid projects , as well as appropriate regulatory Know Your Customer checks . The AfDB 
will put in place an implementation team for the Program who will  be in charge of due diligence and execution of  
individual sub- projects.  
 
 
* Please expand this sub- section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 72*
---

RESTRICTED  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 74 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level51 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways   
The AfDB -GCF Green Mini -Grid Program for the DRC aims to deliver each 5-10 MW solar 
based mini- grid in three towns of the country , supplying electr icity from a sustainable and 
efficient  energy source than micro -scale diesel generation currently used to bridge the gap.  
The Program arranges  a financing envelope for the DRC’s  first round of green  mini- grid 
projects  selected through the government ’s tendering process . Use of locally available 
renewable energy resources, rapid deployment , easy scalability from the modular design,  
and possibility to locate the power plants near the demand areas make this  technological 
choice the best solution  to achieve increased energy access with lowest emission.  
Envisioned mini -grids will provide access to clean energy to approximately  150,000 p eople 
who live off the grid, avoiding emission of 560,000 tCO 2eq over 20 years .  
 
The Program aims to  set a paradigm -shifting milestone as it pilots a new business model  
providing sizeable supply of clean electricity with private sector investment . Deployment of 
renewable energy  mini- grid, coupled with technical assistance to strengthen regulatory 
framework  and capacity of key stakeholders , will enable the transfor mation of the DRC 
energy sector by accelerating low emission energy access. In addition, energy access will 
strongly reinforce economic and social resilience of low income population living in climate 
vulnerable areas . In the DRC where the concept of  solar  powered mini- grid and the model 
for private- led energy project financing is still new, this Program has an important role to play 
by demonstrating a viable green mini -grid business model scalable across the country  and 
in the region.  
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if 
applicable)52 Final  
Fund -level impacts  
M1.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy access 
and power generation  
 
 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as a 
result of Fund- funded 
projects/ programmes  
 
 
Financing leveraged 
through the facilities  Program report 
(mid-term and 
final)  
Regular 
reporting from 
AfDB to GCF 
as agreed in 
the AMA  0 
 
 
 
0 - 
 
 
 
- 560,0000  
tCO2eq  
(20 years)  
 
Total  
funding 
USD 87m Financing of all 
selected three sub-
projects by AfDB -
GCF , provided that 
selected bidders 
choose to borrow 
from AfDB -GCF53 
Successful 
completion of the 
                                                             
51 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  
52 Mid-term target is not applicable.   
53 AfDB -GCF financing  envelop will be  available for all successful bidders, however successful bidders have a liberty to 
choose alternative financing options. In such  case , not all three projects will be financed hence the impact achieved from 
the Program  will be reduce d. If this situation arises, it will be reported at the mid- term evaluation and re-sizing of the 
Program  may be considered.


---
*Page 73*
---

RESTRICTED  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 74 
 
 
 H 
 
Cost per tCo2eq 
decreased for achieved 
project   
0  
- 
  
USD 36 
tCO 2eq mini-grid 
construction  
Full disbursement of 
the approved 
financing  
 
                                                             
54 AfDB’s historical and current engagements with MERH/UCM and more broadly with the Congolese power sector will 
ensure that the activities are designed and implemented closely with key sector stakeholders.  H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if 
applicable)   Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased number of 
small, medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers  6.1 Proportion of low -
emission power supply in 
a jurisdiction or market  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.2 Number of  
households, and 
individuals (males and 
females) with  improved 
access to  low-emission 
energy  sources  
 
 
 
 
6.3 MWs of low  emission 
energy  capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a result of 
GCF support  Reports from 
the project 
sponsors; 
regular 
reporting from 
AfDB to GCF 
as agreed in 
the AMA  
 Non-hydro 
RE sources 
less than 
1% of the 
national 
energy mix  
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
0 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
- 1+% non -
hydro RE 
in the 
national 
energy 
mix 
 
 
 
23,300 
connectio
ns / 
150,000 
people  
 
 
 
18.5 MW 
solar PV  
with 
battery  
installed All three mini -grid 
projects are financed 
(see footnote 53 .) 
Macro -economic and 
political stability  
Support from central 
and provincial 
governments  
Increasing market 
confidence for green 
mini-grid from the 
GoDRC and private 
sector  
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems  Number of additional 
green mini -grid projects 
developed and reached 
financial close following 
technical assistance   
 
 Reports from 
the TA 
recipients  
(UCM) ; regular 
reporting from 
AfDB to GCF 
as agreed in 
the AMA  0 5 10 Strong ownership 
from UCM and RE  
stakeholders  for the 
subsequent roll -out of 
green mini -grids54


---
*Page 74*
---

RESTRICTED  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 74 
 
 
 H 
                                                             
55 Not financed by AfDB and GCF  Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
Component 1. Three green mini -grid projects  – generation and storage  
Mini-grid projects  financed, 
installed and operational  Number of green mini -
grid projects financed  
and constructed ( solar PV 
plants  and batter y 
storage)  
 AfDB 
monitoring  0 
 
 
 
 - 
 
 3 projects : 
1 Bumba 
1 Gemena 
1 Isiro  All three mini -grid 
projec ts are financed 
(see footnote 53 .) 
Successful tender, 
financial close and 
construction  
 
Component 2. Three green mini -grid projects –  distribution, connections , backup and other costs55 
Mini-grid projects financed, 
installed and operational  Number of green mini -
grid projects financed  and 
constructed (distribution 
networks and 
connections)  
 AfDB 
monitoring  0 
 
 
 
 - 
 
 3 projects : 
1 Bumba 
1 Gemena 
1 Isiro  All three mini -grid 
projec ts are financed 
(see footnote 53 .) 
Successful tender, 
financial close and 
construction  
Component 3 . Technical Assistance grant  
3.1) Green mini -grid 
enabling framework 
improved and capacity  
building 
 
 Green mini -grid strategy 
document and regulatory 
frameworks developed 
and validated 
 
Green m ini-grid standards 
and guidelines  developed 
and validated 
 
A green mini -grid tariff 
guideline developed and 
validated  
 
Number of key institutions 
officials  trained on green 
mini-grid development 
and management   
 
Number of private 
developers trained on 
green mini -grid 
development and 
management   Reports from 
the TA 
recipients  
(UCM)  
 
 0  
 
 
0 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
0 
 
 -  
 
 
- 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
- 
 
 1 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
40  
(of which 
30% are 
women)  
 
50  
(of which 
30% are 
women)  
 Strong ownership 
from UCM and RE  
stakeholders  for the 
subsequent roll -out of 
green mini -grids  
Strong interests for 
green mini -grid 
training


---
*Page 75*
---

RESTRICTED  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 74 
 
 
 H 
Number of l ocal 
technicians and SME  
staffs trained on 
operations  &maintenance 
of green mini -grid 0 
 
 - 
 
 20 
 
 
[Gender Action Plan]  
Number of gender 
mainstreaming policies 
and action plans 
developed in the energy 
sector  
 
Number of women and 
youth trained on green 
mini-grids in target areas  
 
% of women and youth 
employed by  target  green 
mini-grids  
 
Number of  market 
scoping study developed   
 
 
Site-specific gender 
analyses for  the Program   
0 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0  
- 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
  
2 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
40% 
 
 
1 
 
 
3 
 
3.2) Green mini -grid project 
development  support  Number of t echnical 
feasibility studies 
(including ESIA ) for target 
green mini-grid sites 
completed 
 
Number of f easibility 
studies for other selected 
potential green mini -grid 
sites conducted  
 
An investment and tender 
plan for UCM’s green 
mini-grid pipeline 
developed 
 0 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
0 
 - 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
- 
 3 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
1 
 A concrete pipeline 
exists for future green 
mini-grid projects  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Component 1. Project 
financing  – generation and 
storage  Three green  mini-grid projects  financing  
(solar PV  generation and battery storage)  AfDB and GCF  – senior 
loans ;  
Sponsors – equity  
 The activities and inputs will follow 
the cases of other power  projects 
financed by the AfDB.


---
*Page 76*
---

RESTRICTED  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 74 
 
 
 H 
 
 
 
 
 • Procurement of mini -
grid projects  
• Complete additional 
project -specific 
technical studies as 
necessary  
• AfDB d ue diligence  
• Financial clos e 
 
Component 2. P roject 
financing – distribution, 
connections and backup  
• Procurement of mini -
grid projects  
• Complete additional 
project -specific 
technical studies as 
necessary  
• Due diligence  
• Financial clos e 
 Three green mini -grid projects financing  
(distribution network s, connections and 
emergency backup)  Sponsors – equity;  
Other financiers –  quasi -
equity and grant  The activities and inputs will follow 
the cases of other power projects.  
Component 3. Technical 
Assistance (TA) grant  
1)  Green mini -grid 
enabling framework and 
capacity building    
 
2)  Green mini -grid project 
development support  
 
 1. Green mini -grid enabling framework and 
capacity building  
(i) Develop green mini -grid strategy and 
regulations  
(ii) Develop mini -grid standards and 
guidelines  
(iii) Establish green mini -grid tariff guideline 
(iv) Train key institutions to be able to 
manage and implement green mini -grid 
projects development (UCM, MERH , 
ANSER and benefiting provincial 
governments)  
(v) Train selected project developers on 
green mini -grid projects development and 
management  
(vi) Train local technicians and SMEs for 
operations and maintenance of green mini -
grid 
(vii) Gender action plan implementation 
(Gender Action Plan)   
 
2. Green mini -grid project development 
support  
(i) Support three solar based mini -grids 
under the Essor A2E (detailed technical 
studies and legal c ost) 
(ii) Conduct feasibility studies for other 
selected potential green mini -grid sites (up 
to five)  
(iii) Develop an investment and tender plan 
for UCM’s green mini -grid pipeline  
 Expert consultancy, other 
goods and services as 
required  Consultants and o ther goods and 
services will be procured as per the 
TA budget and procurement plan.


---
*Page 77*
---

RESTRICTED  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 74 
 
 
 H 
                                                             
56 https://www.afdb.org/en/projects -and-operations/project -cycle/  
 H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid- term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.   
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project/programme.  
 
 
Monitoring of the project  
All projects financed under the proposed Program will be monitored by the AfDB’s Portfolio Management team as per the 
relevant internal policies and procedures. The AfDB –  as the accredited executing agency – will be responsible for direct 
monitoring of implementation conditions and reporting periodically to the GCF under the terms to be agreed between the 
AfDB and the GCF.  All mini- grid projects financed under the proposed Program  will comply with the AfDB appraisal, 
approval, monitoring and supervision standards and procedures involving representatives or all relevant teams 
(engineers, lawyers, project finance specialists, procurement experts, E&S specialists, climate finance officers, financial 
management officers, supervision and monitoring specialists). The implementation and monitoring  of each stage of the 
project will be guided and managed by the AfDB project lifecycle management framework56. The key task managers, 
who will perform due diligence, implementation monitoring, risk monitoring and mitigation, will be located in the relevant  
teams  in the headquarters  and the c ountry office in Kinshasa.   
 
Reporting  
1) Reporting of project companies to the AfDB will be  in line with the standard loan agreement, and the AfDB will 
conduct a  biannual supervision.  
2) Reporting of the AfDB to  the GCF : The AfDB will comply with the relevant GCF policies (as specified under the 
AMA) in reporting and evaluation arrangements for this Program . The AfDB will provide the annual performance 
report (APR) to the GCF during the five-year implementation period. In addition, during the sub- loan lifetime , 
semi -annual  performance information report on the status of the GCF -financed individual sub- projects will be 
provided. For the TA component, reports from the beneficiar y will be consolidated by the AfDB for reporting to 
the GCF . In addition, following the arrangement under the AMA and the FAA, inception report, mid- term and final 
evaluation reports, and financial information reports (semi -annually throughout the life of the loan ) will be 
submitted.  
 
Evaluation  
The evaluation arrangements for this framework  will comply with the  related AfDB and GCF policies . Both the independent 
mid-term and final evaluation will be carried out by the AfDB‘s independent evaluation unit  (IDEV) . The work of the AfDB’s 
independent evaluation work is guided by internationally accepted principles for the evaluation of development 
assistanc e, in particular, the Organization for Economic Co- operation and Development’s De velopment Assistance 
Committee (OECD  DAC ) evaluation guiding principles and the good- practice standards issued by the Multilateral 
Development Banks ’ Evaluation Cooperation Gr oup (ECG).


---
*Page 78*
---

RESTRICTED  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 74 
 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable 
supporting documents.  I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility Study  (Market Study)  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if applicable)  
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment  (If applicable)  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
 (If applicable)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation Report  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 79*
---

Avenue Papa Iléo (Ex des Cliniques) n°15 Kinshasa/Gombe 
B.P. : 12348 KIN I – E-mail : hansandredjamba@gmail.com  
Site Web: www.fvc-rdc.org Kinshasa, July, 26th 2018 
   
 
 
 
AND-CDM-GCF/RDC/01-07/OKT/2018 
To: The Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
Concern: Support of the NDA on DRC Green Mini-Grid Program 
We refer to the program: DRC Green Mini-Grid Program  in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo as included in the funding proposal submitted by African Development Bank 
to us on July 24th, 2018. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Coordination 
of the Green Climate Fund, the National Designated Authority of the Democratic 
Republic of Congo. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have 
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to DRC Green Mini-Grid 
Program  as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that : By communicating our no-
objection, it is implied that: 
(i)The government of the Democratic Republic of Congo has no-objection to
the DRC Green Mini-Grid Program  as included in the funding proposal ;
(ii)The DRC Green Mini-Grid Program  as included in the funding proposal is in
conformity with  the Democratic Republic of Congo national priorities,
strategies and plans ;
(iii)In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the
project DRC Green Mini-Grid Program  as included in the funding proposal
is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.République Démocratique du Congo 
Ministère de l’Environnement et Développement 
Durable 
Secrétariat Général à l’Environnement et Développement 
Durable 
Direction de Développement Durable 
Coordination Nationale du Mécanisme de développement 
propre et Fonds Vert pour le Climat  
CNMDP-FVC 
L’Autorité Nationale Désignée  
Page 73


---
*Page 80*
---

Page 74 
Avenue Papa Iléo (Ex des Cliniques) n°15 Kinshasa/Gombe 
B.P. : 12348 KIN I – E-mail : hansandredjamba@gmail.com  
Site Web: www.fvc-rdc.org 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the 
programme DRC Green Mini-Grid Program  as included in the funding proposal has 
been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the DRC Green Mini-Grid Program . We 
acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Hans Andre Lohayo Djamba 
NDA Coordinator and GCF Focal Point


---
*Page 81*
---

Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  DRC Green Mini -Grid Program  
Accredited entity  African Development Bank (AfDB)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Specific  project  location or 
target countr y/ies of the 
programme , as the case 
may be  Democratic Republic of Congo (Bumba, Gemena, Isiro)  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -09-13 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Link to disclosure  English  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/drc -green -
mini- grid -program -esmf -103775/  
French  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/drc -green -
mini- grid -program -esmf -103775/  
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -09-13 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Link to disclosure  English  
https://www.afdb.org/en/do cuments/document/drc -green -
mini- grid -program -esmf -103775/  
French  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/drc -green -
mini- grid -program -esmf -103775/  
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  
Date  [___]  
Place  [___]  
No
te: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
________  Page 75