=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20180925213118+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/ModDate: D:20180925213225+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
17 – 20 October 2018  
Manama, Bahrain  
Provisional agenda item 17  GCF/B. 21/10/Add. 11 
26 September  201 8 
Consideration of funding proposals  - 
Addendum XI 
Funding proposal package for FP 092 
 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Programme for integrated development and 
adaptation to climate change in the Niger Basin (PIDACC/NB) "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  and 
c) Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;  
The funding proposal package  for FP0 92 is being submitted for the first time for the Board's 
consideration at its twenty -first meeting.


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Project/Programme Title:  Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to C limate 
Change in the Niger Basin ( PIDACC /NB) 
Country/Region:  West Africa ( Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guin ea, Mali, Niger, 
and Nigeria ), Central Africa (Cameroon and Chad).   
Accredited Entity:  African Development Bank  
Date of Submission:  June 2 5, 2018


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 Section E  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 Section G  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section H  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
• Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name conventi on for the file name:  
FP-AFDB- 04June2017- AFDB012017  
 “[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 81 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation 
to Climate Change in the Niger Basin ( PIDACC /NB) 
A.1.2. Project or programme programme  
A.1.3. Country (countr ies) / r egion                     West Africa ( Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, 
Mali, Niger, and Nigeria), Central Africa (Cameroon and  
Chad)  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (authorities)  All National Designated Authorities/Focal Persons of the nine 
member  countries of the Niger basin authority (NBA)  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  African Development Bank 
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executive Secretary of Niger Basin Authority (NBA) and 
ministers in charge of water resources  of the nine countries  
Beneficiary:  Rural population of Niger river basin  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
 ☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☒  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission   
A.1.1 0. 
Project  
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Laouali GARBA, Chief Climate Change Officer  
Timothy Afful Koomson, Chief Climate Finance Officer   
Organization  African Development Bank  
Email address  l.garba@afdb.org  
t.afful -koomson@afdb.org  
Telephone number  (225) 20 26 1990  
Mailing address  18ème Etage de l’Immeuble CCIA  
BPV 316 Abidjan  ; Bureau 18 -K 
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☒ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agro- forestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –  diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water sec urity 
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☒


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 81 
 
 
 A 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives  and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
 
High population growth rates, land degradation and use pressures, changes in rainfall patterns, greater frequency and 
intensity of droughts, and conflicts over natural resources are undermining the resilience of Niger Basin communities —
disrupting countless  livelihoods and leading to famine and high mortality rates.  
To promote climate resilient growth in the Basin, the African Development Bank , European Unio n, Global Environment 
Facility and the affected countries have allocated financing for the Programme for Integrated Development and 
Adaptation to Climate Change in the Niger Basin ( PIDACC /NB). Supplemental GCF financing will help forge the 
required collaboration and provide additional concessional resources for urgent intervention.   
Based on preliminary studies undertaken by the Niger Basin Authority (NBA), the PIDACC /NB builds on the Niger Basin 
Climate Resilience Investment Plan (CRIP). The CRIP aims to enhance climate resilience in Benin, Burkina Faso, 
Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Niger  and Nigeria, through regional and national water resource 
investments in reliable information systems, strengthened institutions, and sustainable infrastructure. PIDACC /NB also 
follows successful implementation of the Multinational Silt Control in the Niger River Basin.   
PIDACC /NB aims to contribute to improving the resilience of populations and ecosystems in the Basin through 
sustainable management of natural resources by: reducing the silting process of the Niger River; enhancing the 
adaptability of pop ulations to climate change; and improving natural resource management and integrated ecosystem 
management, the protection of biodiversity and the restoration of soil fertility.  
GCF -related outcomes include improvements in:  
• management, restoration and prot ection of natural habitats from climate variability and change;  
• generation and use of climate information in decision- making;  
• adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks;  
• awareness of climate threats and risk reduction processes; and  
• management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions.  
 
The programme is scalable and contributes to transformational change. It is also structured to ensure long- term 
financial sustainability.  
 
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  October 2018  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  December 2018  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: January 2019 
End:  December 202 4 
Project/programme lifespan  6 years


---
*Page 7*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 81 
 
  
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
The detailed costs of the programme, of activities and components are provided in Annex  III. 
Table 1: Breakdown of costs per component  
Components  Components   Million US$ 
Amount   In % 
C 1 Development of ecosystems and natural resources resilience               86.219    41% 
C 2 Development of population resilience             102.603    49% 
C 3 Programme coordination and management               21.081    10% 
  Total            209.903    100%  
 
Table 2: Breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub -component in local and foreign currency  
Component  Sub-component (if 
applicable)   Amount 
(Entire 
project)  Currency   Amount 
(for entire 
project)   Local 
currency   GCF 
funding 
amount  Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient  
C 1 Sub-component 1.1  70.591    million USD  37,731.9     Million FCFA  25.598    million USD  
Sub-component 1.2  15.627    million USD  8,353.1     Million FCFA  8.705    million USD  
C 2 Sub-component 2.1  82.892    million USD  44,306.8     Million FCFA  8.614    million USD  
Sub-component 2.2  19.712    million USD  10,536.2     Million FCFA  14.801    million USD  
C 3 Coordination , M & E  21.081    million USD  11,268.2     Million FCFA  10.056    million USD  
Total project financing        209.903  million USD  112,196.2     Million FCFA  67.774      
 
Table 3: Estimated amount of GCF grant and loan activities for each component/sub- component  
Component  Sub-component  Amount Entire project 
[Millions US$]  GCF Loan 
Financing [Mill 
US$]  GCF Grant 
Financing [Mill 
US$]  GCF Total 
Financing [Mill 
US$]  
 C 1  Sub-component 1.1                   70.591    0.442  25.155  25.598  
  Sub-component 1.2                   15.627    0.000  8.705  8.705  
 C 2  Sub-component 2.1                   82.892    6.287  2.327  8.614  
  Sub-component 2.2                   19.712    3.271  11.530  14.801  
 C 3  Coordination and M & E                   21.081    0.000  10.056  10.056  
 Total                   209.903    10.000  57.774  67.774  
 
Table 4: Disbursement table for GCF grant  
Year  Grant disbursements (Millions, USD)  (%) 
2019  6.777  12% 
2020  8.555  15% 
2021  8.555  15% 
2022  13.555  23% 
2023  13.555  23% 
2024  6.777  12% 
Total  57.774  100%  
 
Table 5: Disbursement table for GCF Loan  
Year  Loan disbursements (Millions, USD)  (%) 
2019  0.000  0% 
2020  5.000  50% 
2021  5.000  50% 
2022  0.000  0% 
2023  0.000  0% 
2024  0.000  0% 
Total  10.000  100%  
 
A breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type ( project staff and consultants, travel, goods , works,  services,  etc.) and disbursement 
schedule in project/programme confirmation (term sheet) as included in section I, Annexes.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 81 
 
  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  209.903  million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing  to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable grants *  
(vi) Grants *  10.000  
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
57.774  million USD 
($) 
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) 40 years  
 0 % 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants.  
Total requested  67.77 4 Options   
(c) Co -financing  
to recipient  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Loan (46%)  35.924  million USD($)  African 
Development 
Bank  40 
years  0% Senior  
Grant (54%),  42.171  million USD($)  African 
Development 
Bank (ADF)     
Grant  18.081    million USD($)  EU   
Grant  12.980  million USD($)  GEF   
Grant  9.000  million USD($)  FIP   
In-Kind 16.186  million USD($)  Countries    
In -Kind 7.786  million USD($)  Beneficiaries    
      
 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
 
• Letters requesting financing from the African Development Bank (ADF 14) have been received from all 
nine Niger Basin Countries. The Bank contribution is estimated at US$ 78.095 million (comprising US$. 
35.924million as Loan and US$ 42.171 million as Grant)  
• The GEF contribution of US$ 12.980 million  was approved early 2017.  
• The EU funding amounting to US18.081 million ((15 million Euros) was confirmed in December 2017.  
• Funding from the Forestry Investment Fund (FIP), US$ 9.000 million  was endorsed by the C limate 
Investment Funds Committee (CIF) in August 2018.  
• The GCF grant is estimated at US$ 57.774 million.  GCF Grant proceeds will be used to finance technical 
assistance and to non- revenue generating interventions. Grant proceeds will not be blended with the 
AfDB loan.  
• The GCF Loan is estimated at US$10.000 million  and proceeds will be used to mainly finance activities 
under component 2. These include (i) construction of small hydro- agricultural infrastructure and (ii) 
development of water points for cattl e and development of transhumance pathways infrastructure under 
Sub component 2- 1 and (ii) )Community Based Livelihood infrastructure under sub component 2- 2. 
• The country contribution (10%) and beneficiary contribution (up to 5%) were endorsed by Resolution No. 
2 of the 11th Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) held in 
Cotonou (January 2016)1.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (N/A)  
Not Applicable  
                                                             
1 Actual country and beneficiary contributions are estimated at 8% and 4% respectively of the total project costs


---
*Page 9*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 81 
 
  
C.1. Strategic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to contextualize the 
proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.  
 
C 1-1 Status of the Niger Basin, including basin strategies  
The Niger Basin area is  2,240,000 km2 (1,500,000 km2 is hydrologically active). The basin cuts across the major climatic 
zones —which include: the Guinea Savanna vegetation belt in the Fouta Djallon Massif in Guinea, the semi -arid Sahel Savanna 
zone and the tropical mangrove forests in Nigeria’s Niger Delta. An estimated 110 million people live in the Basin. The 
population is expected to rise to more than 180 million by 2025. Heavy reliance on natural resources, combined with ongoing 
conflicts and external effects of climate change, make it one of the most fragile river basins in Africa.  
 Niger Basin Shared Vision. The NBA member countries decided in February 2002 to lead a Shared Vision process for the 
sustainable development of the Basin. The Shared Vision is an expression of the countries’ commitment to promote a 
framework for enhancing cooperation and sharing benefits deriving from the Niger Basin’s resources. The Shared Vision is 
implemented through a Sustainable Development Action Program (SDAP).  
 
The SDAP with its Implementation Plan (2008 - 2027). The SDAP defines and guides the development process in the Niger 
River Basin. It comprises 350 actions for a total amount of US$ 7.2 billion. An estimated 89.4% of the investments planned in  the 
Operational Plan are devoted to strengthening resilience to the populations of the basin.  
 
Niger Basin Water Charter (2008). The charter is designed to ensure that NBA Member States share the river’s resources 
equitably. The Charter lays out a series of principles for equitable and reasonable participation and use of the Niger River water.
2 
 Silt Control in the mid -Niger River Basin. The project financed by the African Development Bank (€ 30 million) was located in 
the loop of the Niger in Mali and Burkina Faso and the right bank of the River in Niger upstream from Niamey . Achievements 
included: (i) adoption of a Silting Control Master Plan and Investment Programme (SDLE); (ii) institutional strengthening of the 
NBA Executive Secretariat and member countries and (iii) watershed restoration and anti -silting plans ~ 38, 088 ha.  
 
Climate adaptation Initiatives in the Niger basin.  The initiatives for the COP21 relating to the Niger River Basin are numerous, 
particularly in terms of adaptation to climate change. The Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) of the countries 
include an adaptation part. The regional institutions (ECOWAS, ECCAS, and CILSS etc.) each have initiatives for adaptation to  
climate change specific to the water resources sector. These strategic documents define priorit y areas for intervention at national 
and regional level to enhance resilience to climate change. The CRIP was developed so that, the measures selected are 
compatible and complementary to the above initiatives to ensure they are coherent at national and reg ional level. The CRIP 
presented at COP 21 is the primary guiding document with respect to climate adaptation within the Niger basin.  
 
The Climate Resilience Investment Plan (CRIP). Under the platform of the NBA, Niger Basin countries also collaboratively 
developed the Investment Plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger River Basin (CRIP). The CRIP 
was developed with the support of the African Development Bank (AfDB), World Bank Water and Energy Global Practices and 
World Bank Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA) programme.  
 
The CRIP (2015), is a strategic planning document that comprises 246 climate change adaptation actions for strengthening the 
resilience to climate change throughout the Niger Basin (see tabl e 4). The CRIP’s priority actions were selected from existing 
planning documents and vetted through an inclusive consultative process with multi -sectoral participation, strategically coupled 
with exercises to build local capacity. The CRIP, took into account all the actions planned under the PIDACC. The Niger River 
Basin member States collaborated on the Plan and pledged to advocate for technical and financial support to implement its 
priority actions.  
 
The plan was presented at the UNFCCC COP21 in Paris to raise the profile of their climate adaptation needs. The confirmed 
adaptation actions form an integral part of the 2016- 2024 NBA Operational Plan (OP), which structures the implementation of the 
SDAP of the Basin over the 9 nine years in 3- year increments  (2016- 2018, 2019, 2021, 2022- 2024). The CRIP framework is 
shown in Table 6 below. All PIDACC activities are integrated in NBA’s CRIP.  
 
                                                             
2 http://www.internationalwatersgovernance.com/niger -basin.html accessed October 30 , 2017


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 81 
 
  
Table 6: Niger Crip Focus Areas & Costs  
Measures contributing to climate resilience  Number of 
actions  Costs 
Millions US$  
Governance and Knowledge Package  54  242  
Knowledge. Collection and generation of climatic and hydrological information. 
Weather -forecasting tools and decision -making tools  26 78 
Integration of climate change adaptation into capabilities, bodies and management 
instruments of national and regional Basin institutions  9 129 
Assessment of vulnerability. Communication and awareness -raising  19 35 
Sectoral Package:  192  2,869  
Vulnerability to water stress  77 1,619  
Vulnerability to flooding  7 63 
Vulnerability to soil degradation  30 201 
Vulnerability to degradation of grazing land  8 127 
Vulnerability to ecosystem degradation  47 636 
Vulnerability to deterioration of the water quality  5 3 
Vulnerability linked to the rising sea-level 1 1 
Resilience (alternative livelihoods)  17 219 
 
Details on the 246 CRIP actions can be accessed in the reference: Investment Plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Clim ate Change in 
the Niger Basin Version for presentation at the meeting of the Finance Ministers of NBA Member States Version 5.1 30 September 2015;  
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/140841467999087867/Plan- d-investissement -pour-le-renforcement -de-la-resilience- au-changement -climatique- du-
bassin- du-fleuve- Niger   
 
C 1.2 Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Niger Basin (PIDACC)  
 
The PIDACC. PIDACC is the first operational program of CRIP which will be approved in 2018 and includes all actions of the 1st 
phase. It is a climate change adaptation program with co- benefits for climate mitigation. It is a program and not an investment 
plan. The preparation of PIDACC started in 2012 (supported by AfDB and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, 
UEMOA) on the basis of the actions identified in i) the master plan for silting control of the Niger Riv er in the nine countries 
(SDLE, 2007) and ii) the Sustainable Development Action Plan (SDAP)of the Niger Basin, 2008.  
 PIDACC aims at preserving the ecosystems of the Niger River and improving the resilience of the nine Basin countries, of whic h 
7 are ECOWAS countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Niger and Nigeria) and two belong to the ECCAS (Cameroon and Chad).The nine countries endorsed the PIDACC/NB and the two economic communities included it in the list of priority regional investment programs. The sub- basins covered by PIDACC interventions are presented in Annex I and include: 
(i) Niger Upper Basin (Guinea –Kankan); (ii) Bani Basin (Côte d’Ivoire-  Folon);  (iii) Niger Inland Delta (Mali –  Koulikoro – Mopti –
Ségou – Sikasso and Bamaba); (iv) Middle  Niger (Burkina Faso; Mali –  Gao, Timbuktu, Ansongo and Bourem; Niger -   Tillaberi; 
Niger - Tahoua; N iger – Dosso; Benin – Karimama / Malanville); and (v) Benue Upper Basin (Nigeria - Upper Benue (RBDA); 
Cameroon - Guider ; Mokolo; Hina and Mogodé and Chad–  Department of Kabbia).  
 In prioritisation of measures for the PIDACC the following criteria (standard for all the countries), were considered:  
 Measures must contribute to strengthening resilience to climate change and fulfil at least one of the following 2 criteria.  
• Institutional measures, knowledge enhancement measures or capacity -building measures co ntributing to enhancing 
resilience to climate change (criterion 1).  
• Sector -specific measures contributing to strengthening resilience of the populations and ecosystems of the basin to the 
climate changes identified in the Niger Basin (criterion 2). Sub cri terion include: (measures aiming to reduce vulnerability 
linked to water stress conditions, flooding, deterioration of the water quality, soil degradation, degradation of the grazing land, 
degradation of the ecosystems and measures aiming to strengthen res ilience (e.g. generation of jobs, revenues, etc.)  
 Moreover, it must also satisfy all the other 8 criteria (3 to 10):  
• Contribute to the sustainable development and management of the Niger Basin (criterion No.3)  
• Avoid maladaptation (criterion No.4)  
• Contribute to the protection, management and development of the water resources in the Niger Basin, as well as of the 
related ecosystems (criterion No.5)


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 81 
 
  
• Be compatible with the planning documents and agreements concerning the Niger Basin, CRIP, Masterplan for silt  control 
(SDLE) and the SDAP (criterion No.6)  
• Be-adopted by the Member States (taking into account national circumstances —criterion No.7)  
• Demonstrate the level of preparation required (criterion No.8)  
• Pre-identified funding (criterion No.9)  
• Economic feasibility (criterion No.10)  
 
C-1-3: African Development Bank experience, lessons reflected in PIDACC programme design  
The African Development Bank’s experience from multinational programmes in shared basins have informed PIDACC 
programme design; in parti cular the programmes financed in Lake Chad (PRODEBALT and PRESIBALT), Lake Victoria, Lake 
Tanganyika and the Songwe River Basin. Lessons include the following:  
(i) Flexibility and adaptability of development support instruments like in the Niger Silting Programme determine the achievement 
of programme targets. In activity design, emphasis should be placed on developing decentralized services to support 
grassroots organizations and investments.  
(ii) Long- term commitment is needed for achieving sustainable results and is important for institutional development programs 
like the NBA and the National Focal Institutions as well.  
(iii) Programmes must be firmly anchored to the local economy. Direct relations must be facilitated among farmers' organizations 
and local CSOs, enterprises, giving the former control over implementing most of the investments financed by the loan. 
Communities should have greater freedom to choose their service providers, suppliers and construction enterprises.  
(iv) To support the implementation of a multi -country project, it is important to strengthen the capacity of the regional organization 
whose role is to support the countries to manage the shared resource. The African Development Bank mobilized GEF 
financing to support the NBA in playing its role of monit oring/advising the nine countries for the implementation of PIDACC. 
Similar efforts have been applied to the Lake Chad and the Songwe River basins.  
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or policies) and outcomes 
and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline scenario.  
C-2-1: Climate vulnerability baseline  
 
C-2-1-1: Climate drivers for vulnerability (weather and climate variability) in the Niger Basin  
Climate drivers are involved in the shocks that push households in the Niger Basin into poverty. A map showing climate hotspots 
in the Sahel is shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1:  Map of Sahel showing climate hotspots (Source UK Met Office Hadley Centre)  
The drivers include: extreme weather events (major floods and droughts resulting in loss of assets and disability for communi ties); 
weather related risk s; crop losses (disruption of production due to adverse weather); and food price shocks.  The PIDACC program 
will contribute towards efforts to address climate variability in the Niger Basin.  
 
Temperature trends in the Niger Sub- Basins  
The temperature trends in the Basin are all positive (Figure 2) and significantly higher than the global average rates of tem perature 
increases reported by the IPCC, Kundzewicz et al (2007).


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 81 
 
  
 
Figure 2: Long term average annual temperature (top panel) and rainfall (bottom panel) trends in sub catchments  
of the Niger Basin (data source: Hirabayashi, 2008)3 
Temperatures across the Sahel have increased by nearly 1oC since 1970, at a rate nearly twice the global average.4 As may be 
expected, the largest trend (0.023⁰C/year) occurs in the Inner Delta- Middle Niger Sub- Basin. This rate translates to a change in 
the average temperature of 0.85⁰C between 1970 and 2006 or, using the trend since 1901, an increase of 1.91⁰C.  
 
Rainfall trends  
The Sahel represents a hotspot as far as annual rainfall variability. It is characterized by a great inter -annual rainfall, which has 
been expressed by multi -year droughts since 1968, as shown in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3: Annual rainfall for the Niger Basin (CRU data)  
 
Instrumental rainfall records in the Sahel show the strong variability of rainfall, in addition to the well -documented decline in 
rainfall since the late 1960s (Hulme, 2001). The rainfall record reveals a shift in climate around 1950, changing from predominantly 
year-to-year variability to variability visible over longer periods of decades. The last 40 years since 1969 have witnessed 
reductions in mean annual rainfall, with a decrease of 20– 40% noted between the periods 1931 –1960 and 1968 –1990 (IPCC 
2007; Chappell and Agnew 2004).5 From the mid- 1990s, rainfall recovered somewhat in the Niger Basin, with rainfall in a number 
of years being above the long- term mean. This has been followed by an increase in vegetation in some areas, in part due to 
rainfall increases (Olsson et al., 2005). Measures are required for strengthened resilience against rainfall variability.  
 
C-2-1-2: Impacts of extreme climate events (droughts, floods) in the Niger Basin  
Trends observed over the last 40 years in the Basin show that overall temperatures have risen, droughts have been recurrent 
and severe, rainfall has increased, and floods have occurred more frequently and with more intensity. (Figure 4). The most 
                                                             
3 May 2014; Niger River Basin Sustainable Development Action Plan’  Niger River Basin Climate Risk Assessment; Final Report; Volume 2; Water 
Resources Profile and Historical Climate Variability; A Joint Initiative of the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) and the World Ban k 
4 June 2015; Alec Crawford; Climate change and state fr agility in the Sahel;  
5 November 2010; Keffing Sissoko Herman van Keulenet al. Agriculture, livelihoods and climate change in the West African Sahel


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 81 
 
  
severe dr oughts occurred in 1912 -1915, 1970 -1974, and 1979 -1993 and recently in 2014.6 The dry episode that started in the 
1960s culminated in severe droughts in 1973, 1984 and 1990, and resulted in a decline in rainfall in the range of 20– 30% in the 
Sahel region.  
 
Figure 4: Niger Basin Weighted Anomaly of Statistical Precipitation (WASP) Index7 
 
Droughts are particularly harmful to rain- fed agriculture and pastoralism. In the Niger basin, droughts killed up to 250,000 
people and decimated over two million livestock in the 1970 –1973 period (Kandji, Verchot, and Mackensen 2006). Benson and 
Clay (1998) assessed the impact of drought on the GDP of several African countries including Nigeria, Burkina Faso, and Niger. They did this by comparing t he performance of GDP in the pre- drought and drought years. Their results showed that in 
1984, one of the worst drought years on record, Niger’s economy suffered a 6% decline. The corresponding values for Nigeria 
and Burkina Faso were 4.5% and 1.5% decline in GDP.  
 
In the Niger Basin, floods in 2012 destroyed hundreds of thousands of farm acres of land in Nigeria, displacing 1.3 million people 
and causing 431 deaths (Kandji, Verchot, and Mackensen 2006). Paeth et al. (2009) analysed the conditions associate d with 
widespread flooding in the Niger Basin in 2007 and associates flooding with a number of factors, including anomalous heating in 
the tropical Atlantic and to La Niña in the tropical Pacific. Other climate- related hazards of significance in the Niger basin include 
extreme temperatures, sand and dust storms, strong winds, brush fires and locust swarms.
8 
 
Extreme climate events not only impact livelihoods through disaster shock, they also— push poor households to adopt low -risk 
strategies that have low returns, and leave no prospect of rising above the poverty line (Hallegatte et al. 2016).  
 C-2-1-3 Uncertainty with respect to climate risk
9 
In the Niger Basin, all GCMs project significant increases in temperature, mostly between 10C and 30C for 2050 and 4.0oC by the 
end of the 21st century for both CMIP3 and CMIP5 Global Circulation Models (GCMs) under the A2 and A1B scenarios (CMIP3) and RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 (CMIP5).
10 Two out of three climate models project small to moderate increases in precipitation and 
90% of the analysed climate projections for the 21st century indicate changes between - 6% and +7% for 2050 (Figure 5).  
 GCMs do not agree on whether the Niger Basin is likely to become wetter or drier in the 21st Century. 50% of the models used 
by the IPCC  (Christensen et al., 2007) predict increased rainfall, while the other half predict decreased rainfall. However a high 
degree of climatic variability is projected to continue, and may become more pronounced on seasonal, annual and decadal 
timescales, to t he scale that resulted in the severe droughts of the 1970s and 1980s.
11 This underscores the importance of 
strengthening the capacity of institutions in the basin to plan investments that can deliver the intended benefits under a wi de 
range of future climat es at various timescales. The PIDACC will factor this in the project design  
 
                                                             
6 February 2010; Hadley Centre Climate Change Consultancy; Sahelian climate: past, current, projections  
7 IRI (2009) for World Bank Africa Region Water Resources & Climate AAA.  
8 December 2011; Marisa Goulden and Roger Few; Climate Change, Water and Conflict in the Niger River Basin; USAID  
9 February 2010; Hadley Centre Climate Change Consultancy; Sahelian climate: past, current, projections  
10 June 2015; Alec Crawford; Climate change and state fragility in the Sahel  
11 Juddy N. Okpara, Aondover A.Tarhule and Muthiah Perumal; Study of Climate C hange in Niger River Basin, West Africa: Reality Not a Myth


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 81 
 
  
 
Figure 5: Ensemble of regional climate projections for West Africa (Source: Giannini et al., 2008; bold black line is the ensemble mean for the 
A1B emission scenario; bold blue line reflects the historical 20th century rainfall variability for the Niger Basin)12 
 
C-2-2: Climate- related sectoral challenges in the Niger Basin  
 
C-2-2-1: Biodiversity loss in the Niger Basin  
Climate change increases the thr eats to biodiversity.  Biodiversity and ecosystem services help the Niger basin countries to 
adapt to and mitigate climate change. Ecosystems in the Niger basin are already degraded due to prolonged drought, agricultur al 
expansion, deforestation, erosion, t he proliferation of invasive species, and biodiversity loss from poaching.  As a result of long -
term declines in rainfall from the 1970s to 1990s, the Sahel ecological zone has shifted 25– 35 km southward, resulting in 
biodiversity loss and conversion of arable land to sand dunes. Climate change poses additional risks, such as habitat and 
biodiversity loss, due to increased temperatures and extreme weather events all of which alter food chains and the habitats t hat 
support them. Endangered mammals such as the cheetah, giraffe, and lion, once common in the region, are now largely absent 
outside of protected areas (e.g., Aïr and Ténéré National Nature Reserve in Niger and Sahel Partial Faunal Reserve in Burkina 
Faso).Biodiversity loss will lead to the erosion of  ecosystem services and will exacerbate vulnerability to the impacts of climate 
change. Among the main threats to biodiversity are climate change, loss of natural habitats and environmental degradation.  
Invasive species, with their high evapotranspiration rates, are an immense burden to already water -scarce regions like the Niger 
basin. Climate change threatens to further degrade land, vegetation and water resources through increased incidence of drought, 
desertification and floods and projected shortening of the rainy season. A drier climate could result in 3,000 km2 reduction of the 
Niger Inner Delta, which will impact aquatic biodiversity, fisheries, and rice production (Zwarts et al. 2005). Bush fires ar e 
predicted with increasing frequency as temperatur es rise in the Sahelian part of the Basin leading to the release of more carbon 
to the atmosphere. Enhanced management of biodiversity could mitigate these impacts and contribute to climate adaptation. By 
conserving nature and restoring ecosystems PIDACC i nterventions will reduce vulnerability and increase resilience. With 
strengthened protection and improved fire management, millions of tons of carbon could be stored in the woodlands.13  
 
Social and economic vulnerability is a concern in communities that ar e dependent on fisheries and aquaculture.  Many 
aquatic species depend on the timing of rainfall and flood events for important migrations (e.g. spawning and feeding). Inland 
fisheries are at risk because of water shortages, drought and impacts from other s ectors. Freshwater ﬁsheries throughout the 
Niger basin are based largely on species that migrate to wetland systems within the basin for breeding and spawning. The combination of changes in rainfall and runoﬀ resulting in falling water levels during drough
ts, is likely to aﬀect habitats and ﬁsheries 
in the basin, impacting the movement of ﬁsh and aﬀecting nursery ground function. Changes may occur in timing and success of 
migrations, spawning and peak abundance, as well as in sex ratios. In addition there m ay be potential loss of species or a shift 
in composition in capture fisheries and impacts on seed availability for aquaculture, thereby threatening livelihoods. Stabil ity of 
supply will be impacted by changes in seasonality, increased variance in ecosyste m productivity and increased supply variability 
and risks.14 Increased storage could promote integration of fish farming through cage culture and enhance fisheries production.  
 
                                                             
12 World bank 2014; Niger River Basin Sustainable Development Action Plan Niger River Basin Climate Risk Assessment; Final Repor t; Volume 1; Main 
Report; A Joint Initiative of the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) and the World Bank  
13 Protected areas: providing natural solutions to 21st Century challenges N. Lopoukhine, N. Crawhall, N. Dudley, P. Figgis, C. Karibuhoye, D. Laffoley, J. 
Miranda Londoño, K. MacKinnon and T. Sandwith  
14 FAO, 2016; Fisheries, A quaculture And Climate Change; The role of fisheries and aquaculture in the implementation of the Paris agreement


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 81 
 
  
C-2-2-2 Climate change and land degradation:  
Unsustainable land use practices and watershed degradation.  The Sahelian part of the Niger basin has witnessed land 
degradation over the past several decades, triggered by incessant droughts and increasing desertification. Slash and burn 
farming, forest fires, deforestation, and mining concessions within selected watersheds contribute to severe degradation adversely impacting their ecological functions, and compromising their integrity. Higher temperatures and variable rainfall are 
additional stressors that reduce water availability and co ntribute to land degradation (USAID 2017).These degraded 
environmental conditions have fostered rural -urban migration in the region, especially in Niger, Burkina Faso, and Mali. Land 
degradation in the Sahel is characterised by soil degradation, mainly due  to wind erosion. This is caused by climatic factors such 
as drought and diminishing rainfall, compounded by anthropogenic factors, including population growth, agricultural intensifi cation 
and overgrazing. These factors result in the reduction of vegetati on cover, decrease in fallow periods and a reduction in the 
balance between fallow areas and cultivated fields, which are vital to maintaining soil fertility and reducing losses from er osion. 
Should this trend continue, it would bring about a sharp decline 
in soil nutrients, accelerating the loss of vegetation cover.  
Agroforestry, integrated farming and practices that promote vegetation cover are proposed as sustainable land practices in the 
project. These will provide soil cover to protect soils against agents of erosion, increase agricultural productivity per unit land area 
and diversify farmers' sources of income, resulting in benefits for agricultural production and addressing land degradation15. 
 
C-2-2-3: Water resources scarcity and increasing environm ental degradation in the Niger Basin  
Severe water stress across the agro -pastoralist region of West Africa.16 Water is a limiting factor for development in the 
Sahel. The region’s water supply is unevenly distributed, poorly accessible due to undeveloped hy draulic supply systems, and 
crosses national boundaries, creating significant challenges (USAID 2014). In the Niger basin, where communities are faced wi th 
highly seasonal and often unpredictable rainfall, a lack of adequate water storage already causes large and avoidable economic 
losses from floods and droughts, and constrains long- term growth. Recent studies suggest that increased temperatures, irregular 
rainfall patterns and drier conditions will amplify future drought severity and temperature extremes,  increasing resource scarcity 
and exacerbating conflict levels and increasing migration and conflict. Countries like Burkina Faso, and Niger that have a lo w 
water resources base per capita are expected to experience physical water scarcity by 2025.  
 
Water  quality degradation . Precipitation and associated river discharge are major drivers of water pollution in the form of excess 
nutrients and sediment, transport into the Niger river. Changing climate conditions will affect water and wastewater treatment and 
disposal in the Niger basin in several ways. Elevated stream temperatures, combined with lower flows, may require wastewater 
facilities to increase treatment to meet stream water quality standards. When drought frequencies increase, water quality in river s 
may suffer because of reduced dilution of pollutant concentration, with potential health impacts. More intense precipitation and 
floods, combined with urbanization and associated increasing impermeable surfaces on the other hand, may amplify the likeliho od 
of contaminated overland flow or combined sewer over flows contributing to declines in water quality in those areas. If flood  
frequencies increase, human health may be impacted by sewage contamination during flood events.  
 
Navigation constraints . Navigation on the Niger River will become increasingly vulnerable to more varied precipitation patterns. 
The impacts from extreme weather events, higher temperatures and heat waves, precipitation changes, and low flows and other 
climatic conditions are aff ecting the reliability and capacity of navigation in the Middle and Lower Niger. Drought often lowers 
vessel drafts on navigable sections of the river in rivers Cameroun, Mali, Niger and Chad. Continued low water flows have lim ited 
the duration of the navi gation period in Cameroun. In Chad, the Niger River carries a heavy sediment load, making navigation 
difficult, during low flows. In the Inland Delta (Mali) and other river areas experiencing progressive narrowing of secondary  
branches, the drought that dr ied these channels has not allowed the annual “rinsing” of the seasonal barriers created by deposits 
of windblown sand and dunes.  
 
C-2-3: Barriers to climate adaptation in the Niger basin  
≠1—Policy and institutional barriers.  Implementing a climate resilient program in the Niger basin requires supportive policies, 
as well as coordination across processes and institutions responsible for climate change to avoid inconsistencies. Issues of 
climate adaptation are communicated within environmental policy, isolating the issue from the development and disaster risk 
reduction agendas. Institutional barriers contribute to weak coordination between those working on climate change, development 
and disaster risk reduction. There is limited awareness among policy -makers and development practitioners about the risks posed 
by climate change, and how these relate to development priorities. Government departments responsible for poverty reduction 
and disaster risk reduction have limited means of  coordination, which undermines adaptation efforts.   
                                                             
15 https://europa.eu/capacity4dev/public -environment -climate/document/land- degradation- and-agriculture- sahel -africa -
causes -impacts -and-recommendations  
16 IPCC (2007): Summary for policy -makers. In: Climate Change 2007: The physical Science Basis. Contributions of Working Group I to the Forth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 81 
 
  
 
≠2—Weak adaptive capacity.17 The capacities for implementing Early Warning systems (EWS) in each of the countries remains 
varied, with weaknesses in their ability to issue critical warnings. Left unaddressed, climate change will have an increasingly 
negative impact on livelihoods across the region. The development of EWS, effective communication of climate information and 
an understanding of the local context within which adaptations take place, are pre -requisites to enhancing climate adaptations 
and rural livelihoods. EWS could help defuse livelihood insecurities by providing the information required to mitigate disast er risk, 
food insecurity, and related conflict and migration outcomes.   
 
≠3—Inadequate C limate Risk Information. Reliable hydro meteorological systems and services are needed to ensure timely 
early warning and preparedness, yet such systems and services are lacking in many of the Niger basin countries . The network 
of hydromet stations is spar se and deteriorating, and hydromet data are often inaccurate. Further, hydromet data are not freely 
shared (inter -country and inter -agency), despite WMO mandates (Peterson and Manton 2008). In part, this is because 
underfunded hydromet agencies sell data t o support their operations. At the regional level, AGRHYMET, ACMAD and the NBA, 
continue to face several challenges, some of which are related to data acquisition in member countries, their timely transmis sion 
to the processing centres and the small number  of observation points. Strengthening of the basin hydromet system is required.  
 
≠4—Inadequate Climate Adaptation Finance.  Long -term financial shortages give rise to and magnify other barriers, such as 
those stemming from lack of information, inadequate in teragency coordination and natural resources investments. Short funding 
horizons also make full integration of adaptation measures difficult. Investment to increase the robustness of infrastructure to 
more frequent extreme weather events in the Niger basin is also delayed due to a lack of financial resources. Institutional 
effectiveness falters when funding is cut back, as occurred with the Niger Basin Hycos program.  Financing of adaptation is also 
difficult because the economic benefits of many adaptation investments are hard to quantify.   
 
≠5—Uncertainty. Effective climate change adaptation in the Niger basin is also complicated by a number of cascading 
uncertainties that limit the ability to predict the timing and magnitude of future climate change impact s. Uncertainty undermines 
the motivation of actors to become more aware, while lack of awareness inhibits efforts directed towards reducing uncertainty . 
 
C-2-4: Overcoming climate change- induced extremes and barriers in the Niger Basin  
The Niger basin countries face challenges in basin natural resources management due to overexploitation of limited and uneven ly 
distributed water resources. These challenges will be exacerbated by rapid population growth and increasing urbanisation on 
one hand and by the impacts of climate change on the other. The changing climate will bring greater extremes – ranging from 
longer periods with droughts to more extreme rainfalls and thereby, more frequent and severe flooding. This means that 
adaptation measur es in the water resources and agricultural domain must be robust and flexible to adjust to these uncertainties. 
Early warnings, climate outlooks for the rainy season, and extreme weather event forecasts are important elements for reducing exposure and sens itivity to extreme weather and climate events in drylands of the Niger basin. A holistic approach for adaptation 
in the basin will improve the ability to cope with present variability, as well as enhance the adaptive capacity to respond t o future 
climate c hange. This will involve both disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation. Such adaptation measures within a 
framework of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) include improving disaster risk management, building adaptive capacity, incorporating water resources planning and ensuring that infrastructure is resilient to climate change.  
 
C-2-5: Existing Tools for basin monitoring, hydrological forecasting and decision making  
A number of tools have been developed by the Niger basin, however, t hey have limitations in translation of science to policy and 
decision making. A description of existing tools is given in sections C 2- 4-1 and C 2- 4-2. 
 
C-2-5-1: Early warning systems and Regional Climate Outlook Forums in the Niger Basin  
Despite the uncer tain climate, early warning systems (EWS) in the Niger Basin are expected to comprise part and parcel of 
disaster risk reduction and management of responses to climate extremes in the Basin. Interface of the PIDACC with Regional Climate Outlook Forums (RCO Fs) like the African Centre of Meteorological Application for Development (ACMAD) and 
coordination with National Climate Outlook Forums (NCOFs) is expected to play a key role in reducing the uncertainty in climate 
projections and mainstreaming outcomes int o PIDACC. RCOFs like ACMAD work to improve the provision of weather and climate 
information in the fields of agriculture and food security, water resources and disaster risk management. The ACMAD -
AGRHYMET -NBA consortium which is the designated WMO West Afr ica Regional Climate Centre Network plans to generate 
regional tailored climate products, providing online access, and coordinating training for users, among other tasks.  
 
                                                             
17 June 2015; Alec Crawford; Climate change and state fragility in the Sahel


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 81 
 
  
C -2-5-2 System for monitoring water resources and flows forecasts using satellite i magery in the NIGER Basin.  
With financing contribution from the African Development Bank – Climdev fund (Euro 1 million18), the NBA has effective 2017, set 
up a system for monitoring and disaster risk prevention related to floods and droughts based on satell ite observations. The 3 
year project supports the collection of hydro climatic data, capacity building and the establishment of a Water resource trac king 
system and satellite flow forecasts. Results include: (i) Users and decision makers trained and sensit ized on disaster risks (ii) 
Flood and drought forecasts developed (iii) operational equipment for data collection, processing and archiving acquired and (iv) 
operational hydro climatic databases at national and regional level. This project has enabled the acquisition of hydro climatic data in real time with a grid of 3km X 3km and the diffusion of hydrological information products for enhanced hydrological forecasting. 
 
 Schemes of the basin forecasting tools are shown in figures 6 and 7. The tool in figure 6 operates in two modes: (i) a rain- flow 
simulation mode to generate daily flow to stations and (ii) flow forecast mode to calculate daily flow up to 6 days in advanc e.  
 
Figure 6: Scheme of the NBA hydrological forecasting model(source NBA 2018)  
 
Figure 7: Scheme of the computerised System for stream flow forecasting (Source NBA, 2018)  
 
The deterministic model (figure 7) is built around data from 38 Hydrometric stations in the basin. Forecast Horizons range from 
3 days to 150 days for trend forecasts. Both models are used for the development of alerts (floods and severe floods). These forecasting tools are managed by the NBA Modeling Expert and the Hydrological Expert in charge of the hydrological database.  
 
C -2-5-3 Existing Decision Support Tools for Allocation of Water resources in the NIGER River basin  
 
In 2007, the NBA developed a model for the allocation of water r esources in the Niger basin using the Mike Basin software. The 
model was used for the preparation of the Niger Basin Sustainable Development Action Plan (SDAP). A macro- economic model 
was also developed. The model was later updated to MIKE HYDRO (see figur e 8).  
                                                             
18 The estimated project cost is €3 016 227, with the contribution from the bank estimated at €1,000,000


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 81 
 
  
 
 
Figure 8 Niger basin decision support tools (Mike Hydro Basin), Source (African Development Bank, 2018)  
 
The modules include (i) a Basin module (MIKE HYDRO Basin) and (ii) a rainfall runoff model MIKE NAM. MIKE HYDRO Basi n 
used for WRM and planning in the basin. It is a semi -distributed model that includes: (i) 66 Hydrometric stations; (ii) 161 sub-
basins; (iii) 481 hydrological nodes (hydrological stations, dams, sampling points); (iv) 304 sampling points and (v) 37 exis ting 
dams and 36 dams in project. The model was calibrated from two databases: (i) the Regional hydrological database of 105 
stations and (ii) the sampling database. The model does not take into account the climate projections.  
 
NBA experts have been using MIKE Hydro since 2012 to assess the impacts of projects on water resources, including the 
following projects: (i) IWRM studies like the development of the Niger Basin SDAP (ii) Provision of multi -sector solution 
alternatives to water allocation and shorta ge problems (iii) Reservoir operation optimization (Fomi, Taoussa and Kandadji) and 
other development projects (levies, works on tributaries) (iv) technical support for the implementation of the notification procedure 
for planned measures (annex No. 3 of t he Water Charter); (v) Exploration of conjunctive use of groundwater and surface water 
and (v) Irrigation scheme performance improvements. The Mike Hydro Basin model is used independently by NBA experts. 
However, major updates are done by international con sultancy as was the case in 2012. The same is true for forecasting models.  
 
The NBA therefore has requisite capacity in running the Mike Hydro Models, however the capacity of the National Meteorologica l 
and Hydrological services is inadequate. Thus considerable capacity building is needed for all NBA countries through an intensive 
capacity development program in all partner States.  
 
C -2-5-4 Strengthening Decision Support Tools for Climate Adaptation in the NIGER River basin  
The existing tools and ca pacity are inadequate to assess climate adaptation at the basin scale. This is critical given that the water 
resources are shared between countries and adaptation measures, depending on the type of interventions considered may have 
important implications downstream. The PIDACC project will strengthen the application decision support tools through capacity development and integration of climate risk management, strengthening of hydrological forecasting based on rainfall -runoff 
models driven by projections of  future precipitation and application of freeware such as the Soil and Water Assessment tool 
(SWAT) to assess impacts of landscape measures. The enhanced tools will enable decision- makers to evaluate and implement 
climate adaptation measures  
 
Examples of c apacity needs include: (i) major model updates; (ii) possible changes to the Mike Hydro Basin tool produced by 
DHI and (iii) to train NMHS on these tools to ensure their sustainable operation by the NBA at regional national levels. Trai nings 
include: IWRM and Climate Change Adaptation; Use of satellite data for drought and flood management; Real -time operational 
flood forecasting and early warning; Real -time data and information management; Agro -Climatic Drought Monitoring & Early


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 81 
 
  
Warning; Configuration of systems to support specific needs, including creating data interfaces to external data sources; 
Configuration of early warning system; Running flood mitigation scenarios during emergency situations.  
 
C-2-4: Outcomes and impact of planned program  
C 4-2-1: An IWRM Approach towards Climate Resilient Growth in the Niger basin  
 
Adaptation to climate change- induced stress on water resources requires a holistic approach. IWRM approaches — combined 
with tools forecasting the changed availability and use of water — will therefore play an important role in managing water 
resources. The planned PIDACC project therefore follows an IWRM approach, to sustainable development, allocation and monitoring of water resource use in the context of social, economic and environmental objectives (see figure 9).  
 
The IWRM approach to the PIDACC is the encompassing paradigm for adaptation to contemporary climate variability, and it is 
the prerequisite for coping with the still uncertain consequences of global warming, climate changes  associated with it and their 
repercussions on the water cycle. IWRM in the Niger basin, combined with the physical models will offer a framework, which enables a better understanding of the impacts of climate change on water resources in the Niger basin as well as the interaction 
between the atmosphere and the hydrological cycle. This will help in planning for climate change adaptation in the basin.  
 
The focus on the river basin as a spatial unit, addressing multiple goals and objectives through cross -sectoral and regionally 
driven planning and actions, stakeholder participation, vertical integration from the lowest level of user to the top policym akers, 
co-ordination and collaboration among all the institutions responsible for resources management at a wat ershed (catchment) 
scale, f and incorporation of Climate Risk management will address the basin challenges and strengthen the project outcomes  
 
 
Figure 9 integration of PIDACC core elements using IWRM conceptualization approach –  optimizing social, economic and 
environmental co- benefits (African Development Bank, 2018)  
 
C 4-2-2: Outcomes and impact of the planned PIDACC program  
The programme’s objective is  to contribute to improving the resilience of populations and ecosystems in the Niger Basin through 
sustainable management of natural resources. Specifically, the program  aims to: i) reduce the silting process of the Niger R iver; 
ii) improve the adaptive capacity of the population and iii) improve natural resource management and integrated ecosystem 
management. The programme’s objectives and impacts at all levels are presented in the consistency framework in Table 7.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 81 
 
  
Table 7: Consistency framework   
Objectives  Components  Effects  Impacts at the basin 
level African / 
International Impact  
Reduce the silting 
process of the Niger 
River  S/C 1.1: Resource and 
Ecosystems Protection  Silting of the Niger 
River has decreased  Inter-Regional  
The Niger Basin’s 
ecosystems are 
preserved and living 
environment of 
people is improved  Climate change 
resilience is 
improved  
Rural exodus and illegal migration has 
reduced  
The fight against 
global warming is 
strengthened  Improve natural 
resources 
management  S/C 1.2: Strengthening natural 
resources management  The sustainable natural 
resources management 
is improved  
Improve population 
adaptation capacity to climate change  S/C 2.1: Implementation of 
Climate Resilient Growth Infrastructure
 Agro -pastoral and 
fishery productions have increased  National  
Income from agricultural and resilience of local population to climate change are improved  
S/C 2.2: Promotion of income 
generating activities Building 
community adaptation capacities  Adaptation to CC 
capacities are built  
C3: PIDACC coordination and 
management  
….. 
C-2-5: Alignment of PIDACC outcomes to GCF outcomes  
Proposed GCF financed PIDACC outcomes include: (i) strengthened management, restoration and protection of natural habitats 
from climate variability and change; (ii) increased generation and use of climate information in decision- making; (iii) strengthened 
adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks; (iv) strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk r eduction 
processes; and (iv) improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions. The outputs are 
elaborated below. The implementation plan and log frame are elaborated in Section C -8-1 and H1 respectively.  
 
Table 8: Alignments of PIDACC Outcomes with GCF outcomes, and implementation role.  
 
Component/Sub 
component  Outputs  Nationally 
Implemented19 Regionally 
Implemented20  
C1: Development of ecosystems and natural resources resilience  
S/C 1.1, Resource and  
ecosystems protection  Output 1: Strengthened sustainable land management  √  
Output 2: Strengthened sustainable forest management  √  
Output 3: Strengthened sustainable agroforestry management  √  
Output 4: Strengthened sustainable protection of natural habitats  √  
S/C 1.2. Strengthening 
the shared management 
of natural resources  Output 5 Strengthened climate and weather information systems  √ √ 
Output 6: Regional pollution prevention plan developed   √ 
Output 7: Payment mechanism for environmental services mechanism and 
adaptation fund set up  √ √ 
Output 8: Strengthened capacity for IWRM implementation at national and 
regional (NBA) levels  √ √ 
C 2: Development of population resilience  
S/C 2.1, Implementation 
of Climate Resilient 
Growth Infrastructure  Output 10. Strengthened climate resilient hydro -agricultural infrastructure  √  
Output 11. Water points for cattle and development of transhumance 
pathways  √  
S/C 2.2. Promotion of 
income generating 
activities Building 
community adaptation 
capacities  Output 14: Community -based Climate Adaptation Action Plans prepared 
and implemented  √  
Output 15. Increase in local economic development arising from the 
upgraded Community based Livelihood infrastructure  √  
C3 PIDACC coordination 
and management  Output 16: Dissemination of good adaptation practices and climate 
information  √ √ 
Output 17: Strengthened Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) by the NBA 
Environment Observatory  √ √ 
….. 
…


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 81 
 
  
Table 9: Financial Contributions by Co -financier and Outputs  
 
 
 
 
 
Annex III - PIDACC Budget -FD+FIP+AfDB v10 -09-18 provides details of the GCF Funded activities at national and regional level.  
 
                                                             
19 Ministries responsible for water Resources and Enviornment  
20 Niger Basin Au thority  Component/Sub component OutputTotal 
Millions 
(USD) Amount 
GCF, 
Millions 
(USD) Amount 
AE (Millions USD)Amount 
EU (millions USD)Amount 
GEF (millions USD)Amount 
FIP (millions USD)Amount 
Country (million USD)Amount 
Beneficiary (millions USD)
 Project Cost        209.903           67.774      78.095      18.081         12.980           9.000          16.186              7.786   
 C 1: Development of 
ecosystems and natural resources resilience          86.219           34.302         1.270      17.486           8.771           8.181            9.352              6.856   
 S/C 1.1 Resource and 
Ecosystems Protection          70.591           25.598         0.168      16.087           4.516           8.013            9.352              6.856   
 Output 1: Strengthened sustainable land 
management (SLM) 39.622         15.208        -         13.881  1.548       -           5.609        3.376          
 Output 2: Strengthened Sustainable 
forest management 13.553         4.529          -         0.612     2.325       3.071       1.760        1.256          
 Output 3: Strengthened sustainable 
agroforestry management 8.713           1.580          -         0.382     0.644       4.942       0.430        0.735          
 Output 4: Strengthened sustainable 
protection of natural habitats8.704           4.281          0.168     1.213     -           -           1.553        1.489          
 S/C 1.2: Strengthening shared 
management of natural resources          15.627              8.705         1.102        1.399           4.254           0.167                  -                      -     
 Output 5 Strengthened climate and 
weather information services 8.881           6.306          -         0.752     1.822       -           -            -              
 Output 6: Regional pollution prevention 
plan developed 1.184           0.452          -         0.112     0.620       -           -            -              
 Output 7: Payment Mechanism for 
environmental services (PES) and RAFCC Fund set up 1.145           0.597          -         0.254     0.125       0.167       -            -              
Output 8:Strengthened Capacity for
IWRM implementation at national/
regional (NBA) levels 3.648           1.349          0.611     -         1.687       -           -            -              
 Output 9: Master Plan for the river 
navigability developed 0.771           -              0.490     0.281     -           -           -            -              
 C 2: Development of 
population resilience        102.603           23.415      68.161        0.595           3.416                 -              6.086              0.930   
 S/C 2.1 Implementation of 
Climate Resilient Growth 
Infrastructure 82.892         8.614          67.864   0.595     1.515       -           4.276        0.028          
 Output 10: Strengthened Climate 
Resilient Hydro-Agricultural Infrastructure59.831         2.424          53.799   -         -           -           3.608        -              
 Output 11: Water points for cattle and 
development of transhumance pathways 
developed15.663         6.190          6.874     0.595     1.515       -           0.461        0.028          
 Output 12: River Sections trained for 
improved navigation1.521           -              1.521     -         -           -           -            -              
 Output 13: Fisheries Infrastructure 
constructed for improved productivity5.877           -              5.670     -         -           -           0.207        -              
 S/C 2.2: Promotion of income 
generating activities Building community adaptation 
capacities 19.712         14.801        0.297     -         1.902       -           1.810        0.902          
 Output 14: Community-based Climate 
Adaptation Plans prepared and 
implemented5.969           4.129          -         -         0.863       -           0.543        0.434          
 Output 15: Increase in local economic 
development arising from the upgraded 
Community based Livelihood 
infrastructure13.743         10.672        0.297     -         1.038       -           1.267        0.468          
 C 3 PIDACC  Coordination, 
monitoring-evaluation and communication 21.081         10.056        8.664     -         0.793       0.819       0.748        -              
 Output 16: Dissemination of good 
adaptation practices and climate information 1.742           1.154          0.423     -         0.165       -           -            -              
 Output 17: Strengthened Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) by the NBA Environment Observatory7.569           6.044          0.976     -         0.082       0.325       0.143        -              
 Project Management and coordination 11.771         2.859          7.266     -         0.546       0.495       0.606        -


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 81 
 
  
C.3. Project / Programme Description (PIDACC -GCF Project)  
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
The PIDACC framework is summarized in Figure 10. The PIDACC programme focuses on three components: (i) Development 
of resources and ecosyst ems resilience; (ii) Development of population resilience, and (iii) Programme coordination and 
management. The component description for the PIDACC - project follows thereafter.  
 
Figure 10: Intervention Framework of the PIDACC21  
Notes to Component, Output and Activity Description :  
Section C3, describes the project activities by output across the Niger Shared River basin. Table 10: Shows the Regions where PIDACC Measures will be implemented by country as well as the executing agen cies in each of the countries.  
Table 10: Showing the Regions of where PIDACC Measures will be implemented by country as well as the Country EES  
 
Country  Region  Executing Entity  
Benin  Departments of Alibori, Atacora and Borgou)  Ministry of Mines, Energy and Water  
Burkina Faso  East, Center -East, Central Plateau, North -Central, Sahel and 
Upper -Basins  Ministry of Water and Sanitation(MEA)  
Cameroon  North and Far North  Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional 
Development  
Côte d’I voire  Bagoué Kabadougou, Folon  Ministry of Environment, Water and Forestry  
Guinea  Faranah, Kankan and Nzérékoré  Ministry of Environment, Water and Forestry  
Mali Koulikoro, Sikasso, Ségou, Mopti, Timbuktu and Gao  Ministry of Water and Energy (MEH)  
Niger  Dosso, Niamey, Tahoua and Tillabery  
 Ministry of Water Resources, Environment & 
Desertification Control  
Nigeria  Sub-basins of Upper Niger basin, Upper Benue River basin, 
Anambra -Imo River basin)  Federal Ministry of Water Resources  
Chad  Regions of East Ma yo Kébbi and West Mayo Kébb  Ministry of Environment and Water Resources  
Niger Basin 
Authority  Basin wide  Niger Basin Authority (PIDACC Coordination Unit)  
 
Appendix VI Climate Rationale for the GCF PIDACC Project, a detailed description of the climate stressors, impacts of the cli mate 
change stressors and proposed interventions, by output, activity and country. Not all outputs are implemented in each country . 
The Executing Entity (EE) by country and at regional level is included as part of the Intervention Matrix. Broader institutional 
arrangements at regional and country level are included in Annex II -Institutional -implementation- arrangements  
                                                             
21 Modified from p reliminary studies of multi -purpose infrastructure of the Programme f or the Integrated Development a nd Adaptation to Climate Change i n the Niger 
Basin ( PIDACC /NB); Regional Synthesis Report


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 81 
 
  
Component 1. Development of the Resilience of Ecosystems and Natural Resources  
Component 1 is aimed at enhancing the resilience of agro- ecosystems by increasing ecosystem services through the use of 
agro- ecology principles and landscape approaches. The location of activities for development of ecosystems and natural 
resources resilience under component 1 are shown in Figure 11.  Under this component, the intervention strategy will focus on 
IWRM as a set of tools and instruments that can assist communities t o adapt to changing climatic conditions that limit water 
availability or may lead to excessive floods or droughts in the Niger Basin.  
 
Figure 11: Location of the activities of Component 1 of PIDACCIbid 
Outputs related to this component are elaborated below.  
Sub-component 1.1. Resource and Ecosystems Protection22 
Output 1: Strengthened sustainable land management  
This output includes reducing risks related to water shortages and land degradation. It addresses land degradation and climate 
change risks in the Niger basin at the regional level by linking national -level efforts for restoration across the basin countries. The 
scope covers erosion and silting control (stabilization of 10000 ha of dunes; restoration of 110,000 ha of degraded land and mechanical and biological management of 45,000 ha of ravines) and includes strengthened agro- sylvo -pastoral management in 
selected watersheds. Measures (technologies) to address land degradation under this output include: Mechanical and biol ogical 
Soil Defence Restoration works on communal land; Mechanical and biological treatment of ravines; Water and soil conservation works in cultivated plots and shoreline protection. These practices will contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigat ion, 
and food security in the Basin.  
 Activities  
Activities will include: (i) Consultation with partner states (agronomists, land officers on zoning of land for agriculture etc); (ii) 
Development and implementing of 9 sub basin masterplans/watershed plans  (iii) Stabilizing dunes; restoring degraded land, and 
mechanical/biological management of  ravines (iv) awareness campaigns on erosion control and improved soil management 
practices; (iii) expansion of sustainable land and water management interventions a nd technologies —includes gender -
responsive CSA technologies (vi) supporting the fight against bushfires; (vii) training men and women farmers in gender -
responsive CSA technologies on- farm or at functional farmer training centres (with demonstration plots,  trained extension officers 
in gender and CSA, appropriate equipment and inputs, business development and marketing and selected value chains in 
agriculture and watershed management and (viii) Building  of a one lane 60 m span bridge in Cameroun. For the s ub basin 
masterplans, vulnerability assessments will be undertaken and will allow adaptation interventions to be targeted to areas that are 
the most at -risk of catastrophic climate change impacts in each of the sub basins. Climate data (trends) and socioec onomic data 
will be used to assess human and ecological vulnerability to climate change, which are both relevant at the watershed level  
                                                             
22  (i) Preliminary studies of multi -purpose infrastructure of the Programme For The Integrated Development And Adaptation To Climate Change In The Niger Basin 
(PIDACC /NB) and (ii) Investment Plan For The Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin; Final Version; N ovember 2015


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 81 
 
  
 
Output 2: Strengthened sustainable forest management  
This output involves support to regeneration of forests and increasing density of trees on farms through farmer -managed natural 
regeneration. It focuses on increment of forest productivity and SFM (40,000 ha of forests). Climate change is adding to the 
existing stresses on forests, contributing to decreased productivity  of trees from drought and temperature stress, increased wind 
and water erosion, increased storm damage, increased frequency of forest fires, pest and disease outbreaks, changes in ranges  
of forest plants and animals and inundation and flood damage23 Key st rategies for increasing resilience of forests to climate 
change include: maintaining healthy forest ecosystems for resilience; restoring degraded forests and conserving, enhancing an d 
using biodiversity.  Improving the sustainability of forest management wi ll not only increase the forest’s resilience, but contribute 
to improving water management, reducing soil erosion, conserving biodiversity and improving the resilience of farming systems . 
GCF interventions are planned in: Cameroon; Côte d’Ivoire; Guinea; M ali; Niger; Nigeria and Chad.  
 
Activities  
Activities will include: (i) Support to development of private nurseries and service providers; (ii) Support provision of nat ionally 
available sources of quality seed and plant material (iii) Demonstration/trial forestry plots and re- establishment of forest tree 
species (includes increasing the availability of wood for other uses for communities and improvement of wildlife habitats) and (iv) 
Building capacity in SFM approaches, includes training of 200 community age nts and associations for REDD+  
 Output 3: Strengthened sustainable agroforestry management  
The output includes integration of agro- forestry into farming systems on 26,000ha of selected watersheds. Increasing frequency, 
intensity and duration of severe weather events are posing major challenges to food security and livelihoods of rural people in 
the Niger basin. Without action, the basin’s agriculture sector will continue to be extremely vulnerable to climatic shocks, 
especially droughts. Agroforestry is  important both for climate change mitigation (carbon sequestration, improved feed) and for 
adaptation in that it improves the resilience of agricultural production to climate variability by using trees to intensify and diversify 
production in the farming systems, amelioration of soil fertility, control of erosion, diversify income for communities and diminishing 
the impacts of extreme weather and buffering farming systems against hazards. The output will include support to increase the  
use of agro- forestry  systems to reduce soil erosion and increase organic matter, soil fertility and soil water holding capacity, 
thereby enhancing climate resilience and productivity. Agroforestry practices will include: (i) contour hedgerows; (ii) boundary 
planting; (iii) tr ees scattered in crops; (iv) home gardens; and (v) fodder banks. Agro forestry would also offer diversified sources 
of income, through selling wood for various uses, which will provide a buffer against economic shocks.
 GCF funded interventions 
are planned in: Burkina Faso, Niger and Nigeria.  
 Activities  
Activities will include: (i) Support to development of private nurseries and service providers; (ii) Establishing fodder bank s with 
Napier grasses (iii) Planting trees/shrubs in home gardens (fruit trees); on existing progressive terraces; boundary planting and planting trees within crops (non- fruit trees); (iv); Training for men and women farmers on gender -responsive CSA technologies 
on-farm or at functional farmer training centres (agro- meteorological data  use supporting 10,000 women in their agricultural 
activities, sensitizing 500,000 women on climate change adaptation techniques and other resources); and (v) Land 
certification/titling policy enacted and approved and implemented — provision of access to restored land for 9,000 women.  
 Output 4: Strengthened sustainable protection of natural habitats  
The output aims at reducing climate change- related risks and the vulnerability of natural ecosystems and biodiversity. This output 
includes participatory management and development of 10,000 ha of natural habitats and rehabilitation of 5,500 ha of spawning 
grounds. Mechanisms will be developed to promote sustainable land- use patterns that maintain the functional integrity of wetland 
ecosystems as spawning grounds . Linking wetland restoration with the sustainable use of natural resources in the region will 
help increase the well -being of the local population by enabling them to increase their economic opportunities for fishery, 
agriculture, and eco- tourism as well as by allowing downstream communities to enjoy cleaner water supplies.
 PIDACC 
interventions will reduce vulnerability and increase resilience. Interventions under this output include: Control of Invasive  species 
in Cote D’Ivoire; Restoration of habitats in  wetlands in the Inner Delta in Mali; Development of spawning grounds and flood plains 
in Guinea; Protection of biodiversity in Burkina Faso and Nigeria and Improved productivity of aquatic environments in Benin,  
Burkina Faso and Niger (refer to annex VI, for detailed measures by country).  
 
Activities  
Activities include: (i) Identifying areas for development of the nature reserves that target local communities; (ii) Establis hing 
corridors for wildlife to access water and biomass during droughts; (iii) Improving management within protected areas: to reduce 
degradation of habitats (4,200 ha) and (iv) Rehabilitation of bare land and spawning grounds in conservation areas (4,700 ha) . 
                                                             
23 Building resilience for adaptation to climate change through SFM  Susan Braatz Forestry Department, FAO, Rome


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 81 
 
  
Sub-component 1.2. Strengthening the shared management of natural resources  
Output 5: Strengthened climate and weather information services including last mile EWS  
This output involves the strengthening of the decision support tools through major model updates; integration of climate risk  
management, strengthening of hydrological for ecasting based on rainfall -runoff models driven by projections of future 
precipitation and application of freeware such as the Soil and Water Assessment tool (SWAT) and capacity development of 
NMHS agencies. It will enhance ongoing programs by the NBA Envi ronment observatory, ACMAD and AGRHYMET.  
 
Last Mile EWS  
The program will reduce vulnerability by focusing on the transformation of “last -mile” community EWS as illustrated in Figure 12. 
Climate and weather services information will be mainstreamed across decision timescales as shown in Figure 13.  
 
Figure 12: Integration of climate information and early warning into the various components including end to end multi hazard EWS  
 
Figure 13: Range of services for planned climate and weather information services (modified from WMO). The idea is to provide “seamless” 
forecasts, whereby a range of products are offered through the climate service, meeting the users’ needs.24 
                                                             
24 Informed by World Meteorological Organization and World Health Organization, 2016; Use of Climate Predictions to Manage Risks


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 81 
 
  
The NBA through the observatory will bear primary responsibility for the regional aspects of the Climate and Weather Information 
system, including developing and implementing tools that permit national data to be transmitted to a regional data management  
system. The NBA will also be responsible for the regional data management system that will permit storage, retrieval, and analysis 
of the data and encourage use of the data through appropriate web interfaces to the database. Embedded within the national and regional systems will be a nati onal-regional data communications component as well as information products.  
 The role of the National Climate and weather systems will be to: (i) Manage the hydro- met network data and meet national 
hydromet services needs in terms of data analysis, repor ting, execution of models, data ingest and information dissemination for 
the sustainable management and development of national water resources, and multi hazard warning systems; and (ii) Permit and facilitate the exchange of approved and quality assured data with the regional system. It will also be responsible for the last mile community multi hazard warning systems.  
 
Strengthened end to end forecasting  
PIDACC will contribute to the development of management strategies based on downscaled climate products, existing hydrologic 
observations and data taking into account the spatial analysis of exposure and vulnerability to floods and droughts. The forecast 
process will build onto the system for monitoring water resources and forecasts using satellite imagery in the basin (SATH -ABN) 
and the NBA Mike Hydro Basin Model (see figure 14). Benefits will include (i) Near -real time monitoring of basin water resources 
(ii) Historical and regional perspective on local hydrological variability (iii) Rapid assessment of the severity and extent of droughts 
and floods (iv) strengthened tools for agricultural planning, including irrigation and (v) strengthened potential to assess 
hydrological impacts of climate change  
 
Figure 14 shows Use of t he basin monitoring system, forecasting products and existing Mike basin decision support tools (African 
Development Bank, 2018)  
Activities:  
(i) Strengthening the decision support tools (Mike Hydro basin, Mike Hydro flood etc) and capacity development.  This 
activity will involve: Strengthening the tools for flood and drought forecasting building onto the existing Mike Hydro tools at 
the NBA Secretariat. For floods, the strengthened forecasting systems will estimate expected water level rise using data inputs f rom simulation tools and models that predict precipitation levels and stream flow, as well as from hydrometric stations 
measuring water levels at selected points along the Niger River. For droughts, strengthening drought forecasting systems will make use of models fed by climatic and atmospheric data (historical/seasonal weather patterns, real -time meteorological 
monitoring, and weather forecasts) to predict the probability of a drought occurring in particular parts of the Niger basin  in 
the future (up to approximately three months). This activity covers the countries of: Cameroon, Guinea, Mali, Niger and Chad. 
The rest of the countries are supported through the ongoing Bank financed hydromet program. For sustainability, the


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 81 
 
  
strengthened tools and capacity will be based on a real 'need' for the services to be provided (basin planning and flood and 
drought monitoring and warning). Flexibility to adjust to emerging requirements support like the use of new or emerging 
technologies for data and information capture and accommodating different levels of data availability. The tools will also be 
anchored in an appropriate water agency (NMHS) with qualified staff.  
(ii) Long -term and on -demand capacity development and training program for NMHS staff on O&M, data modeling, and 
forecasting . GCF financing will be used to procure and install desk tops and modelling and data base software for equipping 
the NMHS in Côte d’Ivoire; Guinea and Nigeria. Other countries are covered with financing from the ongoing Afdb financed project  on strengthening hydrological monitoring in the Niger basin. Capacity will be built using a combination of both regional 
and international experts. Trainings will involve short ‐term experts and the NBA -AGRHYMET staff in order to further 
strengthen the modeling teams at regional and national levels. The activity includes TA for support to certification of meteorological agencies in line with WMO requirements.  
(iii) Expansion of coverage of Hydrological and meteorological monitoring networks.  This activity include s modernizing 
the NMHSs’ observation networks, improving the meteorological and hydrological forecasting systems, and refurbishing 
offices and facilities. GCF financing will be used to finance activities in Benin (Procurement and Installation of 4 Hydromet  
stations); Burkina Faso (Procurement and Installation of 13 Hydromet stations); Guinea (Procurement and Installation of 14 
Hydromet stations); Niger (Procurement and Installation of 4 Hydromet stations) and the Niger Basin Authority (TA for Design 
and supervision of Hydromet stations). Other countries will be covered with financing from the European Union and the 
ongoing Afdb financed project on strengthening hydrological monitoring in the Niger basin  
(iv) Community based Early Warning Systems Established.  This activity involves procurement and installation of equipment 
for community based early warning systems. It will cover: Benin; Cameroon; Côte d’Ivoire; Guinea, Mali, Niger, Chad and the NBA. The community members will use simple equipment to forecast potent ial natural disasters such as floods and 
drought, and operate a communication/dissemination system to inform other local residents of impending threats. Effective 
EWS will increase the lead- time before a potential disaster and allow for community and disas ter response teams to prepare 
for the disaster and mitigate its impacts. GCF financing will be used to Procure and install equipment for community based early warning systems in Benin, Cameroun, Guinea, Mali, Niger, Chad and the NBA.  
(v) Development of Knowled ge products on climate and weather information services. GCF funds will support the 
development of new information and value- added products for vulnerable communities and the main meteorology - and 
hydrology -dependent sectors in Burkina Faso. This will involve development of new information products (dedicated bulletins, 
model outputs, distribution and dissemination of information, agro- meteorological data use support for 10,000 women in 
farming activities and warnings for vulnerable communities and the meteorology and hydrology -dependent sectors. 
Beneficiaries will be targeted following a gender -disaggregated approach. The project will ensure that women are adequately 
involved in the implementation of the EWS and that they benefit from climate information which is relevant to them, presented 
and transmitted in a way that is accessible and easy to understand  
(vi) Undertake capacity -building, in the generation, & dissemination of climate products ; includes: (i) training of 30,000 
producers in the timely disseminatio n of early warning products (including agro- climatic information); and (ii) raising 
awareness among 1,000,000 producers on climate adaptation techniques. Gender impact analyses will be conducted to 
identify gender -specific needs and protection measures rel ated to floods, droughts, and other climate change related 
disasters in the basin. A toolkit for the dissemination of early warnings will be developed and it will include a gender -based 
analysis of the national and local media that are used to disseminate weather and climate alerts. Based on gender -sensitive 
consultations with end- users, the project will supply climate information that is tailored to the specific needs of decision 
makers and local communities.  
 Output 6 Regional pollution prevention plan de veloped 
25 
This output will comprise updating the existing pollution study. Precipitation and associated river discharge are major drivers of 
water pollution in the form of excess nutrients and sediment, transport into the Niger river. Increasing temperatur es, intense 
precipitation and runoff, and intensifying droughts will lower river water quality in many ways, including increases in sedim ent, 
nitrogen, and other pollutant loads.  The regional pollution control plan, will therefore enhance making water supp ly decisions in 
the context of changes in precipitation, increased temperatures, and changes in water quality, quantity, and water use.  
 
Activities:  
Activities will include: Undertaking a Diagnostic study leading to preparation of plan for strengthening t he conventional network 
for water quality monitoring in the Niger River. This includes: updating of sources of diffused pollution at country level an d 
characterization of water pollutants; and preparation of a regional plan for strengthening basin water qu ality management and 
strengthening a water quality monitoring network; The activity will make use of: (i) historic climatological data for estimat ion of 
evapotranspiration; (ii) regular updating of climatological data; and (iii) seasonal and long term weat her forecasts  
                                                             
25 Preliminary studies of multi -purpose infrastructure of the Programme for the Integrated Development and Adaptation t o Climate Change i n the Niger 
Basin ( PIDACC/NB); Regional Synthesis Report


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 81 
 
  
 
Output 7: Payment mechanism for environmental services (PES) and FRACC Fund set up  
This output involves the establishing of payments for biodiversity conservation, wildlife corridors and watershed protection in the 
Niger Basin. NBA member c ountries have adopted the Water Charter which establishes in principle the payment of fees for water 
use. In line with the need to restore the integrity of the degraded lands in the Niger basin, the PIDACC will create an enabl ing 
environment by establishin g a financing mechanism (environment funds) for promoting PES. The PES will establish a system for 
the funding of activities that contribute to the protection of the natural resources in the watersheds for the benefit of the users of 
these resources. PIDAC C plans to set up a Regional CC adaptation fund (FRACC), which will be fed by the royalties that will be 
paid by the heavy users of the water. The FRACC, will be used to finance PES and to foster adaptation, with proceeds from the  
PES and other donors. Onl y measures that enhance climate resilience and climate change adaptation actions will be eligible for 
FRACC financing. This modality for establishing the FRACC and PES will be approved by the Council of Ministers and the Heads of state summit of the NBA countries by year 3 of PIDACC implementation. FRACC and PES will be operationalized at the in 
year 4 of PIDACC. The funding for the operationalization of the PES mechanism and the FRACC covers the 9 basin countries. 
It is shared between i) European union whi ch finances this activity in 5 countries (Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Nigeria and 
Chad) and ii) GCF which finances the activity in 4 countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea and Niger) through the NBA.  
 
Activities:  
Activity: A97:Activities will include: (i) a diagnosis study (legislation, technical and institutional) and FRACC and PES feasibility 
studies; (ii) Establishing rewards or payments for biodiversity conservation, wildlife corridors etc includes —establishing 
payments for biodiversity conservation, wildlife corridors and, in steep areas, watershed protection; and (iii) elaboration, 
validation and endorsement of the PES system and its diffusion and extension. Development of the PES will consider 
participatory v ulnerability assessment to identify adaptive capacity, adaptation strategies, dependence on ecosystem services 
of PES actors and provision of incentives for adaptation strategies through PES. The established FRACC, will be used to 
finance PES and to foster  adaptation, with proceeds from the PES and other donors. The PIDACC project will contribute 
towards steps (i) and (ii).  
 
Output 8: Strengthened capacity for IWRM implementation at national and regional (NBA) levels  
This output involves institutional capacity building activities under the PIDACC to strengthen the NBA and national level 
coordinating structures for implementing IWRM. The activities will provide participants with tools for using IWRM as a tool f or 
climate change adaptation. Capacity -building activities will build knowledge and enhance communication and collaboration 
within and across sectors in various parts of the Niger basin.  
 Activities:  
Activities will include: (i) Preparation of Regional IWRM action Plan (ii) Operationalization of IWRM plans in the 9 countries and improved regional coordination in the implementation of the OP (2016- 2025); (iii) Preparation of a capacity development 
program and (iv) provision of capacity building to NBA executives, partner institutions to plan and implement climate resilient land and water management regimes and scale up effective adaptation strategies at the national and local levels. Content will  
include but not limited to the following topics: Introduction to IWRM and climate change; Drivers and impacts  of climate change; 
Strategy development and planning for adaptation; Impacts of climate change on water use sectors; Dealing with uncertainties;  
Instruments and measures for adaptation; and Adaptation to climate change in water management.  
 
Output 9: Master Plan for the river navigability developed  
The aim of this activity is to improve the navigation conditions on cross -border sections and to strengthen trade and socio-
economic links on the Benoué river  (Nigeria and Cameroun) including the port of Garoua) . The impacts from extreme weather 
events, higher temperatures and heat waves, precipitation changes, and low flows and other climatic conditions are affecting the reliability and capacity of navigation in the Middle and Lower Niger. Drought often lowers v essel drafts on navigable 
sections of the river in rivers Cameroun, Mali, Niger and Chad. Continued low water flows limit the duration of the navigation 
period in Cameroun. The increasing low flows due to drought and the high degree of climate variability across the basin 
necessitate a comprehensive system analysis
26. A feasibility study will be undertaken focusing on definition of measures for 
improving navigation in the navigable river sections in Cameroun, Mali, Niger and Chad, with financing from the EU & AfDB.  
 
 
                                                             
26 Niger River Basin Sustainable Development Action Plan; Niger River Basin Climate Risk Assessment; Final Report; Volume 5; Cli mate and Runoff 
Projections and Climate Risk Assessment; May 2014  
A Joint Initiative of the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) and the Wo rld Bank


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 81 
 
  
Activities:  
Activities will include a diagnostic analysis including: Sediment yield analysis; Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the Ni ger and 
Benoué course, Definition of a regional soil conservation policy and a navigation masterplan.  
 
Component 2. Development of population resilience  
This component will be implemented at national level and will contribute to the development of socio- economic infrastructure and 
the protection of the Basin’s resources and ecosystems in each country. It comprises: (i) S/C 2.1: Implementation of Climate 
Resilient Growth Infrastructure and (ii) S/C 2.2: Promotion of income generating activities Building community adaptation 
capacities. The intervention (activity) locations are shown in Figure 15. The GCF proj ect will contribute towards sub component 
2-2. Investments will be drawn from the sub- basin development plans and community climate adaptation plans. Interventions 
(Activities) will be financed through a call for proposals for grassroots community organizations, for agro- pastoral and fish 
production activities or income generating activities for vulnerable groups.  
 
Figure 15: Location of the activities of Component 2 of the PIDACC  
 
Sub- component 2.1, Implementation of Climate Resilient Growth Infrastructure  
 Output 10. Strengthened climate resilient hydro -agricultural infrastructure  
This output includes rehabilitation / construction of small hydraulic infrastructure comprising 134 s mall multi- purpose dams, the 
development of 19,000 ha of irrigated land). In the Niger basin, where communities are faced with highly seasonal and often unpredictable rainfall, a lack of adequate water storage causes large and avoidable economic losses fro m floods and droughts, 
and constrains long- term growth. Recent studies suggest that increased temperatures, irregular rainfall patterns and drier 
conditions will amplify future drought severity and temperature extremes, increasing resource scarcity and exacerbating conflict levels and increasing migration and conflict. Implementation of hydro agricultural infrastructure will enhance the resilience to 
droughts and temperature increase. This output therefore involves external water harvesting systems to mitigate dry spells, 
recharge groundwater, and permit multiple uses of water. The storage of excess rainfall and the efficient use of small holder  
irrigation are critical in view of growing water scarcity and will strengthen resilience against climate variabili ty. Measures will be 
undertaken in all the Niger basin Countries, financed by the Afdb. Measures financed using GCF resources are mainly in Chad 
and involve Construction of Community based Hydro- Agricultural Infrastructure for irrigation; departments of Kabbia, Lac Léré, 
Mayo.
 The small storage infrastructure will enable both flood and flood recession crops and as well as provide water for 
aquaculture, drinking water and livestock watering.  
 
Activities  
Activities will include: (i) a Preliminary study, mappi ng of locations of the small hydraulic infrastructure across the 9 countries and 
detailed designs and ESS studies (ii) Rehabilitating water storage structures to preserve supplies and improve flood protecti on 
and (iii) Construction of rainwater harvesting infrastructure across the transhumance corridors.  
 
Output 11: Water points for cattle and development of transhumance pathways  
This output includes developing of water infrastructure that is aligned with sustainable forage management in the Agro -pastoral


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 81 
 
  
systems of the Niger basin. It involves construction / development of 134 reservoirs, ponds, wells and boreholes for farming a nd 
134,000ha of transhumance corridors. Warmer temperatures, increased frequency of heatwaves and changes in precipitation 
resulting in droughts have forced pastoralists to alter traditional migratory corridors in search of new seasonal watering holes and 
rangelands. These trends are expected to continue, increasing the likelihood of conflicts between the Sahel’s farming and pastorali st communities as land degradation and competition over water and land resources increases. Development of water 
points for cattle along transhumance routes is thus particularly important. Improved water storage will increase resilience t o 
climate change a nd support water and food security in poor and vulnerable pastoral communities of the basin. The results include, 
a decrease in severe conflicts over access to grazing, and a decrease in the average distance between functional water points  
accessible to pastoralists and agro- pastoralists in targeted zones. The project will promote climate resilient pastoral and 
agriculture activities for women farmers.
 Measures will be undertaken in all the Niger basin Countries except Nigeria. Measures 
financed using GCF r esources include (i) Benin: Development of water points for cattle and development of transhumance 
pathways (Alibori, Atacora, and Borgou) in Benin (ii) Development of 16 boulis with pastoral vocation in the provinces of Kouritenga, Namentenga, Soum, Oudal an and Séno (Sahel and  Upper -Basins) in Burkina Faso (iii) Development of water points 
for cattle and development of transhumance pathways (Sikasso, Timbuktu and Gao regions) in Mali and (iv) Rehabilitation of 
Langui Be dike Pitoa (Far North regions Camer oun) for protection against increased risk of flooding in Cameroun:  
 
Activities  
Activities will include: (i) Undertaking a preliminary study/mapping of location for water points across the 9 countries (ii)  
establishment of corridors for livestock movement to protect farmers’ crops and trees, designating grazing and water access 
areas to ensure resilience of pastoral production systems, (ii) Construction of rainwater harvesting infrastructure across the 
transhumance corridors and (ii) Formation and support of committees to manage small scale infrastructure.  
 
Output 12: River Sections trained for improved navigation  
This output involves river training (through cutting of aquatic plants on 120 km of navigable portions and construction of docks and wharves).and dredging to maintain adequate channel size to accommodate vessels and will be undertaken in close 
collaboration with agencies responsible for waterways or port management. Climate change is being observed in many of the Niger basin’s navigable sections. Increased water temperatures, altered frequencies and intensities of precipitati on, result in 
changes in changes in runoff, sediment distribution and aquatic plant distribution which all affect navigable sections of the Niger 
river. The increasing episodes of low flows, affect navigation at the landing sites.  
 
Activities  
Activities wi ll include building / rehabilitation of navigation sections and landing stages (on Niger, Tinkissu, Sankarani and Milo; 
(In the prefectures of Mandiana, Siguiri, Kouroussa, Faranah, Dabola and Kankan. The activity will make use of climate information to as sist use of current and forecast information on river conditions in relation to transport needs.  
 
Output 13. Fisheries Infrastructure constructed for improved productivity  
This output involve restocking of fisheries and protection of spawning grounds in s elected wetlands. Freshwater ﬁsheries 
throughout the Niger basin are based largely on species that migrate to wetland systems within the basin for breeding and spawning. The combination of changes in rainfall and runoﬀ resulting in falling water levels dur ing droughts, is likely to aﬀect 
habitats and ﬁsheries in the basin, impacting the movement of ﬁsh and aﬀecting nursery ground function. Changes may occur in 
timing and success of migrations, spawning and peak abundance, as well as in sex ratios. In additi on there may be potential loss 
of species or a shift in composition in capture fisheries and impacts on seed availability for aquaculture, thereby threateni ng 
livelihoods. Activities for potential adaptation to be financed by the Afdb involve construction of nursery stations and development 
of spawning & floodplain areas in Benin, Cameroun, Cote D’Ivoire, Mali,
 •Guinea, Niger and Chad  
 
Activities  
Activities include: Construction / rehabilitation of 9 nursery stations and development of 16,000 ha of spawning areas).  
 
Sub-component 2.2. Promotion of income generating activities Building community adaptation capacities  
 
Output 14: Community -based climate adaptation action plans prepared  
This output will support the preparation of 65 community catchment based climate change adaptation plans for selected sub 
catchments. As part of strengthening community resilience, this output will identify and address the impacts of climate change at 
the local level through the preparation of 65 community -based climate change adaptation plans for selected sub catchments of 
rural communes. The process will follow a community participatory process, identification of current and projected climate change 
impacts in combination with other stressors, may impact community infrastructure at sub catchment levels; mapping existing 
community infrastructure assets; identifying potential risks and identification of options that reduce system vulnerabilities  at


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 81 
 
  
community level, prioritizing infrastructure -related adaptation needs; designed to  structurally withstand the impacts of climate 
change and functionally increase community resilience to climate change. This will contribute towards addressing droughts as 
well as floods. GCF financing will be used to finance the preparation of the communi ty based adaptation action plans. The number 
of plans to be prepared by country include: Chad (6No); Cameroun (4 No); Benin (10 No); Guinea 5 No, Mali (10 No); Niger (10 
No); Burkina (10 No); Cote D’Ivoire (5 No), and Nigeria (5No)  
 
Activities  
Activities w ill include: (i) Selection of target areas and target groups for support; (ii) Community - based surveys of the project 
area and prioritization of interventions with communities, water and agricultural experts and other stakeholders;(iii) Develo pment 
of ext ension training materials that incorporate climate resilient approaches and training of project staff and community volunteer s 
in gender sensitive adaptation planning; (iv) Awareness raising/training of communities in gender sensitive adaptation planni ng 
(includes sensitizing an estimated 1,000,000 women on climate change adaptation techniques and climate resilience) (v) 
Community meetings and planning workshops and (vi) Development of local adaptation plans with zoning of land for agriculture,  
grazing, per ennial crops/grasses etc. (based on sub- catchment plans) with community and agricultural experts;  
 Output 15. Increase in local economic development arising from the upgraded community based livelihood 
infrastructure  
This output involves diversifying income sources and increasing coping capacity of communities in the basin. It includes the 
scaling -up of community driven development in the 9 Niger basin countries. Rural communities in the Niger basin are 
particularly vulnerable to climate change due to their dependence on rain fed agriculture. The nature- based livelihoods in 
the basin is being challenged and in some cases overwhelmed, by rising water levels, rising air temperatures and shifting rainfall and storm patterns -  effects of climate change that  are projected to worsen over the next decades. Interventions will 
cover drought preparedness and natural resource management actions, including new and improved water supplies, range and fodder improvement, ecotourism, bee keeping, livestock product value  addition, cage aquaculture, restocking 
reservoirs with fish and income diversification strategies such as investing in women’s’ groups. In each region of 
intervention, a regional approval committee (CRAC) of the activities/micro- projects will be put in pl ace. An activity funding 
manual will be developed by each country to ensure transparency, equity and the achievement of population and 
ecosystem resilience goals. An estimated 150,000 jobs will be created for the youth and women (30% women). The 
indicative  criteria for financing micro- projects will include i) vulnerability to the impacts of climate change ii) having been 
identified as action following a diagnostic analysis with a developed action plan iii) counterpart assistance from the 
beneficiary provinc ial to the investment iv) significant economic benefit and v) Have a dimension of adaptation to the 
climate change of communities.  
Activities for climate adaptation to be financed by the GCF include the following:  
• Benin: Extension of dyke protecting the ir rigated perimeters of Malanville. This includes the installation of flood protection 
structures through the construction of protective embankments, in particular in certain districts of the city of Niamey and 
along the river to protect the rice fields in t he vicinity of the town of Malanville in Benin against inundation.  
• Benin: Building of community adaptation infrastructures (Product Storage facility, Product processing units and market 
sheds)  
• Nigeria: Construction of embankment/dams and levees for protec tion of cropland and villages from flooding with 
embankments in upper Benoe. The levees will control river floodwater flow and protect communities against costly effects 
of inundation.  
• Niger: Construction of communities adaptation Infrastructures (Building crossing structures of Koris)  
• Niger: Upgrading and rehabilitation of dam sections in commune 5 in Niamey for protection against flooding of rice fields  
• Guinea: Building CC adaptation community Infrastructure. Activities to be identified from the communit y adaptation plans 
prepared under output 14  
• Core D’Ivoire: Building of community infrastructures for adaptation to CC. Activities to be identified from the community adaptation plans prepared under output 14  
 
Activities for the entire PIDACC project will include the following:  
(i) Selection and construction of 168 infrastructure upgrading Interventions (Activities) in specific watersheds;  
(ii) Formulation and operationalisation of 292 infrastructure management committees with 30% representation for women;  
(iii) Installation of 110 fish cages installed in river system(50% of beneficiaries will be women); this activity will support cage fish 
culture technology in selected locations along the Niger River system;;  
(iv) Restocking 270 water reservoirs with fish —incl. inte gration of aquaculture into existing farming systems  
(v) Provision of access to recovered (previously degraded) land to 9,000 women and 3,000 young people


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 81 
 
  
(vi) Support towards establishment of 100 SMEs for youth employment (30 run by females); (ii) financing of 12 0 Interventions 
(Activities) supported by women and (iii) integration of strategies to increase women’s participation in the workforce.  
 
Component 3. Programme management and coordination  
This component concerns the efficient management, monitoring and evaluation of the programme and dissemination of 
implementation results. It includes the supervision of activities, the monitoring and evaluation, as well as the annual audit s. The 
PIDACC programme design embraces the “subsidiarity principle,” whereby most interventions will be implemented at the national level. Implementation/institutional arrangements are detailed in Section C.4.  
 
Output 16:Dissemination of good adaptation practices and climate information  
This output involves the dissemination of regional/national public awareness materials for the sustainable utilization of Niger 
Basin resources. It includes outreach activities to seek the support of key policymakers and senior government officials. Generating, disseminating and translating information into  a useful form is a key response to uncertainty generated by climate 
change. The PIDACC project will help to improve climate resilience in the Niger basin, through a number of climate adaptation technologies, practices and innovative solutions which includ e: Early Warning systems; Agroforestry practices; Forestry practices, 
soil and water adaptation technologies (reduced tillage, permanent crop cover, mechanical and biological soil defines works);  
Supplemental irrigation/water harvesting; structural measures like dikes for flood control, Cage aquaculture using natural water 
bodies; weather -based agro- advisories and use of drought resistant crop varieties to mention but a few. In order to enhance 
uptake of technologies and enhance future adaptation at scale, the PIDACC project will promote the dissemination and continued use of these improved practices as well as enhance improved access to timely, meaningful and trustworthy climate information 
and knowledge.  
 Activities  
Activities include: (i) Strengthening of  communications systems, based on the existing NBA communication strategy; (ii) 
Preparation of briefing notes for local and national decision makers, media articles in newspapers, journals, newsletters, radio, participatory videos, etc.; (iii) Preparation of  a knowledge management strategy; (iv) Preparation of a gender strategy and action 
plan
27 (v) Preparation of participatory videos  and website maintenance (v ) conducting ex -post cost -benefit analysis to determine 
the value added by the project compared w ith existing practices and (vi) Conducting national workshops on WSM, SFM ,CSA.  
 
Output 17: Strengthened Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) by the NBA Environment Observatory  
This output will provide resources for enhanced M & E of the PIDACC program by the N BA observatory and the NPCUs. 
Assessment, monitoring and evaluation are crucial for learning and for conducting policy reviews in respect of the PIDACC program implementation. The project log frame in section H1 and H2 of the FP, will provide the primary p remise for Impact 
Evaluation. Climate impact assessments will specify the changes in climate in a historic, current or future context, and establish evidence- based relationships between climate and productivity in the agriculture, forestry and fishery sect ors under the PIDACC. 
The impact assessments will indicate the vulnerability of different stakeholders to a changing climate and the potential impacts 
of climate change on agriculture. Stakeholders targeted for evaluation will include male and female small holder farmers and 
people working in the value chain. Continued evaluation beyond the lifetime of the PIDACC will be undertaken by the NBA 
observatory to measure the sustainability of the results and the long- term benefits or tradeoffs that are the expected from project. 
During project feedback and at the end of the project, lessons learned from evaluating the impacts of the project will be used to inform policy makers and future project design.  
 Activities  
Activities will include: (i) Undertaking a baseline data/benefit monitoring surveys (ii) strengthening the regional and national GIS -
based M&E and MIS; and (iii) collection, analyses, reporting and dissemination of data and information on the programme’s 
progress with regards to outcomes and impact , based on the indicators provided in the log frame and the theory of change logic 
(figure 19) and (iii) production of Annual periodic reports  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
 
C.4.1 Management team. Stakeholders involved in program implementation  
See Figure 17: PIDACC implementation arrangements  
 
                                                             
27 The project gender action plan, will be implemented at a regional level by the NBA and at a national level by the national 
coordination units in each country.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 81 
 
  
Regional and inter -regional level  
The stakeholders involved in the implementation of the programme are the:  
i) NBA Council of Ministers which approves the strategic actions proposed by the steering committee. It comprises ministers 
of water and reports to the summit of Heads of State and Government of NBA countries.  
ii) The NBA which has a critical mandate to facilita te the coordinated and cooperative management of the Niger Basin.  
iii) The Programme Regional Steering Committee which will provide the programme’s main direction.   
iv) The PIDACC regional coordination Unit (PRCU) —established within the NBA, which will coordinate the regional activities.  
v) NBA environmental observatory, which will coordinate monitoring and evaluation . 
 
National level  
Stakeholders in the implementation of the national components in each country include the:  
i) The National Steering Committee (NSC) which will provide country -level direction.   
ii) The National Focal Structure (NFS) comprising all sectoral ministries and the NCU which provides technical coordination and 
programme monitoring at country level.  
iii) The Nati onal program coordinating unit (NPCU) which will carry out the national activities in each country.  
iv) Sectoral ministries that will carry out activities in their respective fields in each country.  
 
Local level  
At the level of each intervention site/region/department of the programme, the stakeholders include the following:   
i) Technical Monitoring Committees (TMC), which group the technical services of the local authorities and is responsible for 
the monitoring of investments made in each region/de partment of the country.  
ii) Sub-basin management committees, which review and endorse the Interventions (Activities) to be submitted for funding.  
iii) Municipalities, CSOs, grass roots community organizations and communities that initiate and submit Interventions  (Activities) 
to the programme for funding. CSOs will be involved in awareness generation, social mobilization and formation of CBO and 
interfacing between the government and community activities in source protection.  
 
C.4.2 Overall strategy  
The entry points for PIDACC actions will be sub- basin masterplans plans and community climate adaptation plans that will be 
developed for each intervention site. The approach to watershed management will be based on the use of the Toolkit for Planni ng, 
Monitoring and Evaluation of Climate Change Adaptive Capacities which was set up and tested by IUCN,28 in association with 
OSS, AGRHYMET and UNECA in 2011, with financial support from the International Development and Research Centre (IDRC). Under the approach, the first step is to establish a diagnosis, an assessment of needs and identification of strategies to be 
implemented. The second step is to plan the implementation of the selected strategies and to put in place tools to monitor th e 
progress. The third step is to ensure that commitments have been well monitored and deliver the expected results.  
 A capacity building programme will be deployed to improve production techniques and the integration of climate information into 
the management of agro- pastoral and fish farming activities. The tools for adaptation to the CC will be developed at the regional 
levels for better cohesion and harmonization. They will then be disseminated in the countries and at the intervention sites. T he 
programme will place emphasis on rural employment creation for women and young people by strengthening the capacities of 
user as sociations, as well as village development committees . Monitoring and evaluation will be participatory at regional, national, 
sub basin, and community levels The inter -regional monitoring will be coordinated by the NBA . 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicabl e) 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. N/A  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
International (e.g. transboundary water ways) treaties or agreements, if any, that need to be complied with for the implementation of the project activities  
Approval of Loan and Grant Agreements  
Loans to be undertaken by each of the recipient host countries are subject to approvals by national cabinets and /or parliaments. 
As such Legal agreements  “Protocol Agreements” in respect of the PIDACC project will be signed by the African Development 
Bank and Ministries responsible for finance and economic planning after approval by cabinets/parliaments in each of the 
countries. Specific details on Protocol Agreements to be signed by Financing Source for the PIDACC project are shown in figure 
17 and detailed in section C 7.4.  
                                                             
28 Somda, J., Faye, A. and N’Djafa Ouaga, H. 2011. Handbook and user guide of the toolk it for planning, monitoring and evaluation of climate change 
adaptive capacities. Niamey, Niger: AGRHYMET Regional Centre. 84 p.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 81 
 
  
 
After Board approval, the legal agreements are sent to the borrowing Countries for cabinet authorization. Following the 
authorization from the cabinet, the loan or grant agreement is signed by AfDB's President or Vice- President and the 
Representative of the Government. After loan approval a Borrower is allowed a maximum interval of 90 days to sign the loan 
or grant agreement with the B ank Group. Grants become effective upon signature by the parties. Before disbursement 
commences the loan or grant must be entered into force, or declared effective29.  
 Loans take effect once conditions agreed to be precedent to first disbursement are met (loan effectiveness). In addition to "other 
conditions", the standard conditions precedent to first disbursements include:  a) designation of authorized signatories for the 
loan resources; b) presenting a legal opinion; c) submission of the investment schedule; d) presenting lists of goods and services 
to be procured; e) opening and maintaining a special project account; f) establishing a project implementation unit; g) any o ther 
condition agreed during negotiation as necessary to precede first disbursement . Conditions are limited to the legal requirements 
as mentioned above, as well as cross -effectiveness of co- financing, and execution of subsidiary loan agreements. The 
requirements and deadlines for loan effectiveness are stipulated in the loan agreements.  The African Development Bank's Legal 
Counsel and Project Coordinating Officer review if the conditions are met, after which the loan is formally declared effectiv e. 
Normally, loan documents allow 90 days for the loan agreements to become effective
30. 
 
Tax Exemption for the African Development Bank financed operations  
Article 57 of the Agreement establishing the African Development Bank (updated in 2016), provides tax exemption and all 
custom duties for the Banks operations31.  
 
Agreements Governing the Niger  transboundary waterways  
The NBA is governed by the Niger Basin Water Charter (2008) which is designed to ensure that Member States share the river’s resources equitably.
 32 Additionally, the Heads of State and Government of the NBA States signed the Paris Declaration (2004), 
which set out principles of management and good governance for the sustainable and shared development of the Niger Basin  
 
Environment and Social Safeguards Clearances  
Environmental and social safeguards compliance will be required at national level, prior to undertaking project actions. No other regulatory approval or authorizations are required in respect of the PIDACC program.  
 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the organization structure, roles and 
responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities, as well as the flow of funds structure  
 
C.7.1 Implementation/instituti onal arrangements  
 
The Niger Basin Authority (NBA)  
Implementation of the project most measures are implemented at country level) will be coordinated by the NBA, making use of 
existing institutional arrangements to ensure national government endorsement and involvement, engagement with relevant 
line ministries, and appropriate technical oversight. The NBA has been instrumental in preparation of the PIDACC project.  
 
Established in 1980 as successor to the Niger River Commission, the NBA is the regional river basin organization (RBO) 
mandated to promote cooperation among its 9 member countries to develop and manage the Basin’s resources. The mandate 
of the NBA is to “promote cooperation among the member countries and ensure an integrated development of the Niger Basin 
in all the fields of energy, water resources, agriculture, livestock, fishing and fish- fanning, forestry and forestry exploitation, 
transport and communications and industry. “A “Shared Vision Process”, which led to the signing of the 2004 Paris Declaration, 
set the management and governance principles for the sustainable development of the Niger Basin and reaffirmed the central role of the NBA as a coordination, knowledge, and development organization.  
 
Based on the SDAP, an estimated $7.2 billion 20-year Investment Program was approved in April 2008. The Water Charter, 
approved in April 2008, confirmed the mandates of the NBA. The NBA monitors the conditions of the Basin (done, in practice, 
                                                             
29 https ://www. Afdb.org/en/projects -and-operations/project -cycle/loan- signing/  
30 https://www.Afdb.org/en/projects -and-operations /project -cycle/loan- effectiveness/  
31 https ://www. Afdb.org/en/documents/document/agreement -establishing- the-african- development -bank -2016- edition- 92045/  
32 http://www.internationalwatersgovernance.com/niger -basin.html


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 81 
 
  
through the NBA’s Observatory of the Environment), provid es services to key stakeholders (including flow forecasts) and a 
neutral analysis of planned water abstractions, and it mobilizes high- level expertise for relevant studies and analyses. Much of 
the background documentation and analytical work, to the devel opment of the PIDACC has been undertaken with supervision 
of the NBA Secretariat.  
 
The NBA has so far focused on two types of activities: (1) administration and implementation of activities on the ground together 
with member countries, and (2) development of frameworks and tools to support sustainable development and IWRM in the 
Basin, including a repository of the Basin’s hydrological historical database and central collection of new data, flow forecasts, 
and update and running of the basin model to simulate the impact of infrastructure planned by countries on the river.  
 
The NBA has an increasingly central role in facilitating decisions and building consensus among member countries, water users , 
civil society, and other key partners and is increasingly cal led upon to link national -level investments to regional processes.. 
The institutional arrangements of the NBA. The institutional arrangements of the NBA is shown in the figure below.  
 
 
Figure 16: Niger Basin Secretariat Institutional Arrangement  
 
The institutional arrangements of the NBA include the Summit of Heads of State and Government (SHSG), the Council of Ministers (CoM), the Technical Committee of Experts, the Executive Secretariat, and the National Focal Structures (NFS). The 
SHSG is the supreme body of the NBA. It defines the general orientation of the development policy of the Authority and controls its executive functions to assure the realization of the objectives of the Authority. It meets every two y ears in an ordinary session 
hosted by the member state which assumes chairmanship. The mandate of the chairman is two years.  
 
The CoM comprising representatives from the water resources and related ministries is responsible for monitoring of the 
activities  of the Executive Secretariat and reports to the Summit. The COM provides guidance for issues related to the Niger 
River Basin and approves strategic actions by supporting the Regional Steering Committee (RSC).The CoM meets once a year in an ordinary sessi on.  
 
Project Steering Arrangements  
The Regional Steering Committee (RSC) is the primary decision- making body and serves in a technical and institutional advisory 
capacity during implementation and review of programme activities. The RSC comprises: the Executive Secretary of the NBA, 
the coordinators from each NFS; a representative of the Ministry supervising the NBA from the country hosting the RSC meeting; 
a representative of the technical supervising Ministry of Projects and Programs of the member countr ies concerned when they 
are implemented in a ministerial department other than the supervising ministry of NBA; a representative of the Ministry of Finance from each member country; a representative from the existing or planned major facilities in the Basi n; and President of 
the Regional Coordination of Users of natural resources  of the Niger Basin. Any development partner can appoint a


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 81 
 
  
representative as observer. The RSC meets at least twice a year to give overall guidance to the NBA and its National Foca l 
Structures, formally review progress, and approve annual project work plans. Their roles will be to: (ii) monitor project progress 
and take timely actions to resolve implementation constraints; (iii) liaise with different National Focal Points to ensure the 
national units and the PRCU act in harmony; (iv) review annual project financial reports (v) review and approve Annual Work Plans; and (vi) ensure monitoring and evaluation of programme activities.   
 The Secretariat is administrated by an Executive Sec retary appointed upon the recommendations of the CoM to the SHSG for 
a period of four years and renewable once. The NBA’s institutional reform in 2005 introduced a new change by providing the 
terms of reference and profile of the Executive Secretariat to guide the CoM’s recommendations.  
 
The Technical Committee of Experts comprises representatives of the member states. Its mandate is to prepare the sessions 
of the COM. The Technical Committee of Experts meets upon invitation of the Executive Secretary accor ding to a work schedule 
approved by the Council of Ministers.  
 
The NBA monitors the conditions of the Basin (done, in practice, through the NBA’s Observatory of the Environment), provides 
services to key stakeholders (including flow forecasts) and a neutra l analysis of planned water abstractions, and it mobilizes 
high-level expertise for relevant studies and analyses. The observatory will handle the monitoring and evaluation function which 
includes data collection and all required tasks to track programme i ndicators, in collaboration with national agencies.  
 The National Steering Committee (NSC) comprises members of the National Focal Structure (NFS), chaired by the national 
NBA Focal Point in liaison with the country NDA and participants from the relevant m inistries and agencies like the NHMS, civil 
society. The NSC will provide quality assurance for the national level activities, working directly with the PIDACC Regional 
Coordination Unit (PRCU) and the National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU).   
Pidacc Implementation Arrangements  
Figure 17 shows the project implementation arrangements. PIDACC institutional arrangements build on existing structures within the Niger Basin Authority (regional) and at the national level.  
 
 
Figure 17: PIDACC implementation arrangements  
PIDACC Regional Coordination Unit (PRCU).  The PIDACC unit (PRCU) is a unit hosted within the NBA to implement the 
project. The PRCU will support the NBA in project management; financial, procurement, and administrative responsibilities; and 
supervision of the technical components of project implementation.  Utilizing the PRCU builds on the capacity of the existing 
implementation structures and allows for implementation to commence in a timely manner. The PRCU will work closely with 
regional institutions, the RSC, and the NPCU to ensure timely progr amme implementation and effective capacity building. The


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 81 
 
  
activities of the PRCU will be monitored and directed by the RSC. Experts to support the PIDACC project who will be hired 
include: (i) Regional Coordinator (Msc natural Resources Management); (ii) IW RM specialist (Msc Water Resources 
Management) (iii) Climate Change specialist (Msc degree in climate change;) (iv) M&E specialist (Msc in Economics or 
statistics) (v) Social Development and gender expert (MA Social Development) (vi) a Financial management  specialist and (vi) 
Procurement specialist (Master’s degree in procurement).  
 The experts at the PRCU will be regional experts recruited from the NBA countries. This ensures that the regionally built capacity within the basin by the PIDACC is maintained.  It is planned to build the capacity of all these national experts to ensure and 
efficient and effective management of the program at regional and national levels. At the Regional level (PRCU) The 3 experts  
below will cover the required thematic areas whic h include Climate change, Water Resources, soil, forests, biodiversity and 
wetlands. Specifications to suit those attributes will be made in the ToR of the experts  
 
• The Regional Coordinator (Msc in sustainable land and forests management); Natural Resources Expert) with expertise in 
sustainable land and forests management. The expert will also be responsible for the technical coordination of Sustainable 
Land Management activities.  
• The IWRM expert (Msc WRM) will cover aspects to do with water resources management  
• The Climate change specialist (Msc degree in climate change, biology or geography) will cover aspects to do with Climate change, biodiversity and wetlands.  
 
Other experts to support the PRCU will include (i) M&E specialist (Msc in Economics or stat istics) (ii) Social Development and 
gender expert (MA Social Development) (iii) a Financial management specialist and (iv) Procurement specialist (Master’s 
degree in procurement).  
 
Financing for the Regional Project Coordination Unit (RPCU) will be made through proceeds from a number of partners who 
include: the GCF, the AfDB, the GEF, the FIP and the beneficiary countries.  
 National Programme Coordinating Unit (NPCU).  The Implementing Agency in each country is the NBA’s Supervising Ministry 
which is the Ministry of Water Resources [Environment and Agriculture] in all countries except Cameroon, where the programme 
will be under the supervision of the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Development. Within each department, a National Programme Coordi nating Unit (NPCU) will be established to support the implementation of the country component. 
The NPCU will be responsible for coordinating and implementing and M & E at the national level. NPCU’s will work with 
decentralized services and locally -based or ganizations, but also closely with the PRCU. Responsibilities will include: (i) pre-
selection of intervention sites; (ii) organization and supervision of all training and workshops; (iii) execution of the ESMF ; (ii) 
development of tools and materials to enable grassroots organizations to implement program actions; and (iii) supervision of consultants and firms for the implementation of activities. Agreements will be signed with the sectoral ministries for the implementation of the sub- components in their respective areas of competence. The GCF, the AFDB, the GEF, the FIP and the 
partner states, will all make cash contributions towards the costs of the NPCU. Reference for the respective contributions per 
country are indicated in Budget lines A192; A193; A194;  A196; A197 and A198 of “Annex III (sheet “Summary Budget”).  
 The indicative staff composition of the NPCU will comprise the following: (i) National Coordinator (MSc in Natural Resources 
Management/Land and Water Management) (ii) Water management specialis t (Msc Water Resources Management) iii) 
Infrastructure Specialist (Msc Civil Engineering) (iv) Social Development and Gender expert (MA in Social Development)  l
33. (v) 
an M&E specialist (vi) a Financial management specialist (MSc Finance) (vii) a Procurement specialist (Master’s degree in procurement). Each NPCU will have a National Coordinator with qualifications in Water management and an Expert with qualifications in (Natural Resources Management/Land) who will coordinate water and soil conservation activ ities as well as 
sustainable forest management. The profile of the Natural Resources Management expert will focus on Land/ forest management or biodiversity and wetland management dependent the dominant NRM activities of PÏDACC in the country. This 
will ca ter for the wider environment and natural resources dimensions within the program. .All PIDACC coordination units will 
be in place /operational before the first disbursement [see section C 6].  
 
Local Coordination Committees (LCCs). The collaborative effort  of local institutions both public and civil is vital for the 
PIDACC project success. It will provide opportunities for communities to communicate amongst themselves and with local 
governments, and be responsible for assisting the implementation and monitoring and evaluation of the interventions. At the 
local level, working closely with the NPCU for administrative support, the LCCs, as community -based implementation units, will 
                                                             
33 The specialists will be responsible for incorporating the Gender Action Plan into project planning and implementation including supporting/assisting 
design (and if required, implementation) of awareness workshops and training, establishment and monitoring of sex disaggregated data and indicators 
for project performance and monitoring (refer to section H.2)


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 81 
 
  
be key in community awareness and education on climate adaptation programs. They  will work with local authorities and 
communities in developing, regularly monitoring, and evaluating the site- specific on the ground watershed activities.  
 
Beneficiaries.  The communities groups (producers, fishermen, breeders, women’s groups, agricultural groups, resource 
management groups and youth groups etc) are the final beneficiaries of the projects. Community groups will work closely with 
the local authorities, the LCCs and the NPCU. They will: (i) identify site- specific activities (interventions) ;  (ii) assess 
environmental and social impacts; (iii) submit proposals to the LCC for activities to be funded; (iv) sensitize and involve t heir 
local communities and capacity building activities; (v) monitor and evaluate pilot and activities using locally adapted M&E 
systems; (vii) establish or train existing management committees directly responsible for programme monitoring and evaluation; 
and (viii) identify and articulate priority issues and solutions in their locality as they affect the Basin’s sustaina ble management.  
 
C 7.2 Selection Criteria for the selection of proposals/activities during project implementation  
 Feasibility studies were carried out for components (1 and 2) of the PIDACC in consultation with all stakeholders. The studies 
comprised (i) the identification of the project ideas and the sites of intervention and (ii) technical and environmental studies of 
Sub-component 2.1, Implementation of Climate Resilient Growth Infrastructure (Outputs 10, 11, 12 and 13) are already defined 
and studied t o feasibility level. However detailed design studies will be undertaken during implementation of the PIDACC.  
 
GCF financing will go towards Component 1: Development of ecosystems and natural resources resilience (S/C 1.1 Protection 
of resources and ecosyst ems and S/C 1.2: Strengthening shared management of natural resources) as well as S/C 2.2) and 
Component 3. The activities will be formulated and submitted by the communities to the NPCUs for consideration during the 
implementation phase. A community support mechanism will be put in place to support the selection of interventions. Measures 
will include: (i) technical assistance for project development and monitoring; (ii) development of a project finance manual describing the criteria and the review procedure; and (iii) putting in place a technical approval committee of projects in each 
intervention area.  
 
Candidate Activities for implementation by the Project will follow the basic principles of participatory natural resources 
management and specifically (i)  the request for the activity must emanate from the beneficiaries (ii) the activity is consistent 
with sub basin masterplans to be developed at country level and located within the Pidacc area of jurisdiction (iii) contribution 
towards building the resilie nce of communities, ecosystems and infrastructure to climate risks (droughts and floods); (iv) be in 
compliance with environmental safeguards (category 3 or 2 projects); (v) be led by groups of communities (producers, 
breeders, fishermen, women and young p eople willing to provide the counterpart varying from 5% to 20%); and vi) justify the 
capacity of the beneficiary group to ensure a sustainable management and maintenance of the results of the project.  
 
In addition, no activity will be approved that invol ves any of the following: (i) location in nature reserves; (ii) significant loss of 
primary forest, mangroves or sensitive wetland; (iii) any permanent negative effect on known rare or endangered species;  (iv ) 
any significant impacts on air quality and water quality and (v) involuntary relocation of people. Other criteria may be added 
during the development of the community interventions implementation manual taking into account the local realities.  
 
C 7.3 Preparation of Community Activities/Interventions  
A local consulting firm will be recruited in each country to provide technical assistance for the generation, development and 
monitoring of projects. This consultant will be responsible for i) sensitizing and informing communities about the activities  of 
PIDACC, ii) developing activities/Interventions based on communities’ demand for PIDACC financing and iii) supporting 
communities for monitoring of projects implementation.  
 
C.7.4. Construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements  
The contracting and supervision arrangements will be carried out by the NBA, national agencies and promoters of the 
Interventions (Activities) in line with the established practices acceptable to the African Development Bank. The programme 
agreements will specify the detailed implementation arrangements budgets, rights and contractual obligations of all parties 
regarding the project cycle, procurement procedures,34 disbursement procedures35 and reporting requirements, among others.  
C.7.5. The African Development  Bank’s overall role as the Accredited Entity  
The African Development Bank’s overall role is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its headquarters and countr y 
office units. This role includes: (i) project preparation oversight; (ii) implemen tation supervision, reporting and knowledge -
                                                             
34 https://www. Afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/ African Development Bank /Documents/Policy -
Documents/Procurement_policy_for_bank_group_funded_operations.pdf  
35 https://www. Afdb.org/en/document s/document/disbursement -handbook -54419/


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 81 
 
  
management, and financial management; and (iii) project evaluation oversight.  Safeguard specialists (Environment and Social 
and gender specialists) at the African Development Bank will in addition to other techni cal experts support program supervision.  
C.7.6. Agreements and Funds flow for the grants and loans  
 
Figure 18: shows Agreements, Funds flow and reporting requirements for the PIDACC program at regional and national levels. Separate Protocol Agreements will  be signed between the African Development Bank and each of the Co- financiers (GCF, 
GEF, CIF -FIP, and the EU) for their contributions to the PIDACC project.  
 Since PIDACC is a public programme, all agreements (loans and grant) will be signed between the A fDB and the governments 
of the 9 countries and the NBA Executive Secretariat.   At national level, the borrowers will be the Niger Basin Countries through their Ministries in charge of Finance and Economic  
Planning. The ministries of finance will be the recipients of the loans and grants and will designate the Ministries in charge of Water Resources and Environment as the agencies for the implementation of the relevant project activities.  
 At regional level the recipient of the funds will be the Niger Basin Authority for regionally implemented activities. Separate protocol agreements will be signed between the African Development Bank and NBA for the regionally implemented component financed by the GCF, the GEF and the African Development Bank. The NBA will make resources available to the regional coordination 
unit (PRCU) to finance activities.  
 Financing from the African Development Bank together with co- financing resources to the host countries will be channelled under 
separate legal agreements which w ill be signed with the Ministries in charge of Finance and Economic Planning on behalf of the 
corresponding host countries. The Grant Agreements will require the host countries to confirm the provision of their respecti ve 
financial contributions for the Pr oject. The Ministries in charge of Finance and Economic Planning will designate the Ministries in 
charge of Water Resources and Environment as the agencies for the implementation of the relevant project activities. 
 
 
 
Figure 18: Agreements and Funds flow for the PIDACC Fund  
 
Details on the Specific Agreements by Fund are outlined in the section below.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 81 
 
  
GCF -Funded Activities  
The African Development Bank will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement with the GCF in line with the Accreditation Master 
Agreement. Separate Grant and Loan Agreements will be entered into by the African Development Bank with the NBA and the 
Governments of each host country based on the signed FAA.  
 
CIF Funded Activities  
The African Development Bank will sign a Protocol agreement with the Trustee of the Climate Investment Funds [CIF] for activities funded with proceeds from the Forestry Investment Program (FIP). The African Development Bank will enter into a separate 
Protocol Agreement with the Government of Cote D’Ivoire for implementation of the FIP financed activities.  
 
GEF Funded Activities  
The African Development Bank will sign a Protocol agreement with the Trustee of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) for 
activities funded with proceeds from the G EF. Separate Protocol Agreements will be entered by the African Development Bank 
with the NBA for regionally implemented activities, and with the Government of Burkina Faso for nationally implemented activi ties.  
 
EU Funded Activities  
The African Development Bank will sign a Protocol agreement with the European Commission (EC) for activities funded with proceeds from the EU. Separate Grant Agreements will be entered by the African Development Bank with the Governments of each Host Country for implementation of the FIP financed activities.  
 
African Development Bank Funded Activities  
The African Development Bank will sign separate Protocol Agreements for the loans and grants to each country for nationally 
implemented activities and the Niger Basin Authority fo r regionally implemented activities.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 81 
 
 C 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  PIDACC  Program  
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format below is 
used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Section H. In the  case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be completed.  
 
Component/Sub component  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Person in 
charge/Partners  Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 
Component 1: Development of the 
resilience of ecosystems and natural 
resources                                                    
Sub-component 1.1, Resource and 
Ecosystems Protection                                                    
1. Strengthen SLM for reduction of soil 
erosion and silting to sustainable levels                                                    
1.1. Undertake consultation with partner 
states, agronomists, land officers on zoning of 
land for agriculture etc                                                  Ministry/CSO/bene
ficiaries  
1.2.Develop 9 sub basin masterplans  
/watershed management plans                          Ministry/CSO/ PID
ACC /beneficiaries  
1.3 Stabilize dunes; restore degraded land, 
and mechanical/biological management of  
ravines                                                  Ministry/CSO/ PID
ACC/beneficiaries  
1.4. Conduct awareness campaign on erosion 
control and improved soil management  
practices                                                  Ministry/CSO/bene
ficiaries  
1.5. Expand sustainable land and water 
management interventions and technologies 
—inc luding gender -responsive CSA 
technologies                                                  Ministry/CSO/beneficiaries  
1.6. Support the fight against bushfires                                                  Ministry/CSO/bene
ficiaries  
1.7 Conduct training for men and women 
farmers in business development and 
marketing and selected value chains in 
agriculture/ watershed management                                                  Ministry/CSO/beneficiaries  
1.8.Building  of a one lane 60 m span bridge                          Ministry  
2. Increas ing forest productivity and SFM - 
targets area 40,000 ha of forests                                                    
2.1. Support to development of private 
nurseries                                                  Ministry 
//beneficiaries  
2.2. Support the  provision of nationally 
available sources of high quality seed and 
plant material                                                  Ministry 
/PIDACC/beneficia
ries 
2.3. Conduct demonstration /trial forestry plots 
/re-establishment of forest tree species;                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC 
/beneficiaries


---
*Page 42*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 81 
 
 C 
Component/Sub component  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Person in 
charge/Partners  Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 
2.4. Build capacity in SFM (incl . training of 200 
community agents /associations for REDD+                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC 
/beneficiaries  
3. Integrat ion of  agro -forestry into farming 
systems on 26,000ha of agro -forestry ha of 
the watershed                                                    
3.1. Development of private nurseries                                                  Ministry 
/beneficiaries  
3.2. Establish fodder banks with Napier 
grasses                                                  Ministry / PIDACC  
/beneficiaries  
3.3. Plant trees/shrubs on existing radical 
terraces  and on progressive terraces as well 
as on boundaries and within crops                                                  Ministry 
/PIDACC/beneficia
ries 
3.5. Undertake  land certification — provide 
access to restored land for 9,000 women.                           
3.4. Train men and women farmers on gender -
responsive CSA technologies on-farm 
(sensitizing 500,000 women on climate change 
adaptation techniques)                                                  Ministry 
/PIDACC/beneficia
ries 
4. Strengthen ing sustainable management 
of natural habitats                                                    
4.1. Identify areas for development of the 
Nature Reserves                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC  
4.2. Establish corridors for wildlife to access 
water and biomass during droughts                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC  
4.3. Rehabilitate bare land and  spawning 
grounds across the basin nature conservation 
areas                                                   Consultants/ Ministry / PIDACC 
4.4. Improve management within protected 
areas: to reduce degradation of habitats                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC  
Sub-component 1.2, Strengthening the shared management of natural resources                                
5. Strengthen ing hydro meteorological 
forecasting and early warning systems                                                    
5.1. Strengthening the decision support tools 
(Mike Hydro basin, Mike Hydro flood etc) and capacity development through integration of 
climate risk management                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry 
/PIDACC/ACMAD  
5.2. Long -term and on -demand capacity 
development and training program for NMHS staff on O&M, data modeling, and forecasting. 
Includes TA for support to certification of 
meteorological agencies in line with WMO 
requirements.                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry 
/PIDACC/ACMAD


---
*Page 43*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 81 
 
 C 
Component/Sub component  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Person in 
charge/Partners  Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 
5.3. Expansion of coverage of Hydrological 
and meteorological monitoring networks                                                  Ministry 
/PIDACC /ACMAD  
5.4. Community based Early Warning  Systems  
Established                                                  Ministry 
/PIDACC /ACMAD  
5.5. Develop new information and value -added 
products                                                  Ministry / PIDACC  
/ACMAD  
5.6. Capacity -building activities in the 
generation/application of climate products                                                  Ministry 
/PIDACC /ACMAD  
6. Undertake TA for preparation of the 
Niger regional pollution prevention plan                                                    
6.1. Diagnostic study leading to preparation of 
plan for strengthening network for water quality 
monitoring in the Niger River.                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC 
7. Establish PES mechanism and Regional 
Adaptation Fund for Climate Change                                                    
7.1. Diagnosis study and FRACC and PES 
feasibility studies                                                   Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC  
7.2. Establish payments for biodiversity 
conservation, wildlife corridors and, in steep 
areas, watershed protection                                                   Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC/ 
Beneficiaries  
8. Capacity building of NBA executives, 
partner institutions and user associations 
and IWRM devices of functional countries                                                    
8.1 Preparation of Regional IWRM action Plan                          Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC  
8.2. Operationalization of IWRM plans in the 
nine (9) countries and improv ing regional 
coordination in the implementation of the NBA 
Operational Plan (2016 -2025);                                                  Ministry / PIDACC/ 
Beneficiaries  
8.3. Detail a capacity development program 
that includes on -site and off -site training                                                  Ministry / PIDACC / 
Beneficiaries  
8.4. Undertake capacity building of NBA 
executives, partner institutions to plan and 
implement climate resilient land and water 
management regimes                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC/ 
Beneficiaries  
9. Technical assistance for preparation of 
Navigation masterplan (Benoué river, 
Nigeria and Cameroun)                                                    
9.1. Diagnostic analysis including (i)Sediment 
yield analysis (ii) Hydrologic analysis of the 
Niger and Benoué course and (iii) Definition of 
a regional soil conservation policy                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC 
Component 2, Development of Population Resilience


---
*Page 44*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 81 
 
 C 
Component/Sub component  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Person in 
charge/Partners  Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 
Sub-component 2.1, Implementation of 
Climate Resilient Growth Infrastructure                                                    
10. Implement ing Hydro -Agricultural 
Infrastructure                                                     
10.1. Preliminary study/mapping of locations of 
the small hydraulic infrastructure across the 9 
countries                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / PIDACC/ 
Beneficiaries  
10.2. Rehabilitat e water storage structures to 
preserve supplies  and improve flood protection                                                  Ministry / PIDACC / 
Beneficiaries  
10.3. Construct  rainwater harvesting 
infrastructure across transhumance corridors                                                  Ministry / PIDACC / 
Beneficiaries  
11. Develop ment of  water points for cattle 
and transhumance pathways                                                    
11.1. Preliminary study/mapping of location for 
water pints across the 9 countries                                                  Ministry / PIDACC / 
Beneficiaries  
11.2. Establish corridors for livestock 
movement to protect farmers’ crops and trees, 
designating grazing and water access areas to 
ensure resilience of pastoral production 
systems                                                  Consultants/  
Ministry / PIDACC/ 
Beneficiaries  
11.3. Construct ion of  rainwater harvesting 
infrastructure along transhumance corridors                                                  Ministry concerned  
11.4. Formulat ion and support of committees 
to manage small scale infrastructure                                                  Ministry concerned  
12. Train River Sections for improved 
navigation                                                    
12.1. Build / rehabilitate navigation sections 
and landing stages (on Niger, Tinkissu, 
Sankarani and Milo                                                  Ministry / PIDACC/ 
Beneficiaries  
13. Fisheries Infrastructure constructed for 
improved productivity                                                  Ministry concerned  
13.1. Construct ion of  9 nursery stations and 
develop of 16,000 ha of spawning and 
floodplain areas).                                                  Ministry concerned  
Sub-component 2.2. Accompanying measures and social protection  
14. Develop ment of  Community Climate 
adaptation Action Plans                                                    
14.1. Select  target areas and target groups for 
support                                                  Ministry concerned  
14.2. Undertake c ommunity based survey of 
project area and prioritization of interventions                                                  Ministry concerned  
14.3. Develop extension training materials that 
incorporate climate resilient approaches                                                  Ministry concerned


---
*Page 45*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 81 
 
 C 
Component/Sub component  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Person in 
charge/Partners  Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 
14.4. Awareness raising /training of project 
staff and communities in gender based 
adaptation planning( includes e stimated 
1,000,000 women)                                                  Ministry concerned  
14.5. Conduct c ommunity meetings and 
planning workshops                                                  Ministry concerned  
14.6. Develop and implement local adaptation 
plans with zonation of land for agriculture, 
pasture,                                                  Ministry concerned  
15. Strengthen Community Based 
Livelihood infrastructure                                                    
15.1. Select ion and c onstruct ion of  168 
infrastructure upgrading Interventions 
(Activities)  in specific watersheds;                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / 
Beneficiaries  
15.2. Form ulation of 292 infrastructure 
management committees with 30% 
representation for women;                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / 
Beneficiaries  
15.3. Install ation of  10 floating fish cages in the 
river system(50% of beneficiaries will be 
women);                                                  Consultants/ / Beneficiaries  
15.4. Restock ing 270 water reservoirs with 
fish; incl. integration of aquaculture into 
existing farming systems                                                  Consultants/ 
Ministry / 
Beneficiaries  
15.6. Provi sion of  access to recovered 
(previously degraded) land to 9,000 women 
and 3,000 young people                                                  Ministry / 
Beneficiaries  
15.7. Support for the establishment of 100 
SMEs for youth employment, of which 30 will be run by females; (ii) financing of 120 
integrated Interventions (Activities)  supported 
by women; and (iii) integration of strategies to 
increase women’s participation in the 
workforce.                                                  Ministry  / Beneficiaries  
Component 3; Project Management and 
Coordination                                                    
16. Dissemination  of good adaptation 
practices and climate information                                                    
16.1. Strengthening regional and national 
communications systems, based on the 
existing NBA communication strategy.                                                  Ministry concerned 
/PIDACC 
16.2. Preparation of briefing notes for local and 
national decision makers                                                  Ministry concerned 
/NBA  
16.3. Preparation of project knowledge 
management strategy                                                  Ministry concerned 
/PIDACC


---
*Page 46*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 81 
 
 C 
Component/Sub component  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  Person in 
charge/Partners  Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 
16.4 Preparation of project gender strategy                           
16.5. Preparation of media articles in journals, 
newsletters, maintain website                                                  Ministry concerned 
/NBA  
16.6. Conduct an ex -post cost benefit analysis 
to determine the value added by the project 
compared with existing practices                                                  Ministry concerned 
/PIDACC 
16.7. National workshops ( WSM, SFM ,CSA )                                                 Ministry concerned 
/PIDACC  
17. Strengthen M& E system and practice 
by the NBA Environment Observatory                                                    
17.1. Undertake project baseline data/benefit 
monitoring surveys                                                  Ministry concerned 
/PIDACC  
17.2. Strengthen  regional and national GIS -
based M&E and MIS incl. gender 
disaggregated data                                                  Ministry concerned 
/PIDACC 
17.3. Collection, analyses, reporting, 
dissemination of  data and information on 
program p rogress                                                  /Ministry 
concerned 
/PIDACC  
17.4. Preparing annual periodic reports                                                  PIDACC  Program 
coordinating unit  
Interim Evaluation                           
Project Completion                          PIDACC  Program 
coordinating unit  
Final Evaluation                          PIDACC  Program 
coordinating unit


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 81 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme , in consideration of  other alternatives . 
GCF involvement in the PIDACC  is critical as it will contribute towards strengthened resilience of human and natural systems 
in the Niger B asin to the impacts of climate variability and change and related risks. Without GCF investments that improve 
resilience in the Basin, PIDACC  will have minimal impact.  
 
GCF will contribute to the achievement of B asin countr y commitments to the UNFCCC conventions —more speci fically , the 
NDCs as  committed under  the Paris A greement and the NAPs, NAPA, the national climate change strategies, and the 
national disaster risk management strategies.  Linking PIDACC  interventions to NDCs will help align investments  with 
national climate goals and help mainstream climate infrastructure needs into broader growth plans within the Niger Basin. 
By reducing econom ic losses and increasing productivity, the programme will directly support climate resilient growth . The 
contribution of GCF is also essential for the  development of a sustainable funding mechanism (PES) to preserve natural 
resources in the long run  through a Regional  Adaptation Fund for the CC (RAFCC  or FRACC ).   
D.2. Exit Strategy   
 
The approach for sustainability is drawn on elements from the success of multi country climate adaptation programs like 
the Bank financed Silt Control project in the  Sahelian Zone of the Niger River Basin (Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger and 
coordinated by the NBA) which strengthens its sustainability beyond project closure. These include (i) a strong participatory approach-  emphasizing demand driven interventions  by the governments and the beneficiary communities to 
address climate variability (ii) contribution of the governments and beneficiary communities estimated at 10% and 5% of the project costs respectively —which strengthens ownership, sustainability and re plication and (iii) setting up community 
based infrastructure management committees, which are trained and equipped for O & M of infrastructure. Other 
dimensions include (i) strengthened mechanisms for O & M of the hydromet infrastructure (ii) strengthened M & E system 
to document and disseminate best practices and (iii) setting up mechanisms for payment for Ecosystem services (PES) 
and a Regional Adaptation Fund for Climate Change (RAFCC) to finance downstream measures after project closure. The 
Bank will ensure that agreements for loans and grants to the recipient  agencies include commitments to an exit strategy 
which ensures the sustainability of project outcomes. Details of the elements are illustrated below.  
 
Strengthened policy and institutional enviro nment  
The project is aligned to the national climate change related priorities  (including meeting their NDC commitments which 
strengthens replicability and contributes towards future adaptation interventions and broader project sustainability. At a 
regiona l level, the Niger water charter provides for continued promotion of integrated management of the Niger Basin 
water resources and maintenance of the integrity of ecosystems through protection of aquatic ecosystems against the 
deterioration of basins and the threat of climate variability among other obligations.  
 
Natural resources interventions  
Project activities related to agro- forestry, afforestation, soil and water conservation and natural resources management are 
community driven type activities. Interv entions for example confirming the choice of locations to be protected , fixing of 
dunes etc, will be implemented with active participation by the beneficiary population (counterpart labor  contribution), 
which strengthens their sustainability after project completion. The technical and financial capacities of the local 
communities will be strengthened, thereby minimizing  the need for recurrent expenditure after project closure. With 
strengthened management capacity, the communities will be in a better positi on to own and sustain the project's results.  
 
Sustainable agriculture techniques and technologies introduced to communities have been tested before under the Niger silt control program, and are technically feasible and therefore have the best chance of bei ng self -sustaining and self -
replicating. Through the enrichment of this local knowledge and know -how with relatively simple reproducible techniques, 
the project aims at developing and maximizing the various results by the beneficiary population. Assessments will also be 
conducted for sustainable harvesting operational plans for communities (including benefit sharing) to build community 
resilience to climate change impacts through income and livelihoods diversification and enhancement.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 81 
 
 
 D 
Maintena nce costs (weeding, raising the fences, replanting, which might be necessary) as well as the protection of the 
developed sites will be the responsibility of the beneficiaries in partnership with government technical departments and the 
decentralized communities. The forestry and agro forestry investments will also be supported by the development of 
training programmes and management protocols for nursery staff and the increased generation of revenue through 
marketing of tree seedlings, and the development of revenue models to support the sustained operation of each nursery. 
After project completion, countries will continue to be responsible for the monitoring, training, awareness, technical suppor t 
for the sustainability of development activities at the request of the population and the decentralized communities.  
 
Community based hydro- infrastructure and pastoral watering points  
Strengthening of the technical, managerial and financial capacities of the beneficiary communities (through committees set 
up for O & M of the small infrastructure) will ensure ownership and the sustainability of community based hydro 
infrastructure. The management committees will through a benefit and revenue sharing approach ensure revenue collection for O & M of the community infras tructure after project clos ure. The establishment of catchment based 
adaptation plans will promote community -based catchment management and s erve as an incentive for improving the 
lifetime of the hydro agricultural infrastructure.  
 
Modernized  Climate and Weather information systems  
An integrated agency wide approach, through the Niger Hycos —will be undertaken to engage the governments  on O & M, 
focusing on strengthening capacity and ultimately, improving service delivery from the installed hydromet stations. 
Strengthening of the NMHS, will build onto efforts of the ongoing African Development Bank -ClimDev financed project 
“system for monitoring water resources and flows forecasts using satellite imagery in the Niger  Basin (SATH -ABN)”. 
Commitment will be obtained for government support beyond the project close to cover the O & M of the new systems and 
services and retain qualified staff. The African Development Bank  through the ClimDev program, will also support long-
term planning and capacity development through facilitating knowledge- sharing across borders in the Niger basin.  
 
Strengthened knowledge base and M & E framework  
The PIDACC  will create dedicated knowledge and learning across project components including the creation of a publicly -
available online information portal to increase the availability of information on landscape approaches, as well as seminars 
to share critical knowledge with key decision makers  and community members. The M&E system will generate project 
information on the socio- economic and environmental benefits, document lessons learned and incorporate them into 
decision making. Future phases of the PIDACC, will be informed by the experience and knowledge products generated by 
the project. For sustainability, these M & E systems at the NBA and country level, will be embedded within permanent 
public agencies.  These activities will encourage replication and ensure the sustainability of project results  
 
Financial Sustainability  
Country and beneficiary contributions which are estimated at 8% and 4% respectively of the total project costs, reflect 
ownership of the project outcomes and will contribute to project financial sustainability.  
 
PIDACC  also will explore innovative mechanisms for meeting funding needs  for sustainability of the natural resources 
interventions in the basin.  Mechanisms w ill include: raising funds from new markets (such as carbon offsets, water, or 
other payments for ecosystem services (PES)) . PES generates its own funding without substantial budgetary outlays from 
the governments. The PES mechanism will establish a system for financing the activities for protecting natural resources 
in the basin watersh eds by users of these resources . The PES will be financed through taxes levied on heavy water users, 
such as mines, industries, large dams and cities in the basin.  A regional Adaptation Fund for climate Change ( Environment  
Trust Fund), which is a long term financing instrument, will be put in place and operationalized by year 3 of the PIDACC 
project implementation  to manage the PES . The study to design the RAFCC design is ongoing financed by the European 
Union. The Trust Fund modalit ies will be defined during the project to ensure that the fund is created in line with the 
country’s priorities. It is expected that the RAFCC will be catalytic and support scaled up climate  adaptation actions 
leading to a sustainable and virtuous  circle of investment  in management of the basin’s  natural resources.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact Potential  
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the proposed 
project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and indicative assessment 
facto rs, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where relevant and applicable.  This 
section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub- criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework .  
Building resilience to CC is a priority for poverty reduction and shared prosperity in the Niger basin. C limate Change 
projections point to higher temperatures, increased frequency and intensity of rainfall and associated flooding, along with 
more frequent and prolonged droughts. Climate variability, in particular, poses a significant risk to vulnerable communities.  
Projected impacts threaten many of the basin development priorities (food and energy security in particular).  
 
Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries, number of beneficiaries relative to total population (PMF -A Core 
1), particularly the most vulnerable groups . The GCF -financed activities under PIDACC  are expected to contribute directly 
to adaptation by increasing resilience to climate shocks in poor and extreme poor households. The improved resilience will  
potentially benefit 4 million people directly and 10 million indirectly ( ~50% female). The community resilience will be 
supported through strengthening of  existing delivery mechanisms including flood and drought prone households through 
improved storage and conservation  of ecosystems . 
 
Expected reduction in vulnerability by enhancing adaptive ca pacity and resilience for populations focusing on the most 
vulnerable population groups and applying a gender -sensitive approach. The programme will improve the resilience of the 
populations and ecosystems of the Niger River through the implementation of measures  such as: (i) erosion and silting 
reduction, dune fixation and watershed management; (ii) protection of biodiversity and wetlands for sustainable management 
of Ramsar sites ; (iii) sustainable rangeland management ; and  (v) implementation of 33 community climate adaptation plans.  
 Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision- making (PMF -A 6.0 and related indicator(s) . 
The PIDACC project will strengthen the decision support tools through integration of climate risk management, 
strengthening of hydrological forecasting based on rainfall -runoff models driven by projections of future precipitation and 
application of freeware such as the Soil and Water Assessment tool (SWAT) to assess impacts of landscape measures. 
The enhanced tools will enable decision- makers to evaluate and implement climate adaptation measures.  The program 
will also strengthen the use of Climate risk inform ation for decision making, both at the country  and basin level. Examples 
may include services that improve decisions for resiliency in the short - and long- term, such as early warning systems for 
climate related disaster risk management, area planning, and provision of services critical for sustaining economic growth.   
 
Expected st rengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks (PMF -A 7.0 and related indicator(s)).  
The programme will have a strong focus on reducing community vulnerability  through focusing on the transformation of ‘last -
mile’ community EWS . Ecosystem -based adaptation approaches like agroforestry, IWRM, livelihood diversification, and 
sustainable forest management interventions will also reduce vulnerability to climate change.  An estimated 500,000 people 
(50% women) will be reached by climate- related EWS systems and other risk reduction measures.  
 
Expected improvement in the management of land or forest areas contributing to emission reductions ( PMF -M 4.0 and 
related indicator(s)).  The project places emphasis on assessing, monitoring and reporting on mitigation in the Logical 
Framework (Section H1) and M&E (Section H 2). The programme will contribute towards reducing GHG emissions and 
increasing carbon sequestration through sustainab le forest and soil management through: (i) REDD+ development of 40,000


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
ha of forests, and (ii) training of 200 members of community associations in REDD+ .36 Conserving terrestrial carbon 
represents a “least -cost opportunity” in terms of climate change adapt ation and mitigation and is essential to increasing the 
resilience of agricultural ecosystems .37 Mitigation benefits have been estimated and analysed ex -ante, and will be assessed 
and reported in the Project’s Completion Report.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential  indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 
eq) to be reduced or avoided (mitigation only)  Annual  1.4 million tons CO2   
[Estimates of reduced/avoided emissions by 
mid-term/year 3 is 4.2 million tons CO2]  
Lifetime  7 million ton CO2  
 Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender (reduced 
vulnerability or increased resilience)  Total  Direct b eneficiary population i ~500,000 
households (estimated at 4 million people);  
(average of 8  persons per household. Indirect 
beneficiaries estimated at 10 million people  
(50% women)  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total population, 
disaggregated  by gender (adaptation only)  Percentage 
(%) 10% (50% are women ) 
 Expected increase in generation and use of climate 
information in decision -making  Percentage 
(%) 50% 
 Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to climate risks  Percentage 
(%) 50% of beneficiary population  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Enhanced climate resilient landscapes developed 
as a hedge towards climate extremes  Total  • 40,000ha — forestry  
• 26,000 ha — agroforestry  
• 10,000 ha of dunes stabilized;  
• 110,000 ha of degr aded land restored;  
• Mechanical and biological management of 
45,000 (m3) of ravines undertaken  
 Number of households benefiting from last mile 
early warning systems against climate extremes of 
floods and droughts   • 62,500  households (estimated population 
500,000~ 50% being female ) 
 
Methodology used for calculating the above  indicators  
The detailed methodology and data are provided in the preliminary studies for the Programme for the Integrated 
Development and Adaptation to Climate Change i n the Niger Basin ( PIDACC/NB) . In assessing the potential for emissions 
reduction, the following hypothesis and basis for calculation was used:  (i) Carbon stock: according to FAO estimates (2011), 
the total carbon of Sahel forests in the living biomass of forests area (above ground + below grou nd biomass) is about 53 
tCo2/ha (ii) Rate of deforestation: According PRONAGREF (TAED, 2009) is estimated at 107,626 ha/year.  
 
Estimation of potential carbon sequestration, is based on an AGRYMET study .38 The study estimates the potential carbon 
sequestration maxima in Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso and Chad. A sequestration rate of 53 ton nes CO2 eq. /ha for assisted 
natural regeneration of forests (80% from c arbon above ground biomass, i.e. 42.4 tonne s CO2 eq . /ha, and 20% from c arbon 
in soil biom ass). The estimate for hedgerows is based on 200 stems/km versus 625 stems/ha (e.g. 3 km of hedgerows 
equals 1 ha in terms of CO2 sequestration.  
 
  
                                                             
36 Preliminary studies of multi -purpose infrastructure of the Programme For The Integrated Development And Adaptation To Climate Change 
In The Niger Basin ( PIDACC /NB); Regional Synthesis Report  
37 World Bank 2012. Carbon Sequestration In Agricultural Soils  
38 “Preliminary evaluation and mapping of the carbon sequestration potential on the basis of forest species and soil and climate units in the 
Sahel and particularly in Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso, Burkina Faso and Chad” (WMO, Center, AGRHYMET Regional Center), labelled as 
AGRYMET modelling method in the CEO draft Letter


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyse impact beyond a one- off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate -resilient development 
pathways could be scaled-up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish it.  
 
Scaling up low carbon/ climate resilient growth pathways  
A strengthened knowledge base will ensure documentation and dissemination of best practices and this will inform future 
programming within the wider CRIP program me. Scaling up will also be supported by key partnerships. The project will also 
pilot low -emissi on agriculture through increasing tree cover in crop and livestock systems (e.g. agro- forestry ~26,000ha) and 
reducing soil disturbance (e.g. through reduced tillage), peatlands management (low lands) , grazing land management, 
forest management (~40,000 ha)  as means of sequestering carbon in agricultural systems  in the Niger B asin. Such actions 
will expand so that by the mid-2020s , land -use change and forestry will become a net carbon sink .  
 
The proposed RAFCC mechanism will assist the basin  countries in reduc tion of deforestation and degradation. The Fund 
will aim to compensat e users within the watersheds for GHG reductions through improved protection of forests as carbon 
stores. The contribution of carbon sequestration would be key, allowing for compensation of GHG emissions by 2050.   
 
Potential role women can play in the project as agents of change  
Under its Gender Strategy, the Niger Basin Authority has committed to mainstream gender considerations in all its operations 
and support gender -specific activ ities, especially in areas where gender disparities are most severe.  Rural women, mainly 
active in the primary sector and dependent on weather conditions and natural hazards, would thus be most affected by the 
effects and impacts of climate change. The improved management of the Niger Basin’s natural resources – to be brought 
about by the Project - will be particularly beneficial to poor rural women.  
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, learning processes / institutions.  
The PIDACC  program me will strengthen the knowledge base and analytical tools related to climate r isk management in the 
Niger Basin. Activities will include the following:  
• Climate risk assessment tools through enhanced numerical weather prediction models building on existing tools, 
extended hydrologic forecasting (SWAT) ; climate risk assessments; integration of spatial information in ArcGIS, climate 
adaptation factsheets, s easonal forecast s, Web Portal with real -time maps and periodic state of the basin reports ; 
• Creating knowledge products (e.g. reports, briefing papers on high level PIDACC  results;  interactive knowledge 
products) ; documentation of i ndigenous climate knowledge especially last mile warning;  
• Knowledge dissemination/experiential learning through outreach (incl. public domain information, technical forums). The 
diffusion of tailored products will be monitored through gender -sensitive field surveys ; and  
• Strengthening interactions and outreach on climate risk management within the Niger B asin in close collaboration with 
the NMHS, ACMAD and AGRHYMET (incl. workshops, distance learning, vendor fairs) . 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of private and public 
sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program.  
 
The programme will contribute to the creation of an enabling environment for more informed policy making for climate 
resilient growth in the Niger B asin.  Practical  examples will include strengthening:  (i) awareness raising and information 
exchange ; (ii) national implementation strategies for E WS and community -based adaptation;  (iv) climate resilient a griculture, 
biodiversity , forestry and ecosystems management ; and (v) establishment of information systems for GHG inventories .


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Describe how the programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically drive investment in low -
emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, and/or improve climate-responsive 
planning and  development.  
 
Contribution to NBA r egional regulatory frameworks  
The PIDACC /NB will promote the African Development Bank 's 2013- 2022 Strategy and other regional policies which include:  
• African Development Bank  10 Year Strategy . The strategy emphasizes transition to green growth, responding to the 
challenges of climate change and reducing the ecological footprint on its natural capital, as a springboard for growth.  
• African Development Bank  Human Capital Strategy 2014– 2018 , which places emphasis on improv ing skills for 
competitiveness and jobs . 
• African Development Bank  Feed Africa Strategy . The strategy aims to address food insecurity and climate change by 
improving resilience against climate impacts, reducing GHG emissions, and increasing productivity in farming.  
• African Development Bank  HIGH  5. The High5’s aim to i mprov e the quality of life for the African people. The strategy 
recognizes the need for reliable and accurate weather and climate data and information to help African partner states 
on how to ma instream climate risk management into the water resources sector . 
• ECOWAS Regional Agricultural Investment Programme. The programmes focus es on: (i) promotion of early warning 
systems ; (ii) development of cris is management systems ; (ii) support for the rehabilitation of zones after crises ; and 
(iv) development of compensation mechanisms/insurance against catastrophes .


---
*Page 53*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
E.2.5. PIDACC  Theory of Change Diagram  
 
Figure 19: Theory of Change diagram for the PIDACC  program showing causal linkage/pathway between the problem statement, barriers and strategic result area inclusive of the ass umptions and 
risks.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
E 3.1.1. Economic c o-benefits  
The project economic analysis  is based on a 30 year impac t given the 7 to 10 year average lifespan  of planned climate and 
weather information systems  and a 30 to 40 year lifespan  for natural resource investments. Operations and maintenance 
(O&M) costs are assumed to be between 1 % and 5% of programme  investments. A discount rate of 10% was used to 
calculate  the Net Present Value (NPV). A 10% discount rate represents an understanding that future costs and benefits are 
relatively important in comparison to the current situation –  concurrent with concerns regarding climate change.  The NPV  is 
calculated to be US $ 250million, at a discount rate of 10%  for the base case which includes avoided costs due to climate 
change expressed as benefits . This represents a benefit -cost ratio of 1.6. The Internal Rate of Return (IRR), which is the 
interest rate that makes the NP V of all cash flows equal to 0, was calculated to be 1 8%. A sensitivity analysis was conducted 
to illustrate the benefits of the programme at varying r ates of return. At a discount rate of 12%, the NPV equals 
US$ 150million. This  implies that the programme would be viable even with higher discount rates.  
E 3.1. 2. Social co-benefits  
Social benefits are derived from increased income reliability. An estimated 150,000 jobs will be created at the end of the 
programme. Through creation of rural employment for the most vulnerable groups (young people and women), PIDACC /NB 
will be a model of action promoting gender, social equality and inclusive development. This is in line with the African 
Development Bank  Human Capital Development Strategy ,39 which places emphasis on improving demographic dividends 
through improving skills for competitiveness and jobs. The strategy also emphasizes building financial and social systems 
to ensure inclusion and social cohesion. Through strengthened climate and weather information systems,  PIDACC  will also 
strengthen the productivity of farmers and reduce the number of people who are food insecure in the Niger Basin.  
 
The project will help prevent conflicts between farmers and pastoralists in transhu mance transit and arrival areas  and build 
peace among communities. Integrated landscape management will promote the multi -functionality of landscapes and 
provide a mechanism that enables local stakeholders to reduce conflicts among different types of specialized resource users 
who differ in their dependencies on a range of ecosystem services (e.g., herders, farmers, or fishers). Examples will include 
agreements negotiated between farmers and herders to demarcate corridors for livestock movement, which will help to 
protect farmers’ crops and trees from livestock browsing while at the same time safeguarding grazing and water access 
areas for herders. Investment  in transboundary water management (focusing on water and rangeland resources) through 
hydro infrastructure ( Outputs10 and 11) will also help to de- escalate tensions, promote stability, and provide resilience to 
hydrological shocks that might otherwise act as a trigger for conf lict. Targeted areas will include transhumance corridors. 
This will provide a measure of resilience against water -related disasters and water crises  and mitigate against conflict.   
 
E.3.3 Gender -sensitive development impact  
Improvements in forecasting and early warning will help minimize the negative impacts on women. People- centred  
community -based EWS will directly address women’s vulnerabilities and exposure to disaster risk. During community  
sensitization,  as well as design and implementation, women beneficiaries will be targeted for their engagement and 
ownership of the community -based EWS . Specifically, gender will be mainstreamed into activities such as capacity building, 
communication, project formulation, studies, and assessment s. Sharing information to strengthen disaster risk management 
and operation of the storage infrastructure along the transhumance routes will strengthen resilience.  
 
Section E 3.1. 4. Environmental and economic co-benefits  
Improved access and utilization of hydromet information and EWS will reduce the climate- related disaster risks through an 
increase community preparedness for response and recovery , consistent with Sustainable Development Goa l (SDG ) 
target 13.1 and SGD target 13.3 on strengthening institutional capacity on climate change mitigation  and adaptation.  
 
                                                             
39 African Development Bank Human Capital Strategy 2014 –2018 May 2014


---
*Page 55*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
Reforestation, regeneration of tree and forest areas  (~40,000 ha) , agro -forestry ( ~26,000ha), erosion and silt control and 
sustainable agro- sylvo -pastoral management will generate benefits for food security, adaptation to climate change 
(microclimate), and water management . It will further provide safety nets for rural people in times of economic distress, 
helping them offset losses in income caused by weather shocks . This is consistent wit h SDG  13 on climate change, SDG  
15 on s ustainable forests, and INDC priorities on agriculture and forestry.  
 
Interventions on wetland and flood plain restoration will support many human activities, including fisheries, cropping, and 
gardening. Protection and wise use of wetland resources will also offer water supply and quality benefits that are often 
essential t o maintaining a basic standard of living in both urban and rural areas. Wetlands will also continue to provide a 
wide range of other benefits to local communities, including handcraft and building materials, food resources such as wild vegetables and medic ine for various ailments. Indirect benefits will include provision of ecological services, that maintain 
and protect natural and human systems, such as maintenance of water quality and flow, flood control, nutrient retention and climate regulation (micro- climate stabilization), and the production and consumption activities they support; carbon 
sequestration, etc. This is consistent with SDG Goal 15 on protection, restoration and promotion of sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems and halting and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss  
 Integrating protection of natural habitats and improved management of agricultural resources into adaptation plans will 
contribute to cost -effective strategies for reducing vulnerability to climate change.
40 Interventions on flood plain/spawning 
grounds restoration will support fisheries , consistent with SDG  13 on c limate change, and SDG  15 (target 15.3) on reducing 
the degradation of natural habitats, halt ing the loss of biodiversity and preventing the extinc tion of threatened species.  
 
Establishment of a Regional Adaptation Fund for C limate Change will provide sustainable funding for conservation actions 
by prioritizing proposals for funding that involve local people in negotiated resource use and co -management of resources . 
This is consistent with SDG target 15.a: mobilizing financial resources to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity and 
ecosystems SDG target 13.a : implement the commitment undertaken by developed -country parties to the UNFCCC . 
  
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country /beneficiary groups , and elaborate how the programme addresses issue s 
(e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups , overall income level, etc ). 
E.4.1.1 Non climate drivers for vulnerability  
 
The demographic growth in the Niger Basin puts pressure on the natural resources and the environment.  The Niger 
basin’s population is growing at ~ 3% per year. By 2030 the number of people living in the drylands of West Africa is expected 
to increase by 80% ( based on current population growth estimates ). Over the same period, climate change could result in 
an expansion of the area classified as drylands by as much as 20% under some scenarios, for the region as a whole, with 
much larger increases in some c ountries. Rapid population growth is putting pressure on a deteriorating resource base and 
creating conditions under which extreme weather events, unexpected spikes in global food and fuel prices, or other 
exogenous shocks can easily precipitate full -blown  humanitarian crises and fuel violent social conflicts41. Forced to address 
urgent short -term needs, many households have resorted to unsustainable practices, resulting in severe land degradation, 
water scarcity, and biodiversity loss. Economic  growth will reduce the share of people living in drylands who are sensitive to 
droughts and other shocks, but probably not fast enough to overcome the effects of demographic growth.42 
 
                                                             
40 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / THE WORLD BANK; Biodiversity, Climate Change and Adaptation 
Nature- Based Solutions from the World Bank Portfolio  
41 Cervigni, Raffaello, et al. 2016. Confronting Drought  in Africa’s Drylands: Opportunities for Enhancing Resilience. Africa Development 
Forum series. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978- 1-4648- 0817- 3. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO  
42 Opportunities for Enhancing Resilience Confronting Drought in Africa’s  Drylands; Raffaello Cervigni and Michael Morris, Editors A 
publication of Agence Française de Développement and the World Bank


---
*Page 56*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
Poverty and climate change vulnerability in the Niger Basin are strongly correlated . The chronic vulnerability of people 
living in drylands of the Niger basin, stands at the forefront of the basin member states development challenge. Table  11, 
shows the prevalence of poverty within the basin. In 2012, the annual per capita income ranged from US$ 370 in Niger to 
US$ 1,430 in Nigeria; the weighted average was US$ 1251 ( PIDACC , African Development Bank , 2014). Of the 275 million 
inhabitants in the nine NBA countries, about 27.7 million are malnourished, which is 10% of the total population (FAO 2010 
Statistics). Widespread poverty limits the resources with which communities can adapt to and recover from climate events. 
Economic reliance on rain fed farming and pastoralism mean that livelihood and food security is intimately linked with 
weather trends and environmental conditions. The average poverty rate in the Niger Basin is estimated at 55 % (2011) . 
While there has been a substantial drop in poverty, there has been an increase in the number of poor, due to dem ographic 
expansion in the basin. The Basin’s rural poor represent a significant population in the riparian countries.   
 
Table 11: Prevalence of Poverty in the Niger basin  
• In Mal i, poverty declined from 55.4% (2001) to 48.4% (2011). By 2013, the poverty rate was estimated at 50.9%.  
• In Chad,  47% people live below the national poverty line and 68% are considered vulnerable.43 
• In Cote d’Ivoire, the poverty rate declined to 28% (%1.90 a day poverty line, 2011 PPP) in 2015, down from an estimated 
34% in 2011. The poverty rate using the national poverty  line was down to 46%.Ibid  
• In Nigeria, extreme poverty was estimated at 53.4% (2009). Poverty is estimated to have reduced to 46.8% (2015) .  
• In Benin, estimates of the 2011 PPP US$ 1.90 per day indicate poverty rates dropping from 61.4% to 49.6% (2006- 2015) . 
• In Guinea, poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate (national poverty line) stagnating at around 55% (2002-2012) .  
• In Niger , from 2005 and 2014, the incidence of poverty (based on poverty line of US$ 1.90 per day) fell from 50.3% to 45.7%.  
• In Burkina Faso, the percentage of people living below the poverty line declined from 52.7% in 2003 to 40.1% in 2014.  
• In Cameroon, p overty is  concentrated in the northern parts of the country. The number of poor in that region has more than 
doubled between 2001 and 2014 from 2.1 million to 4.5 million (56% of all poor in the country) in 201444 
 
Insecurity and  fragility . The vulnerability of people in the Basin is exacerbated by political instability, notably  recent conflicts 
in Mali and other parts of the Sahel, and the resurgence of Boko Haram and the resulting violence and lack of security. 
Security problems and displac ed populations (Mali, Niger/Chad/Cameroon/Nigeria, etc.). The impacts of climate change and 
recurrent natural disasters also lead to mass migration of people in the region. In 2003 more than 25,000 refugees settled in the Fouta Djallon and Mount Nimba regi ons of Guinea. This led to increased degradation of the highlands, with rapid 
deforestation and associated land degradation .  
 
Conflicts over shared natural resources use: Some of the biggest issues facing agro- pastoral systems that could 
undermine resilience building efforts in the Niger basin include farmer -herder conflicts and land tenure and rights
45. The 
pastoral systems are trans -boundary by nature, and pastoralists migrate across borders as a coping strategy against 
droughts and conflicts. Competition over natural resources, especially land and water, along with the erosion of traditional 
range management and tenure systems, have inflamed conflicts among pastoralists (like the Fulani) and between 
pastoralists and settled farming populations over  the past three decades. Threats related to climate change and other 
forms of instability, make traditional transhumance routes less accessible, marketing corridors more dangerous, and livestock production more risky. Strengthening resilience means working on a continuum of actions that combine 
preventive interventions and social safety nets with development efforts (World Bank 2014). 
 
Gender  Inequality. The vulnerability to climate change and variability, food insecurity and food crises have a significant 
gender dimension, because women are among the most vulnerable groups, owing to their limited social and economic power 
in the Niger basin. Differentiated power relations between men and women and unequal access to and control over assets 
mean that men and women in the Niger basin do not have the same adaptive capacity. Instead, women have distinct vulnerability, exposure to risk, inadequate coping capacity, and inability to recover from climate change impacts (Masika 
2002
46). Gender -based inequalities in access to livelihood assets, division of labour , and participation in decision- making 
processes result in women’s and girls’ increased vulnerability to the risks of natural disasters like droughts. Resilience is 
inconceivable  without rural women . In the Niger basin countries, women represent only 8% of landowners and access only 
                                                             
43 Reference: http://povertydata.worldbank.org/poverty/country  
44 “World Bank Group. 2016. Republic of Cameroon: Priorities for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity. Country Diagnostic  
45 Gray, Erin, Norbert Henninger , Chris Reij, Robert Winterbottom  et al.  2016. Integrated Landscape Approaches for Africa’s Drylands.  
World Bank Studies.  Washington, DC: doi: 10.1596/978- 1-4648- 0826- 5. License: Creative Commons Attribution; CC BY 3.0 IGO  
46 Masika, Rachel. 2002. “Gender and Climate Change.” Gender and Development Journal 10 (2): 2– 9.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
10% of the credit available in West Africa, although they provide at least 50% of a gricultural labour . Reducing inequalities 
based on gender and empow ering women to participate more fully in social -economic growth are thus recognized as 
essential to reducing poverty and achieving development goals within the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) countries  
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs: • Economic and social development level of the country and the 
affected population; • Absence of alternative sources of financing ; • Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
 
Strengthening the i nstitutions and implementation capacity  through the PIDACC  program  
The NBA and the NBA National Focal Points still lack the institutional depth to perform some important activities. Core 
staffing is thin relative to the size of the NBA’s work program and insufficient to respond to the increasing and emerging 
demands place d on the institution (e.g. strategic planning, social development  and gender or responding to basin 
management issues, such as climate risk management). Thus c apacity strengthening will be undertaken at the regional, 
national and user level, following prev ious capacity assessments for African Development Bank  financed projects. 
Activities for strengthening are indicated in the sections which follow.  
(i) Strengthening the NBA Capacity  
Strengthening commitment and core capacity at the regional level  will have many other benefits, such as: increasing 
knowledge sharing; and strengthening institutional capacity, especially for the management of transboundary challenges  
like climate risk management . Activities will include the following:  
i) Strengthening the NBA's program coordination skills for enhanced M & E system s under the PIDACC ; 
ii) Strengthening the NBA's communication and practices for sharing information, knowledge and experience, implementing its communication's strategy and reinforcing the NBA's Information Technology;  
iii) Strengthening the NBA capacity in regional hydro- meteorological and Early Warning Systems ; and  
iv) Creation of innovative public -domain analytical toolkits, portals, and development of a strong working relationship with 
regional academia through support for internships  and targeted research studies . 
 
(ii) Strengthening national level capacity  
The capacity development interventions at national level will comprise the following:  
i) Strengthening the NBA's National Focal Structures including additional skills, resources and staff trainings for 
coordination with National Implementing Agencies (NIAs) and supervision of  programme  activities ; 
ii) Strengthening capacity through technical help desk services  for the model user community ( national level ); as well as 
publication of a series of technical briefs to provide information and analysis on strategic water resource issues ; and  
iii) National level -capacity building and on- the-job training of those involved in downscaling of RCOF forecasts to inform 
various sectors and communities as part of last mile early warning.  
 
(iii) Strengthening capacity of l ocal communities  
Capacity development interventions will include the following:  
i) Strengthening communities in gender -responsive CSA technologies on- farm or at functional farmer training centres  
sensitizing 500,000 women on climate change adaptation techniques ;  
ii) Programs addressing climate change impacts on specific ac tivities (livestoc k management practices, etc .); and  
iii) Field visits and farmer –farmer exchanges as experiential learning opportunities . 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence  of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, incl . NAMAs, NAPAs ,NAPs  
Please describe how the project/ contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate-resilient development, and the 
degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional framework.  
All Niger basin countries are parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and have 
signed and ratified the Kyoto Protocol. By rati fying the UNFCCC, the Niger Basin states have committed to the 
implementation of measures to adapt to climate change.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
The PIDACC  programme will contribute to the implementation of objectives of the three Rio conventions ratified by all NBA 
countries, including the Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) and 
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).  
 PIDACC  interventions are aligned with operationalization of national commitments on climate mitigation and adaptation 
through NAPAs, the National Climate Change Policies  and S trategies, NDCs, National Communications (NCs), SDGs, and 
the National Strategies for Disaster Risk Reduction.  Niger Basin partner states NCs are also motivated through the lens of 
poverty alleviation and drought control, considering that many countries suffer from recurring drought. The proposed program is consi stent with the NAPAs for 6  of the Niger Basin countries (Burkina Faso, Guinea, Niger, Mali, Chad and 
Benin).  Cote D’Ivoire and Cameroo n have not developed NAPAs. Nigeria  is not classified as a least developed country, but 
produced a similar document in 2010 which it has called its National Adaptation Strategy and Plan of Action (NASPA).   
 Measures in the country national climate change commitments which are consistent with the PIDACC  include: sustainable 
management of forests; forecasting and EWS ; restoration of degraded land; fixation of dunes; p romoting improved farming 
techniques; bush fire defence; preserving the quality and quantity of water resources,  managing ecosystems, development 
of agro- sylvo -pastoral techniques; exploitation of fisher ies; implementation of soil and water conservation techniques  and 
rainwater harvesting and storage.  A summary of the NBA’s country commit ments to the INDCs is shown in T able 12 below.  
 
Table 12: Niger River Basin INDCs  targets and Climate Adaptation Measures  
Country  Reference  
Million tons CO2 eq.  Target  
(Business as Usual = BAU).  Agriculture, Forestry and 
Other Land Uses  
Cameroon  40 M tones  CO2 eq. (2010)  
Agric.: 62.5%  71 M Tons CO2 eq. (2035); Reduction of 32% 
(BAU, 2035)  46.5 M tonnes  CO2  eq. 
(2035)  
Côte 
d’Ivoire  15. 96 M tonnes  CO2 eq. (2012)  
(Agriculture: 6.14 M t CO2 eq.)  24.58 M Tons CO2 eq.  
Reduction of 28% (BAU, 2030)  4 .72 M tonnes  CO2 eq. 
(2030)  
Niger 0,031;  (SCN), 2000)  Unconditional reduction 2.5% (BAU, 2020) and 
3.5% (2030) - Conditional reduction:  25% ( BAU, 
2020) and 34.6% (2030, or  reduction of 33,400 
GgCO2 eq.).  89% of total GHG 
emissions  
Benin  6.3 (2000) ; Agriculture  : 68% Conditional reduction  21.4 % (BAU 2021 -2030) 9.5 (2030)  
Guinea  15.12 (1994)  
Agriculture: 62%  -13% greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in 2030, 
excluding land use and forestry   
Nigeria  2 Tons CO2 eq. per capita  
214.21 (2000) ; 263 (2010)  2030 BAU: around 3.4 Tons CO2 eq.  
2030 Conditional: around 2 Tons CO2 eq.   
Chad 8,380 Gg CO2 eq. (2010), incl . 
lands, forests , Agriculture: 18 
448,00 Gg CO2 eq. (2010),  Unconditional reduction of 18.2% (BAU 2030, 
23,449 GgCO2 eq.).  
Conditional reduction of 71%  30,399 Gg CO2 eq. 
(2030).  
Burkina 
Faso 75,633 Gg CO2 eq. (2015)  BAU: 118,323 Gg CO2 eq. (2030) ; Conditional 
reduction: 13,766 Gg CO2 eq. (2030)  Reduction  
7,236 Gg CO2 eq. (2030)  
Mali -192 M Tons  CO2 eq. (2010)  
Agriculture: 48.5  (2010)  -85 M Tons CO2 eq.  Agriculture 59.5 (2030)  
Forestry ,Land use, -153 
M Tons CO2 eq. (2030)  
….. 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities  with respect to the activities 
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
The African Development Bank , as the GCF -AE, will oversee appropriate implementation of the programme in line with 
African Development Bank  procedures  and standards, and specific requirements in the AMA agreed with the GCF.  The 
African Development Bank  brings unique qualities to the shared effort to support the Niger B asin. The African Development 
Bank  has supported implementation of climate resilient growth programs in the lake Chad Basin, the Nile Basin, and the 
Songwe River B asin. Other s include the implementation of regional program mes to build resilience in Africa (the 2015- 2020 
P2RS Sahel Resilience Programme and the Horn of Africa Resilience Programme) Africa (Phase II and III).  The African 
Development Bank  plays a role in preparing projects, iden tifying partners with the right capacity and convening them to


---
*Page 59*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
provide solutions to development challenges as a complement to its own investments. Finally, the Bank’s continued support 
is warranted as a strategy to manage and reduce risks to other elements  of its program mes in Niger Basin RMCs. 
 
The Project w ill be implemented by the NBA and the 9 partner states ( Executing Entities -  EEs). The EEs have significa nt 
experience in implementation of programs  in the Niger Basin.  However the EE s still lack the institutional depth to perform 
certain important activities. Thus , the programme will equip the EEs with robust skills needed to deliver the project outcomes 
effectively.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with NDAs on the funding 
proposal and the no-objection lette r. 
 
E.5.3.1 Endorsement by NDAs  
Following consultations with all nine GCF NDAs in July 2017, PIDACC  GCF was endorsed by all Niger River B asin partner 
states. Programme design gives a sharper focus on strengthening the climate resilience of the Basin’s natural resources 
and ecosystems on the one hand, and strengthening the resilience of its population on the other hand.  
 
Stages for preparation of the PIDACC  
i) Identification of actions on the basis of the Sustainable Development Action Plan (SDAP) (2012)  
ii) Validation of the proposed actions and areas of intervention of the programme (2014)  
iii) Niger River Basin Climate Risk Assessment . A Joint Initiative of the NBA and the World Bank (2014)  
iv) Investment Plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin Nov — 2015  
v) Endorsem ent of NBA Ministers’ Programme (2015)  
vi) Endorsement of the programme by the Summit of Heads of State 2016  
vii) Consultation with civil society stakeholders at the level of the programme and the intervention strategy 2016  
viii) Consultation meetings with stakeholders  in each country within the framework of the feasibility study (2016)  
ix) Validation of the feasibility reports of the programme by the beneficiaries and NBA 2016 consultation meeting with 
GCF NDAs of Niger Basin countries in July 2017  
 
On 1 June 2016, a donor roundtable was held in Abuja, Nigeria between representatives of NBA, Niger basin m ember 
countries and development partners, to mobilize financing for the PIDACC . During this meeting , 80% of the required funding 
was pledged, including US$ 136 million from the African Development Bank , US$ 12 million from GEF  and US$ 55 million 
from member countries.   
 
E.5.3.2 Specific climate change strategies that informed project preparation  
The PIDACC  project is consistent with national commitments of the various member countries to the UNFCCC, including 
NAPAs, climate communications, INDCs, as well as the African Development Bank  Group Second Climate  Action Plan 
2016- 202047. Specific Climate resilient investment plans that informed interventions include (i) Niger River Basin Climate 
Risk Assessment — Niger River Basin Sustainable Development Action Plan; A Joint Initiative of the Niger Basin Authority 
(NBA) and the World Bank , 2014 and (ii) Investment P lan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the 
Niger Basin Final version 7.3 November 2015 (CRIP)  
 
E.5.3. 3 Engagement and consultations with c ivil society  
Programme activities were identified in a participatory manner through consultations with communities, local groups, civil 
society and national services. Consultation for CSOs and NGOs from the Niger Basin on the CRIP and PIDACC  programme 
was organized from 12 to 13 September 201 5, which enabled CSO concerns to be taken into account before the presentation 
of the CRIP at COP21 in December 2015 in Paris.  A follow up consultation was undertaken during appraisal with various 
stakeholders including the CSOs, NDAs and private sector, and a stakeholder engagement plan elaborated.  
 
 
                                                             
47 file:///C:/Users/eolet/Desktop/AfDB -CCAP/AfricanDevelopmentBankClimateChangeA ctionPlan2016-2020.pdf


---
*Page 60*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
E.5.3. 4 Multi stakeholder engagement and consultations  
The proposal has been developed using a coordinated approach with engagement of multiple partners like the EU, the World 
Bank and KfW, to enhance synergy . National workshops for the validation of feasibility studies for the national components 
of PIDACC were organized in October 2016. Subsequently, a regional workshop was held from 7 to 9 November 2016 in 
Conakry, Guinea, which validated the t echnical and ESS studies of PIDACC at the regional level. The views and suggestions 
of all stakeholders were duly taken into account in the final design of the project, as well as some particularities specific  to 
the context of each country. The implementation of the programme will be based on a participatory approach that will make 
communities the ow ners of financed Interventions (Activities) . Stakeholder engagement plans will be prepared as part of the 
national level ESMFs,  and will guide subsequent consultations and public participation. The ESMFs, will also include 
grievance  and redress mechanisms, in line with the African Development Bank ’s integrated safeguards.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing  barriers; providin g the least concessionality;  without crowding out private and other public investment.  
 
E 6.1.1. Financial s tructure  
The proposed financing structure is adequate and comprises concessional loans and grants that will allow tackling both 
short and medium -term objectives related to climate resilient growth in the R iver Basin. GCF Grant proceeds will not be 
blended with the African Development Bank  financing . GCF Grant proceeds will be directed to TA and to non -revenue 
generating interventions , while GCF loan proceeds will be directed towards implementation of community livelihood based 
infrastructure. Without GCF  resources, the holistic approach proposed by the present project w ill not be possible.   
 
E 6.1.2. Efficiency and e ffectiveness  
Mainstreaming climate risk management into the PIDACC  will enhance the effectiveness,  and efficiency of planned 
interventions by reducing climate- related risks whi le contributing to sustainable growth.  Planned interventions are efficient 
given that the value of economic benefits (i.e. economic benefits) are greater than  the value of what society has to give up 
for their implementation (i.e. economic costs). Refer to section E 6.3 for details on the economic analysis.  
 
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co-financing ratio  (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the project/programme)  and/or 
the potential to catalyse  indirect/long -term low emission investment.  
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
 
Table 13: Showing financing by source  
 
Source of funding   Amount Millions USD   % Contribution   Funding 
Instruments  
 African Development Bank (ADB)           35.924    17% Loan  
 African Development Bank (ADF)           42.171    20% Grant  
 Global Environment Fund (GEF)           12.980    6%  Grant  
 Green Climate Fund (GCF)           10.000    5% Loan  
 Green Climate Fund (GCF)           57.774    28%  Grant  
 European Union (EU)           18.081    9%  Grant  
Forest Investment Fund (FIP)             9.000    4%  Grant  
 Countries           16.186    8% In-Kind 
 Beneficiaries             7.786    4%  In -kind  
 Total         209.903    100%    
 
With a total co -financing amount estimated at USD  142 million, the Co-financing ratio is estimated at 2: 1


---
*Page 61*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 81 
 
 
 E 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected EIRR and FIRR with and without the Fund’s support, based on the analysis conducted in F.1. 
The EIRR without the Considering Climate Change is estimated at 15.4%, while that with the funds support (consideration 
of CC is estimated at 18%. See table 14 below (details in section F1 and Annex IV).  
 
Table 14: EIRR without and with consideration of Climate Change  
Indicators for Financial Returns  IRR without consideration of CC  IRR with consideration of CC  
Base Case  15.4%  18.0%  
 
Financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
Use of grants and loans will ensure long- term financial viability of PIDACC. Its scalability and contribution to long- term 
transformation at b asin and country level s are important determinants for v iability. Viability after financing ends  is assumed 
to go beyond that of economic returns and encompasses socioeconomic metrics, including, improvements in the r esilience 
of communities, and alignment with national priorities in the climate and economic growth policies of the Basin partner states  
[Please refer to section D.2. Exit Strategy for details on financial sustainability]  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied.  
Investment actions will be proposed in terms of: (i) sub- basin conservation;  (ii) development infrastructure;  and (iii) capacity 
building.  This will inc lude industry best practices in community planning frameworks for addressing environmental issues.  
 
New technologies for climate- smart agriculture have shown great potential and impact within Bank -financed programs and 
have potential for replication within this program me. These include farm ponds, micro irrigation, drought -resistant seeds, 
solar pumping, shade netting, and even a few cutting- edge concepts like use of remote sensed products to address monitor 
effects of improved watershed management.  Use of remote sensing and geospatial data and information products is an 
important part of the information- sharing and capacity -building efforts promoted by the Bank under various programs. Many 
of the river basin investment projects undertaken have incorporated geospatial data gathering and built institutional capacit y 
to manipulate geospatial data.  The programme will enhance the NBA spatial knowledge base with the best available local, 
regional, and global datasets. This will in turn inform the spatial analysis on erosion modelling to help prioritize watershe ds. 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
(a) Total project  financing  (mitigation component)  30.97 million  US$48  
(b) Requested  GCF amount  10.39  million US$____ ___  
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  7 million  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 4.4 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  US$1.48 / tCO 2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators  (d) and (e)  above.  
Sequestration rate of 53 tonne s CO2 eq./ha; for assisted natural regeneration and for trees planted for the purpose of 
dune fixation It is 50 ton ne CO2 eq./ha (FAO, AGRHYMET).  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  N/A 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  N/A: Please describe how the indicator 
values compare to the appropriate benchmarks establ ished in a comparable context. N/A 
 
                                                             
48 Output 2: Strengthened Sustainable forest management ;  Output 3: Strengthened Sustainable agroforestry forest 
management ;  Output 4: Strengthened sustainable protection of natural habitats


---
*Page 62*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 81 
 
 
 F 
* F.1.  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  
The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the  detailed economic and financial analysis  (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
F.1.1. Pro gramme cost-benefit analysis  
 
The detailed economic analysis is presented in Annex IV.  
The 9 NBA countries have variable inter -country and intra- country agro- climatic characteristics. Thus, economic 
conditions vary between these different agro- climatic zones. To this end, the economic analysis made is specific to each 
of these countries . Since PIDACC  actions will be spread over the entire national portion of the Niger Basin in each 
country, the economic analysis is of interest to the country’s entire basin.  While cost -benefit analysis provides a useful 
process and resultant metrics to help steer inves tment decision- making, it is not the only factor considered.  The results 
of the economic and financial analysis of the programme and country components are presented in Annex VIII. The 
EIRRs for the country components range from 15  to 26% (Table 1 5). The o verall IRR is estimated at 18% for the base 
case with Climate Change considerations.  
Table 15: IRR By Country  
Region / Country  Global  Burkina Faso  Mali Niger  Chad  Benin  Cameroon  Côte d'Ivoire  Guinea  Nigeria  
ERR  18% 16% 18% 15% 15% 15% 18% 16% 15% 26% 
 
Table 16: Sensitivity  Analysis  
Indicators for Financial Returns  IRR without consideration of CC  IRR with consideration of CC  
Base Case  15.4%  18.0%  
Sensitivity test  Costs  -20% 19.6%  22.5%  
-10% 17.4%  20.0%  
10% 13.7%  16.2%  
20% 12.3%  14.6%  
Benefits  -20% 11.6%  13.9%  
-10% 13.6%  16.0%  
10% 17.2%  19.8%  
20% 18.8%  21.6%  
 
The programme implementation period is estimated at five years, while the project impact duration is estimated at 30 
years. This is based on the premise that planned climate and weather information systems would have an average 
lifespan of 7- 10 years, whil e natural resources investments would have a much longer life- span, in the range of 30- 40 
years. O&M costs are assumed at between 1- 5% of project investments. For the case with climate change; the approach 
was to add avoided costs to  the base case benefits , without climate change. The benefits of taking action (the avoided 
costs of damages) are further in the future. The estimated benefits are then compared to the costs of taking action.  
 
A discount rate of 10% is used to calculate the NPV. A 10% discount rate represents an understanding that future costs 
and benefits are relatively important in comparison to the current situation –  concurrent with concerns regarding climate 
change. The Internal Rate of Return (ERR) was calculated to be 18% for the base cas e with avoided costs due to Climate 
Change considered. The NPV was calculated to be US$ 250 million, with a discount rate of 10%. This represents a 
benefit -cost ratio of 1.6. Since it is impossible to accurately predict future per capita consumption growth, a sensitivity 
analysis was conducted to illustrate the benefits of the project at varying rates of return. At a discount rate of 12%, NPV 
equals US$ 150 million. This demonstrates project viability e ven with higher discount rates.  
 
F.2. Technical Evalua tion   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  N/A


---
*Page 63*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 81 
 
 
 F 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Also describe how the gender aspect s are 
considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and Action Plan.   
 
F.3.1. Environment and Social Assessment  
PIDACC  is classified in category 1 according to the African Development Bank's Integrated Safeguard System (ISS)  
because of its potential negative impacts on the human environment and on the ecosystems of the Niger River.  A 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) was prepared and comprised a systematic examination of 
environmental and social risks and impacts, and issues, associated with the planned PIDACC  at Basin level . An 
environment  and social management framework [ESMF ] was  also prepared. The SESA and ESMF can be accessed 
using the link https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/niger -strategic -environmental -and-social -studies -of-the-integrated-
program -for-development -and-adaptation-to -climate -change -in-the-niger -basin-PIDACC-bn- 100875/  . A summary SESA and ESMF 
can be accessed through the following link: https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/abn-multinational -integrated-
development -and- climate -change-adaptation -in-the-niger -basin -program -PIDACC-nb-97280/   
 The PIDACC  ESMF seeks to:  (i) enhance positive and sustainable environmental and social outcomes associated with 
project preparation and implementation; integrat e environmental and social aspects associated with the numerous 
projects into the decision making process; (ii) minimize  environmental degradation as a result of either proposed 
individual projects or their cumulative effects ; and (iii) minimize impacts on ecosystems. The ESMF provide s guidance 
and measures with clear roles and responsibilities, along with capacity strength ening measures for effective 
implementation and monitoring.
 Table 17  shows Bank Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project.  
 
Table 17: Bank Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project  
 
Bank Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project  Yes No 
Operational safeguard 1 – Environmental and social assessment Applicable because the program will 
support investments in the watersheds. Since the CDD -type activities and exact locations have not been 
identified ex -ante, the safeguard instr ument used in each country is the ESMF.  Χ  
Operational safeguard 2 – Involuntary resettlement: land acquisition, population displacement and 
compensation Not Applicable because the project will not limit access to land and forest resources by the 
local communities. Refer to the African Development Bank  ISS, Guidance Materials, and Volume 2: 
Guidance on Safeguard Issues49, in particular Involuntary Resettlem ent and Operational Safeguard (OS) 2.    Χ 
Operational safeguard 3  – Biodiversity, renewable resources and ecosystem services Not Applicable 
because PIDACC will not implement activities in protected or transboundary areas. So the project doesn’t 
trigger OS.3. The ESMFs will address issues pertaining to this policy.   Χ 
Operational safeguard 4 – Pollution prevention and control, hazardous materials and resour ce 
efficiency Applicable. The PIDACC will involve, preparing a pollution control plan.  Χ  
Operational safeguard 5 – Labor  conditions, health and safety Not Applicable S5 is not triggered by 
PIDACC because it will finance only small infrastructure to be bu ilt by communities and SMEs. Security 
measures will be included the SMEs contracts .  Χ 
 
Formulation of country level ESMFs  
All participating Niger Basin countries shall formulate their own ESMFs that are consistent with the African 
Development Bank ’s Integrated Safeguards System (ISS). Section 9 of the SESA includes the Project ESMF. The 
ESMF outlines (i) Measures for the Mitigation of Negative Impacts (ii) Environment and Social Procedures for Selection 
of Interventions (Activities)  (iii) Land Use Restrictions and Involuntary Resettlement (iv) Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
(SEP)  (v) Grievance and Redress Mechanism(vi) Environmental Monitoring and Surveillance Program(vii) Capacity 
Building Program and (viii) the Implementation And Monitoring Schedule. Country ESMFs shall be reviewed and 
approved by the African Development Bank  to ensure that they are consistent with CGF’s environmental and social 
performance standards.  Specific attributes of Operational safeguard 1 –  Environmental and social assessment are 
shown in table 1 8. 
                                                             
49 https://www.afdb .org/fileadmin/uploads /African Development Bank/Documents/Publications/SSS_ -_IESIA_Volume_2_- En.pdf


---
*Page 64*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 81 
 
 
 F 
Table 18: Specific ESMF procedural me asures applicable to the PIDACC  
 
Measure  Description  
Activity  Screening 
Protocol  A screening protocol exists in the form of the African Development Bank  ISS—Guidance Materials 
Volume 3: Sector Key sheets (2014), checklists, which guide the borrowers /grantees in, among others, 
identifying eligible projects and assessing social and environmental risks and the associated required 
assessments studies and requirements shall be developed (SESA Section 9.2, under Stage 1: 
Identification, environmental and social selection and Intervention (Activity) classification) . 
Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan to 
guide grantees in the 
development of their 
respective country 
level ESMFs  In consultation with the Bank, the NBA (regional) and National Governments in the Niger basin, will 
develop and implement a Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEP) commensurate to the nature and scale of the interventions (activities) and potential ris ks and impacts (SESA section 9.2). Reference will be 
made to the African Development Bank  ISS, Guidance Materials, and Volume 2: Guidance on 
Safeguard Issues in the drafting of the SEPs as part of the ESMFs. An  indicative generic Stakeholder 
engagement Mat rix is included as well, that will guide the countries during the drafting process.  
Project -level and 
country level grievance redress mechanism  Grievance And Redress Mechanism, provides relevant guidance and references (SESA Section 9.5). A 
grievance and redress mechanism will be included as part of the National project ESMFs, compliant with the  national safeguards and the African Development Bank  ISS (Operational Safeguard 1: 
Environmental and Social Assessment). Such grievance mechanisms will utilize exi sting formal or 
informal grievance mechanisms suitable for project purposes, supplemented with project -specific 
arrangements designed to resolve disputes in an impartial manner.  
 
Supervision of the ESMF Implementation  
The project team s at the NBA EE and the National E xecuting Entities [E E] will ensure the provision of technical support 
to develop and improve understanding of the GCF’s safeguard polices and the effective implementation of the African 
Development Bank  Group’s Integrated S afeguards. African Development Bank  supervision teams will include 
environmental and social safeguard experts. Regular monitoring reports (tw ice per year) on the implementation of 
environmental and social safeguards provisions will be provided to the Afric an Development Bank  for approval. These 
reports will be verified during project supervision missions, which will include environmental and social safeguard experts. 
At the national level, the n ational EEs will be in charge of the monitoring and evaluation of safeguards.  
 
F.3.2. Gender c onsiderations  
The status of women in the Niger Basin has remained poor, with little progress evident on gender indicators over the 
years. Gender dynamics vary across the area based on ethnicity, livelihood systems and socio -economic status.50 In the 
Niger basin, large gender disparities persist. Women and girls are disadvantaged in many areas and don’t enjoy the 
same opportunities as their male counterparts. This is true for almost all public sectors, ranging from unequa l access to 
basic social services, unequal property rights and persistent gender gaps in the labour market and in the public sphere.  
 Some of the highest rates of maternal mortality in the world are observed in the Sahel region, for example in countries 
including Niger (590 per 100,000), Nigeria (630), and Chad (1,100). As a consequence, women are exposed to climate 
risk. The social structure of Sahelian communities has changed considerably over the years. This change is chiefly 
manifested in the redefinit ion of roles and responsibilities within households. The 2012 food crisis has revealed that 
women have taken on increasing responsibilities from a number of standpoints. Their contribution to maintaining their households in times of crisis is tacitly expec ted, even though this increased responsibility within the household is not 
always reflected in increased power within the community. Indeed, because they have only a subsidiary role in relation 
to household responsibilities and are relegated to the side- lines when it comes to community -based management in 
general, women continue to have limited access to factors of production.  
 
Climate extremes particularly impact women in the Basin. As a result of droughts women and girls face a triple burden 
in some cases : to survive, care for their families and evade sexual violence in the process. Droughts in the Niger basin 
also frequently result in the degradation of water sources. Decreased water resources also causes women’s health to suffer as a result of the increased work burden and reduced nutritional status. This decreases the time available for food 
production and preparation, with consequences for household food security and nutritional well -being.  Investments are 
required in interventions that reduce the risks  (such as losing access to land) that present formidable barriers to women 
wanting to adopt new technologies and practices and actively participate in markets .


---
*Page 65*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 81 
 
 
 F 
Since the mid -2000s, however, almost every basin country has adopted a gender policy or strategy and is increasingly 
mainstreaming gender issues in different policy sectors51. The weak implementation of gender -focused policies is, 
however, not just a funding problem. There are other obstacles and risk factors: strong individual and institution al 
resistance to gender initiatives, deep- rooted cultural issues and traditions, general under -representation of women in the 
public sphere, illiteracy. In practice, gender is still considered mostly as an afterthought and gender policies are often 
not implemented effectively. Budgets allocated to gender -specific issues within sectoral policies remain tiny; 
disaggregated gender data is missing etc.  52.  
 
Interventions are included as part of the gender action plan GAP in Annex VIII. As part of the Gender Act ion Plan (GAP), 
the project  will promote women’s representation on community level action committees and involve women in planning 
and undertaking adaptation activities. The project  will also Increase women’s access to agricultural extension and land 
resources within the context of climate smart agriculture. The project  will also promote gender -sensitive budgeting in 
local administrations.  
 
Implementation and s upervision of  the Gender Action Plan (GAP)  
The program GAP, will be implemented at a regional level by the NBA and at a national level by the national coordination units in each country. A project baseline will be established in Year 1, (i) that allows for monitoring changes in activities, 
percepti ons and attitudes that relate to women’s participation (ii) that allows for monitoring distributional issues within 
the household (iii) that allows for monitoring changes in women’s time budgets and labour burden and (iv) that allows 
capture of women’s acc ess to land for farming / gardening.  
 
The project will monitor gender actions through a GAP, including the number of beneficiaries (gender disaggregated) as 
well as gender sensitive project output, outcome and impact indicators.  Supervision arrangements will comprise: (i) 
Safeguard specialists (Social and gender at the African Development Bank for implementation support supervision) —
AE; (ii) Social Development and gender specialist s at the regional level by the N BA—EE and  (iii) Social Development 
and gender specialist s at the N PCU who will cover community development and gender aspects as well.  
 
The specialists will be responsible for incorporating the Gender Action Plan into project planning and implementation 
including supporting/assisting design (and if  required, implementation) of awareness workshops and training, 
establishment and monitoring of sex disaggregated data and indicators for project performance and monitoring. Engaging with different gender groups and grassroots organizations from the beginning will help the identification and 
implementation of gender -equitable activities.  
 A number of measures will be put in place at the start to help guide implementation of gender equitable activities, 
particularly when collecting gender -disaggregated data.  These include: (i) Ensuring there are sufficient funds to support 
gender -related activities and facilitate the participation of traditionally marginalised communities members (ii) 
Establishing mixed -gender field teams (iii) Scheduling activities at times and places that are convenient for different 
gender groups (iv) Making sure that field coordinators, facilitators and translators communicate with women and men 
participants in a language in which they feel comfortable (v) Managing group dynamics and promoting the equal 
participation of all participants and (vi) After discussions with women’s and men’s groups separately, bringing groups 
together to exchange and learn from people’s different perspectives.  
 
The PIDACC RPC U will report on progress of Gender Action Plan activities in quarterly progress reports to the African 
Development Bank  and the government. O ther training providers, non- government  organizations may be hired to 
implement different Gender Action Plan activ ities under the guidance of the specialists.  
 
 
 
                                                             
50 Towards Climate Resilient Agricultural and Pastoral Production Systems; A synopsis of programme design considerations under 
constraints of select natural resources, capacity and climate in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger Monica L. Wrobel, Tony Hill, Ellen A. Bean, Mark 
Mulligan, Sophia Burke, Josh Allen, Felicity Roos and Angie Dazé (© CARE International UK, RBM, SNV, TREE AID, August 2014)  
51 http://www.oecd.org/swac/topics/gender/  
52 http://oecdinsights.org/2017/03/08/gender -equality -in-west-africa/


---
*Page 66*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 81 
 
 
 F 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/ program’s  financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, disbursement 
methods and auditing.  
 
Details on grant and loan agreements as well as Funds Flow arrangements are outlined in section C 7.4 and figure 17 .  
 
Due Diligence  
The African Development Bank , as the GCF -accredited entity, will oversee implementation of the programme in line with  
the African Development Bank  procedures , standards and requirements in the AMA/FAA to be agreed with the GCF.  
The AfDB team responsible for project origination will carry out due diligence and assessments of financing proposals 
for each sub- project. The origin ation team’s findings and recommendations undergo a rigorous internal review process 
before they are cleared by Senior Management to be presented to the Bank’s Board of Directors for approval. This includes various interdepartmental committee reviews.  
 The AfDB will, through its Anti -Corruption and Integrity department, provide Integrity Due Diligence (IDD) for the project 
operations through a structured, systematic analysis to identify, assess, mitigate, manage and monitor potential loss from integrity ris ks and riskier exposure. This is to ensure that funds are used for their intended purposes and with due 
attention to considerations of economy, efficiency and competitive trade. The Bank will use the following assessment 
criteria to safeguards its investment. (See also the Bank’s IDD Policy for further information.)  
• Identification of beneficial ownership  
• Assessment of civil and regulatory backgrounds  
• Identification of sanctioned persons and entities  
• Identification of Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) and other high risk relationship 
 
Corporate financial transactions are closely monitored through the MDB harmonized treatments of corporate groups and 
also through the AfDB’s established guidelines on anti -fraud, anti -corruption and anti -money laund ering policies 
(AMLCFT ). The AfDB continues to ensure that its financing operations and investments are not used for illegal or tax -
evasion purposes. In addition, measures are currently in place to address the issue of tax havens and the accompanying 
risks.  The AfDB will lead standard KYC due diligence process including anti -money laundering and other evaluations of 
sponsors.  
 
F.4.1 Financial management  
The NBA PRCU and the national coordinators will oversee the project  financial management aspects, including the 
preparation of the financial statements and quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial Reports, monitoring financial transactions and making the necessary arrangements for the annual project financial audit s. The PRC U is coordinating 
the implementation of the GEF -financed Niger Basin Integrated Development for Increased Rural Climate Resilience 
Programme (Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, Benin, Chad, Cameroun, Nigeria).  Please refer to section
 
C.7.4. Agreements and Funds flow for the grants and loans, for the Funds flow arrangements.   
 
Financial and accounting management will be based on the principles and rules of the OHADA accounting system and will operate on a financial accounting management software comprising at least the budgetary, analytical and general 
accounting modules . The principles and rules of the OHADA accounting system are compliant with the Bank’s policies 
and international accounting standards on financial reporting. A Project I mplementation Manual will be developed to 
guide the budgeting, accounting and financial procedures.  
 
F.4.2. Disbursements  
In line with African Development Bank  disbursement handbook53, the NBA and the partner states will be required to 
open special Accounts denominated in US$ in a commercial Bank acceptable to the African Development Bank . 
Evidence to this effect will be submitted by the Executing Entities [EEs] ahead of project disbur sement together with the 
signatories to the accounts in accordance with the Financing Agreements.  
 
                                                             
53 https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/disbursement -handbook -54419/


---
*Page 67*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 81 
 
 
 F 
Disbursement of GCF funds will be transaction -based  in line with the African Development Bank  disbursement handbook . 
Disbursements will be made through: reim bursement, direct payment and working capital. The NBA and National EEs 
will open accounts in national banks acceptable to the Bank. All supporting documents will be provided for Statement of 
Expenditures for all transactions submitted for African Developm ent Bank  prior review. The others will be retained at the 
PRCU and National EEs and be made available for periodic reviews by the African Development Bank  missions and 
external auditors.  
 
The PRCU will produce Interim Unaudited Financial Reports on a quart erly basis together with the quarterly progress 
reports to be submitted to the African Development Bank  and the annual financial statements of the Programme for 
financial and accounting audit. The Interim Financial Reports will include sources and uses of funds by project 
expenditures classification. They will also include a comparison of budgeted and actua l project expenditures 
(commitment and disbursement) to date and for the quarter. The PRCU and National EEs will submit the Interim Financial 
Reports to the Bank within 45 days following the end the calendar quarter.  
 
The annual financial statements will comprise a balance sheet, a statement of employment and resources showing 
annual and cumulative data, notes to the financial statements, physical inventory of acquired assets and r econciliation 
of the Bank's disbursements with the amounts received from the Programme, and the reconciliation statements of the 
special account .  
 
F.4.3. Audit  
Audits will be undertaken in line with the African Development Bank Guidelines for Financial Reporting and Auditing of 
Projects54. The Financial Agreement with the NBA and the National EEs, will require the submission of Audited Financial 
Statements to the African Development Bank  within six months after each year -end. An independent external auditor 
will be recruited based on T erms of Reference acceptable to the Bank (not later than four months after effectiveness) for 
the entire duration of the project. The Financial Statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing 
standards. The external auditor will prepare a Ma nagement Letter to provide observations, comments, and 
recommendations for improvements in accounting records, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants 
in the Financial Agreements.  The cost of the audit will be met from project resources and paid by the Bank after validation 
of the annual reports. In line with Clause 16.01 of the AMA, the African Development Bank  will make available to the 
GCF , copies of audited financial statements and/ or, annual audited reports of the Funded Ac tivities by the Bank from the 
Executing Entity pursuant to the relevant Subsidiary Agreement, which shall not be later than six months after the end 
of the Executing Entity’s fiscal year.  
 
F.4.4. Procurement  
Procurement of goods, works and consulting services, financed under the programme, will be in accordance with the 
“Procurement Policy for Bank Group Financed Operations” (2016) .55 The procurement plan will be prepared at project 
appraisal.  Procurement by International Competitive Bidding (ICB) and procurement of consultant services under the 
Programme shall be in accordance with the Bank's Rules and Procedures for the Procurement of Goods and Works or, the Bank’s Rules and Procedures for the use of the Consultants, using the Bank's appropriate standard bidding documents. Procurement by National Competitive Bidding (NCB) of works and goods will be carried out in accordance 
with the national procurement procedures of each of the nine countries and the provisions of the letters of agreement 
relating to the application of national procurement procedures. To strengthen the NBA EE and National EEs capacity on  
the African Development Bank  procedures, a procurement training program will be undertaken at programme  launch . 
                                                             
54 https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/ African Development Bank /Documents/Procurement/Project -related-
Procurement/GUIDELINES%20F0R%20FINANCIAL%20REPORTING%20AND%20AUDITING%20OF%20PROJECTS.pdf  
55 https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/ African Development Bank /Documents/Policy -
Documents/Procurement_policy_for_bank_group_funded_operations.pdf


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 64 OF 81 
 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Insecurity   Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified  risk will be mitigated or managed.  Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk oc curring? If so, to what level?  
Countries facing conflicts are Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon. The sites selected for the programme are 
secured sites in the countries concerned. However, each country w ill propose a plan of action for the safety of the 
intervention sites that will be taken into a ccount during the evaluation mission.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Effective mobilization and adherence of the beneficiary 
populations  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
The implementation of a participatory and inclusive approach will facilitate this social mobilization. Recovery of 
degraded land and intensive development of fertile land is an important motivation . 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Land conflicts  
 Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be elaborated in 
G.2. 
The main risks that may affect the implementation of the programme are:  
• Some countries in the Basin have been confronted with socio- political and security crises  in recent years . This 
may hinder or delay the implementation of programme activities . 
• The success of the programme is also conditioned on the effective mobilization and support of the beneficiary 
populations who are the main stakeholders of the programme.  
• Land conflicts could hamper  the implementation of certain activities, such as watershed treatment . 
• The programme targets the development of agro- pastoral activities. It can be a source of conflict between farmers 
and livestock breeders regarding the delimitation and occupation of land .  
• The coordination of large geographical areas and the diverse nature of the target audience require a concentration site approach to avoid under -powdering . 
• The p roject may encounter the challenges of international waters and competing national agendas .


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 65 OF 81 
 
 G 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
In order to minimize the risks of land conflicts, the site for each of the intervention (activity) will require un -encumbered 
access for project activities. This will require that a certific ate of land securi ty be attached to each intervention (activity) 
document. The PIDACC  program will provide support to local land commissions in each of the countries to facilitate 
access to land certificates. It should be noted that the project does not pr ovide for the acquisition of land or change of 
land status. Awareness -raising campaigns will help to smooth out any potential land conflict before the start of 
programme activities. Support will be provided to local land commissions . Awareness -raising actions will be 
implemented in relation to existing coordination mechanisms.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Coordination of wide geographical areas and the 
diverse nature of the target public   
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
Accountability of national coordination  for the implementation of the investments of each country -component . 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Insufficient synergy of actions between programme 
partners  
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Establishment of a unique coordination for the programme and organiz ation of joint partners’ missions . A 
mechanism exists at regional level for donor coordination and country coordination through the NBA PIDACC  
Regional Steering Committee.  The NBA strategy and individual country strategies for coordination will be applied to 
the project.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
General project complexity including the challenges of 
international waters and competing national agendas  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To ensure successful implementation, the following measures have been taken: (i)  implementing NBA’s 
communication strategy to foster common understanding, collaboration and coordination among riparian countries; 
(ii) identifying activities and beneficiaries at national and local levels to ensure key stakeholders and vulnerable 
groups are positively impacted by Basin Program activities; and (iii) clarifying roles and responsibilities of each 
agency in terms of financial management and procurement to avoid delays and increase accountability.  
 
* Please expand this sub- section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logical  Framework.    
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management F ramework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level 56 
Paradigm shift objectives  
The PDO is to 
contribute to 
improving the 
resilience of 
populations and 
ecosystems in the 
Niger River Basin 
to Climate 
variability and 
change through 
sustainable management and 
development of  
shared basin 
natural resources  This proposal addresses existing climate risks in the Niger Basin but also implements early actions that 
begin preparing for future climate change in key fast expanding economic sectors such as agricul ture, 
energy and construction. GCF Finance will also strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for climate-
responsive planning and development in the Niger Basin through supporting climate mitigation and 
adaptation measures in the NDCs of the Niger River Basin partner states.  
 
The project has a high potential to cost effectively scale-up, replicate and sustain the results of project interventions beyond project completion. The project includes a strong focus on best practices , while the 
technologies promoted by the programme  are financially viable, utilize  local natural resources, are 
transferable, and will be delivered through community -based approaches . There is strong potential for these 
activities to continue beyond the end of the project. The P ayment for Ecosystem Services (P ES) and 
adaptation mechanism to be created with financing from the GCF will further enhance continuity of project 
benefits beyond project closure.  
Expected Result  Indicator   
* = Core  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline57 Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Fund -level Impacts  
 *Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as 
a result of Fund 
funded projects/  
programmes  NBA reports, 
national 
GHG 
emissions 
surveys,  
Lima REDD+  
Information 
Hub Baseline to be 
established in year 1  4.2 
MMtCO2e58 7 MM 
TCO2e   
*  *Total Number of 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries; 
Number of 
beneficiaries relative 
to total population  NBA 
observatory  
Reports and Surveys  0 2 million 
people 
directly and 
5 million 
indirectly 
(~50% 
female).  4 million 
people 
directly and 
10 million 
indirectly 
(~50% 
female).   
M 4.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
land use, 
deforestation, 
forest degradation, and through 
sustainable 
management of 
forests and  4.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2eq) 
reduced or avoided 
(including increased removals) as a result 
of Fund-funded 
projects/programmes  NBA reports, 
national  
GHG 
emissions 
surveys,  
Lima, 
REDD+  
Information 
Hub  Baseline to be 
established in year 1  4.2 
MMtCO2e  7 MM 
TCO2e  Niger Basin 
governments and private landowners 
make land available 
for project interventions. High 
uptake of improved 
practices.  
                                                             
56 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the 
following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  
57 Baseline is to be confirmed by socio- economic baseline survey at appraisal and before project effectiveness  
58 Estimates based on annual reduction/avoided emissions of 1.4 M MTCO2e, which comes to 4.2 M MTCO2e by mid- term/year


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
conservation and 
enhancement of 
forest carbon stocks  4.3 Number of 
technologies and 
innovative solutions transferred or 
licensed to support low-emission 
development as a 
result of Fund 
support.  NBA 
Observatory Reports  Baseline to be 
established in year 1  4 959  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the most vulnerable 
people, 
communities, and 
regions  
 1.2 Number of 
males and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  NBA 
Observatory 
Reports  400,000 (10% 
women)  1,600,000  
(50% women)  4,000,000 
(50% women)  Vulnerable groups 
and women are effectively targeted 
and are enabled to participate in the 
project.  
A 2.0 Increased 
resilience of health 
and wellbeing, and food and water 
security  
  2.2 Number of 
food ‐secure 
households (in areas  
/periods at risk of 
climate change 
impacts)  NBA 
Observatory 
Reports  
National 
reports  
FAO 
Reports   Food 
Insecurity 
Experience Scale (26%  of 
population)
6061 Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale  (23%  
of population)  Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale  (20%  
of population)   
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services   4.1 Coverage 
/scale of ecosystems protected and 
strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and 
change62 Project 
reports  5,400 ha  50,000ha  100,000 ha   
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at  Project/Programme level  
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Project/programm
e outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to climate risks 7.2: Number of males 
and females reached by 
[or total geographic 
coverage of] climate 
related early warning Project 
reports  
 80,000  200,000 (50% 
women)  500,000 
(6350% 
women)   
                                                             
59 CSA practices and technologies to be introduced within the PIDACC include: Early Warning systems; Agroforestry practices; soil and water 
adaptation technologies (reduced tillage, permanent crop cover); Supplemental irrigation/water harvesting; Irrigation techniques to maximize 
water use; Modification of cropping calendar; Cage aquaculture using natural water bodies; weather -based agro- advisories and Use of drought 
resistant crop varieties  
60 FAO. 2017. Regional Overview of Food Security and Nutrition in Africa 2016. The challenges of building resilience to shocks and stresses. 
Accra.  
61 The prevalence of moderate or severe food insecurity [FAO, 2017] is measured based on the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (F IES). The 
FIES generates estimates of food insecurity at the individual level, based on analysis of self -reported occurrence of experiences during a period 
of 12 months  
62 Indicator captures changes in agricultural land (ha) as well as forest land (ha) and protected areas (ha) in targeted areas.  
63 62500, Households (average household size estimated at 8 people per household)


---
*Page 72*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
systems and other risk  
reduction measures 
established/ 
strengthened  
8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate threats and 
risk-reduction 
processes  8.1: Number of 
males and females made aware of climate 
threats and related 
appropriate responses  Project 
reports  
climate service providers 
surveys  80,000  800,000 (50% 
women)  2,000,000 
(50% women)   
9.0 Improved 
management of land or forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions 
reductions  
 9.1 Hectares of land 
or forests under improved and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 emission reductions  Project 
reports  9,000 ha  12,000ha —
forestry  
12,000 ha —  
agroforestry  
4,000 ha of dunes stabilized;  
40,000 ha of 
degraded 
land restored  
Mechanical and biological 
management 
of 6,000 m3 of 
ravines 
undertaken  40,000ha — 
forestry  
26,000 ha —
agroforestry  
10,000 ha of 
dunes stabilized;  
110,000 ha of 
degraded land 
restored;  
Mechanical and biological 
management of 
45,000 (m3) of 
ravines 
undertaken  Communities 
supportive and 
adopt 
improved 
practices  
Project/programm
e outputs  Outputs that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
Component 1 -1       
Output 1: 
Strengthened 
sustainable land 
management (SLM)  1.1. No of Hectares  (ha) 
of degraded area 
restored under 
participatory 
Sustainable Land 
Management   Project 
reports   40,000  100,000   
1.2. No of new green 
jobs created for 
vulnerable groups  NBA 
observatory  
Reports and 
Surveys  None  80,000 (30% 
women)  150,000 (30% 
women)   
1.3. No of farmers in 
project areas using 
climate resilient 
technologies 
(disaggregated by 
gender)  IP reports,  
project 
reports  Baseline to 
be 
establishe
d in year 1  40,000  
(30% women)  100,000  
(30% women)   
Output 2: 
Strengthened 
sustainable forest 
management  2.1 No of Hectares (ha) 
of forest area under 
participatory 
management   Project 
reports  3,000ha  10,000  40,000   
2.2 % increase in yield 
productivity64 Project 
reports  Baseline to 
be 
establishe
d in year 1  10% 20%  
                                                             
64 Forestry yield productivity measured in terms number of trees per hectare


---
*Page 73*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
2.3 No of community 
agents that are 
using REDD+ (No)  Project 
reports  12 100 
(50% women)  400 
(50% women)   
Output 3: 
Strengthened 
sustainable 
agroforestry 
management  3.1 No of Hectares (ha) 
of land area 
covered by agro-
forestry  Project 
reports  1,000ha  10,000  26,000   
3.2 No of farmers with 
skills in sustainable 
natural resources 
management 
(agroforestry, 
forestry, etc)  Project 
reports  Baseline to 
be 
establishe
d in year 1  800,000  
(50% women)  2000,000  
(50% women)   
3.3 Number of farmers 
with additional 
incomes  Project 
reports  Baseline to 
be 
establishe
d in year 1  800,000  
(50% women)  2000,000  
(50% women)   
Output 4  
Strengthened 
sustainable 
protection of natural 
habitats  4.1 No of Hectares (ha) 
of natural habitat 
improved/conserved  Project 
reports  2,000  2000  4,200   
4.2 No of Hectares (ha) 
of spawning 
grounds 
rehabilitated (ha)  Project 
reports  2,000  2,000  4,700   
Component 1 -2       
Output 5 
Strengthened 
climate and weather 
information services 
including Last Mile 
EWS  5.1 Hydromet stations 
with accessible data 
shared in real time  Project  
reports   53 53  
5.2 No of people with 
skills on climate and 
weather information 
(disaggregated by 
gender by sex and 
age group)  Project 
reports  0 1000 (30% 
women)  2000 (30% 
women)   
Output 6: Regional 
pollution prevention 
plan developed  6.1 Operational 
Pollution control 
plan at basin level  Project 
reports  
 Existing 
pollution 
study  1 1 Surveys are 
successfully 
conducted.  
Output 7: Payment 
mechanism for 
environmental services (PES) and 
FRACC  Fund set up  7.1 Operational RAFCC 
Fund and PES mechanisms  Project 
reports  
Final study reports  Decision of 
heads of state to establish 
RAFCC  1 1 Required data 
is available & surveys are successfully 
conducted.  
Output  8: 
Strengthened 
Capacity for IWRM 
implementation at national/ regional 
(NBA) levels  8.1 No of basin/sub 
basin IWRM plans 
developed and 
operationalised  Project 
reports  
Final study 
reports  0 9 9  
8.2 Number of NBA, 
national focal 
structures and 
associations’ 
executives trained  Project 
reports  0 250 500  
Output 9:  Master 
Plan for the river 
navigability 
developed  9.1 Operational 
Masterplan for river navigability in place 
on the Benoué river Final study 
reports   1 1 Required data 
is made available


---
*Page 74*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
(Nigeria and 
Cameroun)  
Component 2 -1       
Output 10  
Strengthened Climate Resilient 
Hydro -Agricultural 
Infrastructure  10.1 No of Hydro -
Agricultural 
Infrastructure  
constructed (small hydraulic 
infrastructure)  Project 
reports  15 60 134  
 10.2  Number of 
Hectares (ha) of irrigation  schemes 
developed (ha)  Project 
reports  1,000  10,000  19,000   
 10.3  % increase of 
household revenue  Project 
reports  To be 
establishe
d at year 1  10% 25%  
Output 11  
Water points for cattle and 
development of  
transhumance 
pathways  11.1 Number of 
Reservoirs, ponds, wells and boreholes 
for farming 
constructed along 
1425km of Transhumance 
corridors  Project 
reports  31 50 130  
 11.2 Number of Hectares 
(ha) of pastoral land 
developed  Project 
reports  20 60000  134,000   
Output 12  
River Sections trained for improved 
navigation  12.1 Distance of 
Navigation sections rehabilitated (km)
 Project 
reports  none  50 120  
Output 13  
Fisheries 
Infrastructure 
constructed for 
improved 
productivity  13.1 Number of 
Rehabilitated 
docks/landing sites  Project 
reports  2 5 30  
 13.2 Number of 
Developed 
spawning and 
floodplain areas  Project 
reports  To be 
established at year 1
 20 40  
 13.3  Percentage (% ) 
increase in fishery 
production  Project 
reports  To be 
establishe
d at year 1  10% 20%  
Component 2 -2       
Output 14  
Community -based 
Climate Adaptation 
Plans prepared and 
implemented  14.1 Community -based 
Climate Adaptation 
Action Plans 
prepared and 
implemented  Project 
reports  None  30 65  
Output 15  
Increase in local 
economic development arising 
from the upgraded 15.1 Number of youths 
with gainful employment (self -
employed, # of 
start-ups, etc.)  Project 
reports  To be 
established at year 1  75,000(30% 
women)  150,000 (30% 
women)


---
*Page 75*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  Final  
Community based 
Livelihood infrastructure  15.2 Operational 
Infrastructure management 
committees, with at least 30% women 
representation  Project 
reports  10 100 (30% 
women)  292 (30% 
women)   
15.3  Number of SMEs 
for youth employment 
established  Project 
reports  10 50 (30% 
women)  100(30% 
women)   
 15.4  Dykes for flood 
control constructed 
(Distance -km) Project 
reports  None  100 122  
Component 3        
Output 16  
Dissemination of 
good adaptation 
practices and 
climate information  16.1 Number of 
knowledge products 
produced and 
disseminated’  Knowledge 
products  
national 
workshops  0 10 Knowledge 
Products  20 Knowledge 
Products   
Output 17  
Strengthened monitoring and evaluation by the 
NBA Environment 
Observatory  17.1 Functional M&E 
system  
17.2 Functional MIS 
system  Annual 
M&E reports 
 0 
 0 
 
 Mid-term 
report,  
Annual 
reports,  
Annual audit 
reports  Project 
Completion 
Report,  
Annual reports,  
End of project 
audit   
 
Activities and Inputs  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Component 1: Development of the resilience of ecosystems and natural resources  
Component 1 .1 Resource and Ecosystems Protection  
1. Strengthen ing 
sustainable 
land 
management 
for reduction of 
soil erosion and 
silting to 
sustainable 
levels  Reducing risks related to 
water shortages and land 
degradation. I ncludes 
promotion of soil 
conservation and 
stabilization measures  1.1. Consultation with partner stat es, agronomists, 
land officers on zoning of land for agriculture etc  
1.2. Development of 9 sub basin 
masterplans/watershed management plans  
1.3. Stabiliz ation dunes; restore degraded land, and 
mechanical/biological management of  ravines  
1.4. Awareness campaign on erosion control and 
improved soil management practices  
1.5. Expansion of  sustainable land and water 
management interventions and technologies —
includes gender -responsive CSA technologies  
1.6. Support ing the fight against bushfires  
1.7. Training for men and women farmers in business 
development and marketing and selected value 
chains in agriculture/ watershed management  
1.8. Building of a one lane 60 m span bridge 
(Cameroun)  The interventions in 
each area will take 
into account 
climatic information 
soil type, plant 
species and 
competitive ability, 
aspect and 
topography .  
2. Increas ing 
forest 
productivity and 
sustainable 
forest 
management - 
targets area Support to regeneration of 
dry forests and woodlands 
through assisted natural 
regeneration of trees and 
increasing density of trees 
on farms through farmer -2.1. Support to development of private nurseries  
2.2. Provision of nati onally available sources of  
quality seed and plant material  
2.3. Establishment of d emonstration/trial forestry 
plots  and re-establishment of forest tree species  Includes a suite of 
capacity 
strengthening 
approaches and 
activities to ensure 
skills and


---
*Page 76*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
40,000  ha of 
forests  managed natural 
regeneration  2.4. Building capacity in SFM approaches , includes 
training of 200 community agents and 
associations for REDD+  management 
comp etency  
3. Integrat ion of  
agro-forestry 
into farming 
systems on 
26,000ha of 
agro-forestry 
ha of the 
watershed  Support to increase the 
use of agro-forestry 
systems to reduce soil 
erosion and increase soil 
fertility and soil water 
holding capacity, thereby 
enhancing climate 
resilience and productivity  3.1. Support to development of private nurseries  
3.2. Establish ment of  fodder banks with Napier grass  
3.3. Plant ing trees/shrubs on as well as on 
boundaries /crops and in home gardens  
3.4. Train ing men and women farmers on gender -
responsive CSA technologies on-farm 
(sensitizing 500,000 women on climate change 
adaptation techniques)  
3.5. Undertak ing land certification — includes 
provi sion of access to restored land for 9, 000 
women.   
4. Strengthen ing 
sustainable 
management of 
natural habitats  Habitat expansion under 
conservation management 
beyond park boundaries in 
buffer zones, biological 
corridors, and ecological 
stepping- stones, to build 
connectivity  & resilience to 
climate change 4.1. Identify ing areas for development of the nature 
reserves   
4.2. Establish ment of  corridors for wildlife to access 
water and biomass during droughts  
4.3. Rehabilitat ion of  bare land  and spawning 
grounds across the basin nature conservation 
areas  
4.4. Improve ment of  management within protected 
areas to reduce degradation of habitats  Interventions 
carried out with the 
aim of protecting 
biodiversity and the 
sustainable 
management of 
wetlands  
Component 1.2 Strengthening the shared management of natural resources  
5. Strengthen ing 
hydro 
meteorological forecasting and 
early warning 
systems  This output is aimed at 
strengthening climate risk 
management in the Niger Basin to support poverty 
alleviation and sustainable 
development within the 
PIDACC. It builds on 
ongoing programs by the 
NBA Environment 
observatory, ACMAD and 
AGRHYMET.  5.1. Strengtheni ng the decision support tools (Mike 
Hydro basin, Mike Hydro flood etc) through integration of climate risk management  and 
capacity development  
5.2. Long-term and on-demand capacity 
development and training program for NMHS 
staff on O&M, data modeling, and forec asting. 
Includes TA for support to certification of 
meteorological agencies in line with WMO 
requirements.  
5.3. Expansion of coverage of Hydrological and 
meteorological monitoring networks  
5.4. Establishing  Community based Early Warning 
Systems  
5.5. Development of  new information and value-
added products65 
5.6. Undertak ing capacity -building, in the generation, 
& dissemination of climate products6667 Effective consultant 
selection process, 
Effective consultation with 
stakeholders  
6. Technical 
assistance for 
preparation of 
the Niger 
regional 
pollution  Interventions will comprise 
updating the existing study, 
supporting the operation of 
existing pollution control 
stations and installing new 
pollution stations  6.1. Diagnostic study leading t o preparation of plan 
for strengthening the conventional network for 
water quality monitoring in the Niger River. 
Study includes (i) updating sources of diffused 
pollution in each country; (ii) characterization of 
pollutants (iii) preparation of plan for 
strengthening WQ monitoring in the Niger River  Effective consultant 
selection process, 
Effective 
consultation with 
stakeholders  
                                                             
65 The project will ensure that women are adequately involved in the implementation of the EWS and that they benefit from climate 
information which is relevant to them, presented and transmitted in a way that is accessible and easy to understand  
66 The project will ensure that women are adequately involved in the implementation of the EWS and that they benefit fro m climate 
information which is relevant to them, presented and transmitted in a way that is accessible and easy to understand  
67 The project will improve the understanding of gender and climate change. Gender impact analyses will be conducted to identify  
gender -specific needs and protection measures related to floods, droughts, and other climate change related disasters in the basin. A 
toolkit for the dissemination of early warnings will be developed and it will include a gender -based analysis of the national and local 
media that are used to disseminate weather and climate alerts. Based on gender -sensitive consultations with end- users, the project will 
aim to supply climate information that is tailored to the specific needs of decision makers and local communities.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1. Payment for 
Ecosystem 
Services (PES) 
and a Regional 
Adaptation 
Fund  The Environment Trust 
Funds will be designed to establish a  system for the 
funding of watershed restoration  1.1. Diagnosis study and FRACC and PES feasibility 
studies  
1.2. Establishing payments for biodiversity 
conservation, wildlife corridors and, in steep 
areas, watershed protection  Effective 
consultation with stakeholders  
2. Capacity 
building of NBA executives and partner 
institutions 
functional 
countries  Effective water resource 
management through the capacity building of NBA executives, partner 
institutions and user 
associations and IWRM 
devices of functional countries  2.1. Preparation of Regional IWRM action Plan  
2.2. Operationalization of IWRM plans in the nine countries and improved regional coordination in 
the implementation of the OP (2016-2025);  
2.3. Detail a capacity development program that 
includes on -site and off -site training  
2.4. Undertake c apacity building of NBA executives, 
partner institutions to plan and implement 
climate resilient land and water management 
regimes  Leveraging 
development 
partner resources through the 
capacity 
development 
program  
3. Technical 
assis tance for 
preparation of 
the feasibility 
study leading to the Navigation 
masterplan 
(Benoué  river, 
Nigeria and 
Cameroun ) A feasibility study for an 
investment program for 
installation of maritime 
infrastructure and 
identification of policy and institutional frameworks to 
ensure sustainability of the 
priority investments 
 3.1. Diagnostic analysis including (i)Sediment yield 
analysis (ii) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of 
the Niger and Benoué course and (iii) Definition 
of a regional soil conservation policy  
 Effective consultant 
selection process Effective 
consultation with 
stakeholders
 
Component 2: Development of population resilience  
Sub-component 2.1, Implementation of Climate Resilient Growth Infrastructure  
4. Implementation 
of Hydro-Agricultural Infrastructure  
(rehabilitation / 
construction of 
small hydro-
agricultural 
infrastructure  
infrastructure)  External water harvesting 
systems to mitigate dry spells, recharge groundwater, and permi t 
multiple uses of water. 
Storage and irrigation will 
provide an important buffer 
against droughts, 
particularly in the Sahelian 
part of the Niger basin  4.1. Preliminary study and mapping of locations of 
the small hydraulic infrastructure across the 9 countries  
4.2. Rehabilitat ion of  water storage structures to 
preserve supplies and improve flood protection  
4.3. Construct ion of  rainwater harvesting 
infrastructure across the transhumance corridors  To ensure the 
sustainability of the small -scale 
infrastructure, th e 
project will establish 
committees at the 
sector and cell level 
to select the sites, 
manage the 
structures.  
5. Develop ment of  
water points for 
cattle and 
develop transhumance 
pathways 
 Developing water 
infrastructure that is 
aligned with sustainable 
forage management in the Agro -pastoral systems of 
the Niger basin. It supports 
activities that reduce 
sensitivity to climate 
related Shocks in poor and vulnerable countries of the 
Niger basin .  5.1. Preliminary study and mapping of location for 
water pints across the 9 countries  
5.2. Establish ment of  corridors for livestock 
movement to protect farmers’ crops and trees, 
designating grazing and water access areas to 
ensure resilience of pastoral production systems  
5.3. Construct ion of  rainwater harvesting 
infrastructure across the transhumance corridors  
5.4. Form ulation and support of committees to 
manage small scale infrastructure  To ensure the 
sustainability of the 
small -scale 
infrastructure, the 
project will est ablish 
committees at the 
sector and cell level 
to select the sites, 
manage and maintain the 
structures.  
6. Train ing of  
River Sections for improved 
navigation  
 River training and dredging  
(river training on 120 km of 
navigable portions, construction of docks and 
wharves).to maintain 
adequate channel size to 
accommodate vessels ; 
undertaken with agencies 
responsible for waterways 
or port management  6.1. Build / rehabilitate navigation sections and 
landing stages (on Niger, Tinkissu, Sankarani 
and Milo; (In the prefectures of Mandiana, 
Siguiri, Kouroussa, Faranah, Dabola and 
Kankan) .


---
*Page 78*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
7. Construct ing 
Fisheries 
Infrastructure 
for improved 
productivity  Ecosystem approach to 
fisheries and aquaculture management that 
integr ates ecological, 
socio -economic, 
governance dimensions.  7.1. Construct ion of  9 nursery stations and develop 
of 16,000 ha of spawning and floodplain areas).   
Component 2.2 Accompanying measures and social protection  
8. Develop ment of  
Community 
Action Plans for 
adaptation to 
climate change 
 Support to increase the 
understanding by sub 
basin communities of the 
impacts of climate change 
and the value of climate 
resilient adaptation for 
proposed interventions.  8.1. Select ion of  target areas for support  
8.2. Community based survey of project area and 
prioritization of interventions  
8.3. Development of  extension training materials that 
incorporate climate resilient approaches  
8.4. Awareness raising/training of communities in gender sensitive a daptation planning (includes 
sensitizing an estimated 1,0 00,000 women on 
climate change adaptation techniques and 
climate resilience)  
8.5. Community meetings and planning workshops  
8.6. Development of local adaptation plans with 
zonation of land for agriculture, pa sture, etc.  Participation of 
local communities will foster 
ownership of 
planned 
interventions and 
provide an 
opportunity for 
consensus building.  
9. Strengthen ing 
community - 
based livelihood infrastructure  Diversifying income 
sources and increasing 
coping capacity. Livelihood 
activities will cover drought 
preparedness and natural 
resource management 
activities, including new/ 
improved water supplies, 
natural resource 
management activities and 
income diversification 
strategies such as 
investing in women groups  9.1. Select ion and construct ion of  168 infrastructure 
upgrading Interventions (Activities)  in specific 
watersheds;   
9.2. Form ulation and operationalis ation of 292  
infrastructure management committees with 
30% representation for women;   
9.3. Installation of 110  fish ca ges installed in river 
system(50% of beneficiaries will be women); this 
activity will support cage fish culture technology 
in selected locations along the Niger River 
system; ;  
9.4. Restocking  270 water reservoirs with fish—
including integration of aquacultur e into existing 
farming systems  
9.5. Provi sion of access to recovered (previously 
degraded) land to 9,000 women and 3,000 
youth  
9.6. Support  towards establishment of 100 SMEs for 
youth employment, of which 30 will be run by 
females ; (ii) financing of 120 integrated 
Interventions (Activities)  supported by women; 
and (iii) integration of strategies to increase 
women’s participation in the workforce.   
Component 3: Project management and coordination  
10. Disseminat ion 
of good 
adaptation 
practices and 
climate information 
(includes 
awareness 
raising and advocacy to support 
replication)  Analysis of project results 
and production of a range 
of knowledge products 
including policy briefs and 
Case studies to demonstrate the benefits of 
project interventions.  
 
 10.1.  Strengthening regional and national 
communications systems, based on the existing 
NBA communication strategy.  
10.2.  Preparation of briefing notes for local and 
national decision makers  
10.3.  Preparation of program  knowledge management 
strategy  
10.4.  Preparation of program  gender strategy  
10.5.  Preparation of media articles in newspapers, journals, newsletters, participatory videos, 
maintain website  
10.6.  Conduct an ex -post cost benefit analysis to 
determine the value added by the project Dialogue and 
learning at workshops will 
ensure horizontal 
Scaling up and the project will use a 
website, site visits, 
and the media


---
*Page 79*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
compared with existing approaches and 
practices  
10.7.  Hold National w orkshops on WSM, SFM ,CSA  
11. Strengthen  
M&E system 
and practice by the NBA 
Environment 
Observatory  Improved management of 
the project by  
implementing agencies and local communities  11.1.  Undertake project baseline data/benefit 
monitoring surveys  
11.2.  Strengthening regional and national GIS -based 
M&E and MIS incl. gender disaggregated data  
11.3.  Collection, analyses, reporting, dissemination of  
data and information on the project’s progress  
11.4.  Preparing annual periodic reports   
 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme specific 
institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please indicate how the interim/mid -
term and final evaluations will be organi zed, including the timing.  
 
Project monitoring, reporting and evaluation  
Monitoring and reporting will follow (i) the Theory for change (section E2- 5) and (ii) the log frame matrix in Section H 1.  
The log frame w ill be used to assess progress towards the P DO through key indicators . The M&E approach will involve 
a combination of field- based data collection and remote sensing/GIS. In addition, the project monitoring, reporting and 
evaluation arrangements will be fully compliant with the GCF monitoring and accountability policy requirement and AMA.  
 
Project progress will be monitored by the African Development Bank  based on official data sources monitored directly by 
the NBA and national executing agencies. In addition, a number of individual evaluations will gauge progress towards 
the PDO, assess the impact of the p rogramme on the beneficiaries, assess the quality of the work carried out by its 
different components, and evaluate overall project efficiency. The Grant Agreements between the African Development 
Bank  and the NBA and executing agencies will detail the reporting requirements in line with the provisions of  the African 
Development Bank  procedures and on the basis of the indicators acceptable to the World Bank.  
 
Milestone  Expected Dates  
Start of Project Implementation  02/01/2019 
Interim Evaluation  31/12/2022 
Project Completion  31/12/202 4 
Final Evaluation  01/07/202 5 
 
Detailed reporting will be as follows:  
 
Inception phase  
A baseline study will be undertaken at programme  inception to generate an updated assessment of the context, 
particularly with respect to the various indicators and targets . The results of the baseline study will be used as the 
reference point by which progress towards achievement of the targets will be assessed.  
 
Annual performance report  
Annual performance reports will be elaborated by the NBA and the National E Es during the lifespan of the programme. 
The reports will  highlight risks that require the attention of the African Development Bank  and GCF. The reports will 
include a narrative on implementation progress based on the log frame submitted in the F P, against the relevant criteria 
of the i nvestment framework as set out in the F P. In line with the AMA, the APR shall be submitted to the GCF Secretariat 
on an annual basis for the period ending on 31 December within sixty days after the end of the relevant annual period.


---
*Page 80*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
The first APR will be submitted following the end of the calenda r year and the last APR required to be submitted within 
six months of the end of the relevant r eporting period.  
 
Mid-term evaluation  
The mid-term evaluation (MTE) will provide an independent assessment of programme performance at mid- term against  
the Fund’s investment framework criteria, to analyse whether it is on track, what problems and challenges it  is 
encountering, and which corrective actions are required so that the pro gramme can achieve its intended outcomes by 
programme completion in the most efficient and sustainable way.  
 
Final project evaluation  
A final evaluation will be implemented six months after project closure and will examine the overall performance of the 
project against the investment criteria and other evaluation criteria that will be defined in the evaluation guidelines  
including financial/economic performances as part of the “ Funded Activity ” efficiency and effectiveness criterion, as well 
as the sustainability and scalability of results and impacts and lessons learned, during the relevant period. The objective 
of the final evaluations will be to learn lessons and apply those l essons in order to upscale and replicate successful 
programmes . 
 
Independent evaluators  
Interim  and final evaluation reports will be prepared by an independent evaluator selected by the African Development 
Bank  and will be submitted on the dates or according to the schedule set forth therein. Copies of these reports shall be 
forwarded by the African Development Bank  to the F und. The African Development Bank  will retain all M&E records for 
this project for up to five years after project financial closure in order to support ex -post evaluations. A detailed M&E 
budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the program me evaluation prior to Afr ican Development 
Bank  Board approval.  
 
Methodologies for monitoring and reporting o n key outcomes of the programme  
The NBA observatory under the NBA Secretariat will be responsible for the overall project based M & E and will coordinate 
the establishment of a management information system (MIS) and M&E plan with the support of partner government agencies, contracted service providers, NGOs, and communities. A major eff ort will be dedicated to improving, updating 
and modernizing M&E systems at different levels and for different purposes. The M & E system will (i) enhance the 
periodic assessment of project performance; and (ii) enhance evaluation of their results in terms  of relevance, efficiency, 
effectiveness, impact, and sustainability.  
 
A highly qualified third party institution will be contracted for the duration of the project to provide M & E support to the 
NBA observatory and national agencies. The support would encompass tracking and analysis of inputs and outputs, key 
implementation processes, periodic impact assessments, and targeted studies/ analyses where implementation problems 
are identified. The third party institution will develop a comprehensive MIS to capture field information and allow for 
effective data analysis and report ing to guide implementation. The project -wide MIS would mainly address input -output 
monitoring related to the various activities proposed under the three PIDACC  project components as a means of tracking 
implementation progress.   
 
Sources of data for feeding the M&E system will include: (a) a dministrative data collected through the project MIS, such 
as progress, technical, and financial reports; (b) specially designed qualitative and quantitative household survey 
instruments; (c) ex isting and newly collected geo- referenced data (including global datasets) ; and (d) scientifically 
collected environmental and ecosystem health data. A baseline survey will be prepared. Data collected wil l be as much 
as possible disaggregated by gender.  
 
GIS techniques (vegetative cover and land- use monitoring systems , erosion modelling using SWAT and related tools ) 
combined with field based data collection and surveys will be used to provide baseline data, track program inputs and 
outputs, key processes, institutional performance, impacts and outcomes for spatially oriented landscape interventions 
(example Output 1: Strengthened sustainable land management ).


---
*Page 81*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 81 
 
 
 H 
  
For knowledge oriented services, client satisfaction surveys will be used to assess the performance of NBA and national 
agency services based on client experience ( e.g. Output 5: Strengthened climate and weather information services 
including Last Mile EWS ). The surveys will shed light on the constraints clients face in accessing information services, 
their views about the quality /adequacy of services, and the responsiveness of government . The surveys will be conducted 
by the NBA observatory  supported by national agencies.  
 
For capacity strengthening outputs (for instance, Output  8: Strengthened c apacity for IWRM i mplementation at national 
and regional (NBA) levels, f ormal surveys will be used to monitor outputs. Fi ndings from the sample of people interviewed 
will be applied to the wider target group or the sub basin population as a whole. Quantitative estimates will also be made 
for the siz e and distribution of impacts . 
 
A Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire will be used to measures changes in social indicators for different population 
groups at household level —specifically relati ng to indicators of access, utilization, and satisfaction with social and 
economic services, like access to rehabilitated agricultural land for women and youth.  
 
Rapid appraisal methods will be used to gather views and feedback of beneficiaries and other stakeholders, in order to 
respond to national decision -makers’ needs for information ( e.g. Output 1 4 —Community based Climate Adaptation Plans 
preparation and implementation). Methods will include: key informant interviews; communit y group interviews and mini 
surveys. The M & E system will regularly track the performance of the community -based interventions (activities) and 
contribute to reporting on the national PIDACC  indicators.  
 
Beneficiary surveys and assessments will be undertaken (example Output 15  Community -based livelihood infrastructure 
implemented)  through systematic consultation with project beneficiaries and other stakeholders to identify and design 
development initiatives, signal constraints to participation, and provide feedback to improve services. For activities 
implemented at n ational level (including the village/community levels), a monitoring system will be applied that will 
strengthen participatory methods and processes for data collection.  
 
Beyond tracking and monitoring progress, an impact evaluation would be undertaken to better understand the extent to 
which GCF funded activities reach the poor and the magnitude of their effects on people’s welfare. A n ex-post comparison 
of the programme and non- equivalent control group will be undertaken. The methods will range from large- scale sample 
surveys in which project populations and control groups are compared before and after, and possibly at several points 
during program intervention to small -scale rapid assessment and participatory appraisals. Baseline and end surveys w ill 
help to gather baseline data,  as well as evaluate progress across variables such as incomes, health, access to land, 
access to natural capital, gender dimensions and  adaptive capacities .


---
*Page 82*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 81 
 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable 
supporting documents.  
  I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility Study  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if 
applicable )  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment  (If applicable)  
☐ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement 
schedule, etc.)  – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I  
☒   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
 (If applicable)  
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☒ Evaluation Report  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 83*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 81 
 
 
 I 
Appendix 1: Acronyms and Abbreviations  
 
Acronyms  Definition  
AfDB's  African Development Bank Group  
ADF African Development Fund  
AMA  Accreditation Master Agreement.  
AMLCFT  AfDB’s established guidelines on anti -fraud, anti-corruption and anti -money 
laundering policies  
AGRHYMET  Agriculture, Hydrology, Meteorology (research center; Niamey, Niger)  
ACMAD  African Centre of Meteorological Applications for Development  
ACPC  African Climate Policy Centre  
AE Accredited Entities  
CSA Climate Smart Agriculture  
COM  Council of Ministers  
CILSS  Permanent Inter -State Committee against Drought in the Sahel  
CIF Climate Investment Funds  
CSOs  Civil Society Organizations  
CBO  Community Based Organizations  
COP  Conference of the Parties — supreme decision -making body of the UNFCCC 
Convention  
ECOWAS  Economic Community of West African States  
ECCAS  Economic Community of Central African States  
EIRR  Economic Internal Rate of Return (Economic decision Criteria)  
ESMF  Environmental  and Social Management Framework  
EC European Commission  
EE Executing Entities  
FEWS  Flood Early Warning System  
FRACC  Regional CC adaptation fund  
FAA Funded Activity Agreement  
FIP Forestry Investment Program  
GAP  Gender Action Plan  
GCM  General Circulation Models  
GHG  Green House Gases  
GEF Global Environmental Facility  
GCF  Green Climate Fund  
HIGH 5  African Development Bank Priorities for accelerating Africa’s economic 
transformation: Light up and power Africa, feed Africa, industrialize  Africa, 
integrate Africa and improve the quality of life for the people of Africa  
IDD Integrity Due Diligence  
IDRC  International Development and Research Centre  
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
IRR Internal rate of Return  
IUCN  International Union for Conservation of Nature  
INDC  Nationally Determined Contribution  
IWRM  Integrated Water Resources Management  
LCCs  Local Coordination Committees  
M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  
MoFP  Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning  
MIS Management Information System  
NAPs  National Adaptation Plan — established under the Cancun Adaptation 
Framework  
NDAs  National Designated Authorities


---
*Page 84*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 81 
 
 
 I 
Acronyms  Definition  
NAPA  National Adaptation Programme of Action  
NASPA  National Adaptation Strategy and Plan of Action  
NCs National Communications submitted as part of the UNFCCC process  
NCOFs  National Climate Outlook Forums  
NFS National Focal Structure  
NMHS  National Meteorological and Hydrological Services  
NSC  National Steering Committee  
NPCU  National Programme Coordinating Unit  
NPV Net Present Value {economic decision support criteria)  
O&M  Operation and Maintenance  
OS Operational Safeguard  
OSS,  Sahara and Sahel Observatory (OSS)  
PEPs  Politically Exposed Persons  
PES Payment mechanism for environmental services  
PIDACC  Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in 
the Niger Basin  
PME  Participatory monitoring and evaluation  
PMF  Performance Measurement Frameworks (PMF)  
PRCU  PIDACC Regiona l Coordination Unit  
REDD+  Countries' efforts to  Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Forest 
Degradation,  
RSC  Regional Steering Committee  
RCOFs  Regional Climate Outlook Forums  
SCP/NB  Silting Control Programme in the Niger Basin  
SLM Sustainable Land Management  
SDAP  Sustainable Development Action Plan — Niger Basin  
SDG  Sustainable Development Goals  
SESA  Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment  
SWAT  Soil and Water Assessment tool  
SMEs  Small and medium -sized enterprises  
SFM  Sustainable Forestry Management  
TMC  Technical Monitoring Committees  
UNECA  United Nations Economic Commission for Africa  
USAID  U.S. Agency for International Development  
UNCCD  United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification  
UNCBD  United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity  
UEMOA  West African Economic and Monetary Union,  
WMO  World Meteorological Organization  
WSM  Watershed Management  
WRM  Water Resources Management


---
*Page 85*
---

MINISTERE DUCADRE DEVIE
ETDUDEVELOPPEMENT DURABLE01BP3502 -01BP3621
Cotonou
Tél.:+22921318045
dgecmcvdd@gmail.comREPUBLIQUE DUBENIN
N°5:3S/DGEC/MCVDD/SA
To:TheGreen Climate Fund ("GCF")
Cotonou, Benin, May31,2017
Re:Funding proposai fortheGCFbytheAfrican Development Bank Group regarding GCFProject
Proposai bytheAfrican Development Bank Group regarding the"Integrated Development and
Adaptation toClimate Change intheNiger River Basin (PIDACC/NB)"
Dear Madam, Sir,
Werefer totheprogramme, "Integrated Development andAdaptation toClimate Change inthe
Niger Basin (PIDACC/NB)" inBenin asincluded inthefunding proposai submitted bytheAfrican
Development Bank Group tousonMay31,2017.
Theundersigned isthedulyauthorized representative ofAinaMartin Pepin, theNational Designated
Authority/focal point ofBenin.
Pursuant toGCFdecision B.08/10, thecontent ofwhich weacknowledge tohave reviewed, wehereby
communicate ourno-objection totheprogramme asincluded inthefunding proposaI.
Bycommunicating ourno-objection, itisimplied that:
(a)Thegovernment ofBenin hasno-objection totheasincluded inthefunding proposai;
(b)Theprogramme asincluded inthefunding proposai isinconformity withBenin's national
priorities, strategies andplans;
(c)lnaccordance withtheGCF's environmental andsocial safeguards, theprogramme aslncluded
inthefunding proposai isinconformity withrelevant nationallaws andregulations.
Wealsoconfirm thatournational process forascertaining no-objection totheprogramme asincluded
inthefunding proposai hasbeen dulyfollowed.
Wealsoconfirm thatourno-objection applies toailprojects oractivities tobeimplemented within
thescope oftheprogramme.
Weacknowledge thatthisletter willbemade publicly available ontheGCFwebsite.
Kindregards,


---
*Page 88*
---

To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)  
 
       Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire , 16 June 2017  
Re: Funding proposal for  the GCF by the African Development Bank  Group regarding the “Integra ted 
Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Niger River Ba sin (PIDACC/NB) ”. 
 
Dear Madam, Sir,  
We refer to the programme  “INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT AND ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN 
THE NIGER RIVER BASIN (PIDACC/NB) ” in Côte d’Ivoire  as inclu ded in the funding proposal submitted by 
the African Development Bank  to us on 31 May 2017 . 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Salubrity, Environment and 
Sustainable Development , the focal point of Côte d’I voire . 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10 , the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed , we hereby 
communicate our no -objection to  the programme  as included in  the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The government of Côte d’Ivoire  has no -objection to the programme  as included in the funding 
proposal ; 
(b) The programme  as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Côte d’Ivoire ’s national 
priorities, strategies and plans;  
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmenta l and social safeguards, t he programme  as included 
in the funding proposal  is in conformity with relevan t national laws and regulations . 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the project  as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We also confirm  that our no -objection  applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme.  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
 
Kind regards,  
 
 
________________  
Name: Richemond Agré ASSIE  
Title: Côte d’Ivoire GCF Focal Point


---
*Page 95*
---

 
 
Page 1 
 
 
*This disclosure form is updated from the version circulated to the Board and active observers on  2 March 2018  
(attached) . Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate 
Change in the Niger Basin (PIDACC/NB)  
Accredited entity  African Development Bank Group  (AfDB)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category A  
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Strategic Environmental and Social Studies of The Integrated 
Program for Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the 
Niger Basin (PIDACC/BN) * 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -03-23  (English) and 2018 -06-27  (French)  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and French  
Link to disclosure   
 English :  
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/docu ment/niger -strategic -
environmental -and-social -studies -of-the-integrated -program -for-
development -and-adaptation -to-climate -change -in-the-niger -basin -
pidacc -bn-100875/  
French :  
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/docu ment/niger -strategic -
environmental -and-social -studies -of-the-integrated -program -for-
development -and-adaptation -to-climate -change -in-the-niger -basin -
pidacc -bn-100875/  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  The s ummary o f the ESMF below contains an ESMP consistent with 
the requirements for a category A project.  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Summary of the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -02-16 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and French


---
*Page 96*
---

 
 
Page 2 
 
 
Link to disclosure   
 
 English : 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documen ts/document/abn -multinational -
integrated -development -and-climate -change -adaptation -in-the-
niger -basin -program -pidacc -nb-97280/  
French : 
https://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/abn -multinational -
integrated -development -and-climate -change -adaptation -in-the-
niger -basin -program -pidacc -nb-97280/