=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20180608144830+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/ModDate: D:20180608144830+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  
Consideration of funding proposals  
 – Addendum VIII  
Funding proposal package for FP089  
 GCF/B.20 /10/Add. 08 
8 June  2018  Meeting of the Board  
1 – 4 July 201 8 
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional Agenda Item  17 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Transforming Financial Systems for Climate ” 
submitted by Agence F rançaise de Développement ; 
b) No-objection letter s issued by the national desig nated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s) ; and 
c) Environmental and social report disclosure  
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority( ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Transforming 
Financial Systems for Climate ” submitted by Agence Française de D éveloppement  is 
being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Memb ers and Alternate 
Board Members  to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or 
commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.20/10/Add.08  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
F unding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  1 
No-objection letter s issued by the national designated authorities or focal points  96 
Envi ronmental and socia l report  disclosure    118


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Programme  Title:  Transforming Financial Systems for Climate  (The “TFSC 
program me”) 
Country/Region:  Multiple countries  
Accredited Entity:  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
Date of Submission:  30.03.2018


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
  
 • Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Acc redited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding pr oposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 93 
 B 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme  Information  
A.1.1. Project / 
programme  title Transforming Financial Systems for Climate  (The “TFSC program me”) 
A.1.2. Project or 
programme  programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / 
region                     17 countries   
 
• Benin   
• Burkina Faso   
• Cameroon   
• Côte d’Ivoire   
• Ecuador  
• Egypt   
• Kenya   
• Madagascar   
• Mauritius   
• Morocco   
• Namibia  
• Nigeria   
• Senegal  
• South Africa  
• Tanzania   
• Togo   
• Uganda   
 
 
 
 
A.1.4. National 
designated a uthority 
(ies) NDAs as designated on the GCF website  
A.1.5. Accredited 
entity  Presentation  
 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) / French Development Agency  
AFD is a financing company and  a public industrial and commercial institution, acting as 
financer, advisor, partner and implementer to mobilize finance and expertise for development 
projects in emerging and developing countries.  It is the main implementing agency for 
France’s official development assistance to developing countries and overseas territori es. In 
2017 alone , AFD engaged a record volume of EUR 10.5 billion of commitments ( 8.3 bn in 
2015 and 9.6 bn in 2016 ). Fifty percent (50%) of these commitments are designed for positive 
impact on the climate. Through a network of 85 field offices, AFD curr ently finance, monitor, 
and assist more than 2,500 development projects in 108 countries.  
 
Since October 2017, AFD has chair ed the International Development Finance Club  (IDFC) , a 
network of 23 national and regional development banks from the North and the South. IDFC 
Members have a proven track record of outstanding successes, innovation and competence 
in the area of development finance and the Club focuses its activities on climat e finance. 
Through this partnership, IDFC members unite global expertise and innovation with in -depth 
local knowhow and total assets of more than USD 3.5 trillion.  
 
Furthermore, A FD is one of the initiators and lead donor of the “ Climate Action in Financial 
Institutions ” Initiative which promotes the systematic integration of climate change


---
*Page 6*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 93 
 B 
considerations across strategies, programme s and operations . 
 
 
Climate Strategy  
 
AFD was on e of the first international donors to integrate the fight against climate change into 
its practices. This approach, initiated more than a decade ago, is based on the principle that 
the fight against climate change is inextricably linked to the trajectory and development 
policies of countries, in terms of opportunities and threats, as well as the involvement of 
economic, institutional and civil society actors. AFD's first climate strategy dates from 2005.  
Since then and in line with its national positioning and its involvement in ecological and 
climate diplomacy, France has devoted a large part of its official development assistance to 
climate finance. The AFD Group has  thoroughly adjusted its intervention strategy and 
committed more than EUR 29 b illion between 2005 and 2017 to projects and programme s 
designed to provide climate co -benefits.  
AFD’s climate strategy has thus become a strong marker of its identit y, with three main 
aspects : (i) systematically measuring the carbon footprint of the opera tions financed (carbon 
balance) and assessing their potential benefits in terms of adaptation to the effects of climate 
change, (ii) an ambitious quantitative commitment to financing  50% of  projects with climate 
co-benefits , and  (iii) selectivity of projec ts in terms of impact on climate, taking into account 
the level of development of the countries concerned. This strategy has profoundly 
transformed AFD's portfolio  and methods, far beyond the operational sphere , and has also 
shaped its partnership strategy . 
This strong position has contributed to the AFD Group’s significant visibility on climate issues 
at both national and international levels . It is actively involved in most major initiatives 
undertaken with its peers and civil society actors . AFD was  particularly  involved  in issues of 
accounting and deployment of climate finance, metrics in terms of impact, risk approaches, 
economic modelling, and issues of strategic integration of climate dimensions by financial 
actors.  
 
The new international momentum, transcribed in the SDGs and the Paris Agreement, 
requires AFD to support fundamental and rapid changes in the development models of 
countries and economic actors  even more ambitiously .  
Moreover, through the setting  up of its Climate Plan in July 2017, the  French government 
wishes to speed up the implementation of the Paris Agreement not only in France but also at 
the international level . This provides AFD with a framework that extends its mandate by 
affirming that AFD will become the first development bank  with an explicit mandate to 
implement the Paris Agreement across its entire portfolio. AFD must therefore continue the 
transformation of its methods and instruments, launched within the framework of its previous 
climate strategies.  
 
Three strategic challe nges have been identified concerning the role and place of AFD in 
climate action in the years to come: ensuring that the Group’s activities are consistent with 
the Paris Agreement, in support of low -carbon and climate -resilient development and related 
public policies; maximizing the impact of its actions in this regard, notably in terms of 
leverage effects; and strengthening AFD’s role as a platform for France’s international 
financial commitment to climate and its positioning as a reference on climate and 
development among international finance institutions.  
 
The new AFD Climate and Development Strategy for 2017 –2022 thus proposes four major 
commitments: (ı) ensure activities are 100% Paris Agreement  compatible, (ıı) increase the 
volume of climate finance, (ııı) contribute to redirecting finance and investment flows, and (ıv) 
co-build solutions and bring influence to bear on standards.  
In terms of parameters and scope, the first commitment entails a fundamental evolution of the 
AFD Group’s approach to climat e issues. This involves progressing from an approach mainly


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 93 
 B 
based on an assessment of projects ’ climate benefits towards an approach that includes 
seeking compliance of all interventions with low -carbon and climate -resilient development 
pathways.  
In terms of volume of climate finance, as characterized by the methodology tested by the 
previous Climate Change Strategy and shared internationally, the  50% objective of 
commitments to projects with climate co -benefits is being extended to the entire AFD Group . 
This will lead to an absolute increase in the volume of such commitments, with a special 
funding effort for adaptation and the African continent.  
 
Financial markets strategy  
 
In 2017, AFD Group adopted a new strategic framework for Financial Systems. This s trategy 
is structured around three areas of intervention: a) Access to financial systems, b) Supporting 
transitions to sustainable financial and economic models , and c) Strengthen ing financial 
systems.  
The first area of intervention aims at promoting access to an adapted and diversified financial 
offer, especially for vulnerable populations living in remote areas or those particularly 
exposed to economic shocks. In addition, a specific approach will be i mplemented to ease 
access to financial system s for MSMEs considering the numerous obstacles they face in 
order to get financial services in appropriate conditions.  
The second area of intervention proposes to support the transformation of financial actors’ 
practices to promote sustainable development models. In different segments of financial 
activity (strategy, risk management, marketing, etc.), AFD Group will support any 
transformation process that would allow financial actors to finance sustainable invest ments 
as a core activity. Environmental and social transitions will be specifically targeted in a 
favorable international context (Paris Agreement, SDGs, etc.)  
Finally, the third area of intervention has been designed in the post -2008 financial crisis 
context. AFD Group will support public authorities (Government, supervisors, central banks, 
etc.) in strengthen ing the financial system structure in order to ensure its stability. This 
support can be structured to accompany the evolution of financial regulatio n, enhance 
supervisors ’ capacity to monitor and control financial activities , or to finance comprehensive 
reforms of the financial sector.  
 
AFD’s added -value for this operation  
 
For many years, AFD has been engaged in an active partnership with financial i nstitutions in 
its countries of operation. AFD provides its expertise and appropriate financial resources in 
order to make investments happen, while financial institutions provide their knowledge of the 
local context, their network , and their clients’ confidence. This rich and diversified experience, 
which makes AFD one of the most dynamic donors for this type of financing, has made it 
possible to develop the SUNREF initiative (Sustainable Use of Natural Resources and 
Energy Finance)  in 2006 in order to promote investments in energy and environmental 
services in developing countries. AFD has therefore a long history and a strong track record 
in the worldwide  implementation of this financial tool. To date, 53 SUNREF projects have 
been successfully implemented in partnership with about 70 local banks in more than 30 
countries of operation, for a total commitment of over EUR 2. 6bn of loans allocated by AFD, 
including EUR 1. 9bn already disbursed.  
SUNREF’s key objective is to contribute to  the development of a low carbon economy that is 
essential in the fight against global warming. SUNREF offers an integrated approach as it 
provides a range of tools and services which are intended to meet the demand at all levels: 
financ ial incentives, tec hnical assis tance, support for the creation of a new organization in 
local financial institutions, etc. SUNREF offers benefits to actors involved in the ecological


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 93 
 B 
transition (access to new markets related to green growth, dedicated financing and consultin g 
services, etc.) and prioritizes partnership innovations ( credit lines  with tailored tariffs for 
“green” investments, capacity building, supporting the public policies of governments , etc.).  
 
The aim of this Programme is to  build on th is experience and go beyond the SUNREF 
programme  by diversifying its portfolio with additional adaptation projects in sectors 
like agriculture, water , and sustainable housing . In parallel, the proposed Programme 
will enhanc e its commitments on the mitigation side throug h additional and innovative 
projects in green infrastructure, waste management, forest ry, and energy efficiency in 
buildings. Through this approach, AFD will continue to assist local financial 
institutions to scale up their access to climate finance.  
 
A.1.5 .a. Access 
modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity 
/ beneficiary  Executing Entities : 
• The AFD team  in our local agencies and in Paris headquarters will be responsible for 
the structuration, implementation , and global monitoring of the Programme.  
As Proparco  is an AFD affiliate dedicated to the private sector, Proparco will 
implement the Programme in countries where Local Financial Partners ( LFPs ) are 
private financial institutions.  
All AFD ’s obligations in cluded in the AMA will be passed down to Proparco.  
 
Implementing entities : 
• Local Financial P artners (LFP s) (including public and private financial institutions, 
microfinance institutions, etc.), as the main financiers of the local economy, can play 
a key role in financing the ecological transition. LFPs will on -lend the funds provided 
under the Programme  to final beneficiaries (most of the time private companies). 
LFPs will identify the investment potential and the most promising thematic areas 
(renewables, energy efficiency, adaptation to climate change such as agro -forestry 
projects, water management projects , etc.) among their existing clients or prospects 
in accordance with a set of eligibility criteria in line with the local public policy and 
climate change priorities. They will assess the creditworthiness of these potential 
eligible investments and structu re a financial offer in line with the needs of green 
projects to reduce the barriers to investment in the targeted country. If the risk of the 
eligible investment is perceived as too high by the LFP, the guarantee mechanism 
can be applied to share the cred it risk. The loans will be made directly to the LFP;  
• The project management entity in charge of the Technical Assistance (TA)  and 
acting as implementing entity for the grants  is most of the time the LFP (mostly for 
public financial institutions  or development banks) , a local institution (Ministry, local 
association supporting private sector, chamber of commerce/other business 
networks, etc.) , or, occasionally,  a procured consulting company  directly . This entity 
shall i) ensure that the TA is operati onal from the start (in order to support the local 
stakeholders from the early stages of the investment) and ii) contribute to institutional 
changes in the country (through a policy dialogue) ; 
• Consultants will be responsible for providing financial and tec hnical assistance to 
the LFPs and final beneficiaries by working closely with all of the stakeholders under 
the supervision of the project management entity and AFD team . 
 
Beneficiaries : 
Companies  operating in the targeted countries investing in low -carbon/adaptation/resource -
efficient project and innovations. They are central to the transition towards a more 
sustainable economic model.  
Depending on the countries ’ needs and local context, the Prog ramme  will be targeting:  
• specific companies (e .g. small and medium size companies , managed or owned by


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 93 
 B 
women ),  
• industrial sectors (e .g. water, agriculture, power)  
• geographies (e .g. remote or unde rserved areas)  
• or communities (e .g. vulnerable communities,  women, young  people ) 
Cooperatives  in the agriculture sector.  
On a case by case basis, individuals  can be targeted (mostly in the case of microfinance 
institutions) , as well as municipalities . 
 
A.1.7. Project size 
category (Total 
investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☒  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / 
adaptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☒  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of 
submission  30.3.2018  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact 
person, 
position  Mrs. Béryl Bouteille, Project Manager, Financial institutions  
Mrs. Audrey Rojkoff, Deputy Head of the Climate Change  Division  
Organization  Agence Française de Développement ( AFD) 
Email 
address  bouteilleb@afd.fr  
rojkoffa@afd.fr  
Telephone 
number   
+33 1 53 44 42 21  
+33 1 53 44 61 77  
 
Mailing  
address  5 rue Roland Barthes, 75012 Paris, France.  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☒ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☒ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and  supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 93 
 B 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme  Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
 
Delivering  the large investment flows needed to address climate change can only be achieved by leveraging the 
resources and capabilities of the financial sector. Local financial partners (LFPs), as the main financers of the private 
sector in developing countries , can play a key role in financing this  transition. However, market barriers continue to 
hold back investment at scale , including i nsufficient access to finance , low internal capacity and a limited pipeline of 
bankable projects.  
 
The TFSC Program aims to engag e LFPs to scale up private sector climate finance . The Program  builds on over a 
decade of experience  in implementing the AFD SUNREF initiative (Sustainable Use of Natural Resources and Energy 
Finance)  in 30 countries.  
 
The goal of the Program  is to create a market for investments in climate technologies in 17 countries  by removing the 
financial and technical barriers faced by LFPs to enable borrowing by, mainly, the private sector. The Program  will 
facilitate project funding (through credit lines and guarantee mechanisms)  in the target countries and will develop the 
capacity of LFPs  and project developers to scale up climate finance .  
 
The project will deliver GHG reductions estimated at 46 million tCO 2e over the 20 -year lifetime of the mitigation 
investments, and increased resilience for an estimated 260,000  people from investments in increased resilience (total 
beneficiaries 1.3 million). Co -benefits include green jobs and business growth (1, 100 SMEs).  The total project cost is 
EUR 882 million, of which EUR 330 million of GCF financing and EUR 552 million of co -financing from AFD. The GCF 
finance, including EUR 31 million in grants, EUR 31 million in guarantees and EUR 267 million  in concessional loans 
will leverage additional private sector financing of approximately EUR 1 099 million (EUR 315 million from LFPs and 
EUR 784 million as equity end -borrowers)  on both mitigation and adaptation.  
  
 
A.3. Project/ Programme  Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  October 2018 (final approval by AFD Board 120 days after  the GCF 
Board approval)  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  N/A (programmatic  approach)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start of Programme  implementation : Q1 2019 (expected 
effectiveness  date of the Funded Activity Agreements (FAA) 
between GCF and AFD)  
Programme  implementation end date: Q1 202 6 (expected)  
 
Project/ Programme  lifespan  Total lifespan of the Programme  : 20 years from the l ast date for 
AFD’s approval to LFPs  (to take  into account the monitoring of 
impacts)  
 
 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 93 
 B 
 
The Programme  will (i) provide LFPs and their clients with credit lines  with tariffs/incentives tailored to climate 
investments needs; (ii) provide grants  to build LFPs’ capacities and assist companies in structuring their climate 
investments through the technical assistance provided , (iii) share, via guarantee  mechanisms, cr edit risks  (including 
exchange risk)  borne by LFPs seeking to develop their climate finance portfolios , and  (iv) feed into the public policies 
of the governments concerned (also through the grants  dedicated to technical assistance).  
Therefore, these finan cial elements of the Programme  aim at alleviating the following most important barriers and 
failures of the market : (i) information barriers both at the level of the sponsors and the LFPs, (ii) lack of innovation/risk 
aversion,  and (iii) liquidity constrai nts/interest rates that are too high for the final beneficiaries. The liquidity constraint 
and high interest rate are addressed by the financial tools (concessional/long term loan, guarantees ), while the other 
qualitative barriers are addressed by the technical assistance. The investment is therefore triggered both by the 
financial conditions and the associated technical support.  
A substantial leverage effect is anticipated: the AFD and GCF credit lines will also mobilize funding brought by LFPs 
and equ ity investment brought by private end -borrowers. Thus, it is assumed that LFPs will provide additional loan 
amounts (20% of the AFD’s and GCF’s credit line) to end -borrowers. In addition, end -borrowers will bring another 30% 
of the credit line amounts as e quity investments.  
Please find below the tables summarizing the Total Programme costs and the breakdown of the different costs by 
component.  
Total Programme  costs and GCF financing by component  
Component  Total amount  Currency  GCF  AFD 
1.Credit line  788 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  268 520 
2.Technical assistance  38 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  31 7 
3.Guarantee  mechanism*  56 MEUR (or USD 
or local 
currency 
equivalent)  31 25 
Total Programme finance  
including leveraged financing  882 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  330 552 
 
*indicative amounts subject to final structure of the guarantee mechanism;  
** from AFD’s own grant resources and/or from other bilateral or multilateral donors .  
According to Clause 12 of the Master Agreement signed between AFD and the Green Climate Fund, the Programme 
should be implemented on a full cost recovery basis. In this regard, Project Management Costs may be included in the 
Programme Costs. This will be determined during the negotiation of the Term Sheet . 
 
Breakdown of cost by sub -component  
Component  Sub-
Component  Total amount  Currency  GCF  AFD 
1.Credit line  Mitigation  (60%)  473 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  161 312 
Adaptation  
(40%)  315 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  107 208 
Component 1 total  788 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  268 520


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 93 
 B 
2.Technical 
assistance  Project 
origination and 
bankability ( 45%) 17 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  14 3 
Climate strategy 
(15%) 6 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  5 1 
E&S 
management 
(30%) 11 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  9 2 
Gender 
mainstreaming  
(5%) 2 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  1.5 0.5 
Communication 
and marketing  
(5%)  2 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  1.5 0.5 
Comp onent 2  total  38 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  31 7 
3.Guarantee  
mechanism  Mitigation (60%)  33.5 MEUR (or USD 
or local currency 
equivalent)  18.5 15 
Adaptation 
(40%)  22.5 MEUR (or USD 
or local currency 
equivalent)  12.5 10 
Component 3  total  56 MEUR (or USD 
or local currency 
equivalent)  31 25 
TOTAL  882 MEUR (or USD 
equivalent)  330 552 
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  882 MEUR (or 
USD 
equivalent)  
  
(b) GCF 
financing  to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  
(vi) Grants  
 268 
0 
0 
31 
0 
 
31  
MEUR (or 
USD 
equivalent)  
 
MEUR (or 
USD 
equivalent)  
 According to AFD’s 
standard 
conditions  
 
 
According to AFD’s 
standard 
conditions  
 
  
As outlined in  
Term Sheet  
 
 
 
 
As outlined in  
Term Sheet


---
*Page 13*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 93 
 B 
MEUR (or 
USD 
equivalent)  
 
 Not applicable  
 Not applicable  
 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  330 million euro 
(€)  
(c) Co -
financing  to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
loan 
 
Guarantee  
 
Grant   520 
 
 
25 
 
7 MEUR (or 
USD 
equivalent)  
 
 MEUR (or 
USD or local 
currency 
equivalent)   
MEUR (or 
USD 
equivalent)   
 
AFD 
 
 
AFD 
 
 
AFD and/or 
other bilateral 
and 
multilateral 
donors  
 According to AFD’s standard condition s 
 
 
 
According to AFD’s standard condition s 
 
 
 
Not applicable  
Lead financing institution: AFD 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE  
(if applicable)  As outlined in Term Sheet  
 
 
B.3. Financial Market s Overview (if applicable)  
 
Despite countries’ commitment to fight against climate change in their NDC and a number of initiatives supported by 
Governments and bilateral/multilateral donors, climate finance market is still nascent in many countries . This is due to 
the presence of a number of market  barriers  that hold back investment at scale : The lack of climate finance is the main 
barrier and it is partially due to an unattractive risk -return because of high (real or perceived) levels of risk or insufficient 
risk taking capacity of LPFs  and to limited local capital which contributes to a conservat ive outlook . Together, these 
translate into inadequate sources of necessary long -term debt finance. In addition, LFPs  usually have insufficient 
internal capacity to assess the financial and technical feasibility of climate related  loan applications and investment 
proposals, especially from SMEs.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 93 
 B 
The number of local  financial institutions with a dedicated climate strategy and climate portfolio is still very limited. Most 
of the existing climate lending  capacity  is focused  on a small number of big companies with high creditworthiness. The 
majority of SME  currently have very limited access to lending from the local banking sector. Addressing the barriers to 
climate finance is crucial  to unlock the climate investment potential.  
 
The Programme is designed to remove or reduce the financial and technical barriers faced by local project sponsors. 
The Programme will provide a long tenor in order to finance projects that have a long amortization period, especially 
renewable energy, environmental , and forestry projects.  
 
In some identified countries, depending on the financial gap and the local needs, the Programme will provide 
concessional loans with a lower interest rate and a guaran tee mechanism to the LFPs that will then be in a position to 
propose attractive financing conditions to their clients. The objective of this incentive is to grow their market offer by 
adding an attractive offer for climate investment and thus allow a finan cing demand to emerge.  
 
Finally, the Programme will provide technical assistance and a significant grace period to allow financial institutions to 
build a pipeline of eligible projects, invest in internal capacities, design a dedicated marketing strategy , and finance the 
first eligible projects in good conditions.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 93 
 C 
 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
To address climate change, the  international community is converging towards a common agenda that recognizes the 
need to build a model with a reduced carbon footprint in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the 
objectives of the Paris Agreement.  
 
Historically, the Paris Agreement marks the recognition by countries in the global North and South of the need to 
change current development models. Three long -term objectives have been defined in the Article 2: keep the increase 
in the global average temp erature to well below 2°C above pre -industrial levels and pursue efforts to limit the 
temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre -industrial levels . These aims  recogniz e that this would significantly reduce the 
risks and impacts of climate change; increase the  ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and foster 
climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development in a manner that does not threaten food production; 
and make financial flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate -
resilient development.  
 
The achievement of these objectives concerns all Parties and, even in a context of differentiated responsibilities, a 
sharp reduction of emissions will be required in many AFD intervention countr ies. At the same time, many countries in 
which AFD operates are the most vulnerable to the effects of climate change.  
 
In addition to the Agreement, one of the key results of COP21 is that all countries have published their nationally 
determined contributi ons (NDCs) to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and the vulnerabilities to the effects of 
climate change. While these are indeed very crucial initial national references in terms of emissions targets, the targets 
defined by the current NDCs (conditiona l or non -conditional) are not yet in line with a 2°C target (reduction deficit of 15 -
17 Gt of CO2 - equivalent per year in 2030, which would lead to a warming of 3 –3.5°C).  
 
Local financial institutions have a key role to play in scaling up climate finance for local private investments.  However, 
despite the dynamism and profitability of these sectors, investors still face numerous obstacles: lack of awareness on 
the potential benefits, overestimation of risks due to a lack of technical knowledge, lack of acc ess to appropriate 
funding, etc. Contributing to removing these technical and financial barriers would allow these institutions to finance 
transformational change towards climate compatible investments.  
 
Therefore , AFD has for many years been engaged in an  active partnership with many LFPs , notably through the 
SUNREF initiative , in order to promote climate change mitigation and adaptation investments in developing 
countries. AFD has launched the SUNREF initiative  in 2006. To date, 50 SUNREF projects have be en 
successfully implemented in partnership with 70 local banks in more than 30 countries, for  a total commitment 
of over EUR 2.6bn of loans allocated by AFD, including EUR 1.9bn already disbursed.  
 
SUNREF has been a successful “green finance” label. It is an innovative integrated approach to environmental finance 
through a combination of financial and technical support. It provides a range of tools and services for this, which are 
intended to meet the demand of all actors: financial incentives (lower intere st rate, longer tenors, investment grants), 
support to structure green investments, assistance in the implementation of an environmental and social management 
system and a gender policy , and valori zation of the results achieved (e .g. energy savings, ha of agro-forestry, CO 2 
emissions avoided, etc.).  
 
Building on this experience , AFD wishes to take the SUNREF  initiative further by increasing and diversifying its 
scope  worldwide. More specifically, the aim of the Programme  is to redirect financial flows towards  more 
diversified private sector projects to better serve the low-carbon and resilien ce transition through:  
- the financing of more adaptation projects in agriculture/land use, water management , and 
infrastructure s/buildings resilient to climate change;  
- more green infrastructure, energy efficiency projects, forest programme s, and waste management on


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 93 
 C 
the mitigation si de; 
- targeting vulnerable populations or less served beneficiaries, including women and individuals  in 
remote area s. 
 
All the participating countries to the Programme have ratified the Paris Agreement. They have all expressed, in their 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), the need for private sector involvement. Additional flows of international 
climate finance in these countries will have transformational effect s on their economies by addressing the need for 
sustainable  financial systems.  
Based on this joint approach, the Programme will provide differentiated response s according to every local need. The 
strategic context of each country in which the Programme will be deployed is described in the attached country forms.  
Each country form presents:  
- A brief description of the programme application and targeted results areas  
- The stakeholder consultation process  
- The project description in the country , including the strategic context and market potential, experience in 
climate finance, project’s objectives and description, the expected paradigm shift , and the  potential and  
sustainable development potential  
- The timeline and financial elements of the project  
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
Emission baseline and objective of change  
The Programme  targets diverse contexts of carbon intensity: from 0.64 ktCO2eq/capita (Kenya, WRI/CAIT, 2014) to 
9.74 mtCO2eq/capita ( South Africa , WRI/CAIT 2014). It aims to target companies in a wide range of climate -relevant 
sectors , as well as in a wide range of economic contexts. Mitigation achievements will rely mainly on the demand of the 
final beneficiaries themselves: the Programme  will guide eligibility criteria but will adapt to local demand. This flexible 
approach does not allow for an exact calculation of CO2eq emissions that will be offset. Nevertheless, based of AFD ’s 
track record with the SUNREF mechanism across the target countries in the last decade, it is estimate d that the whole 
Programme has the potential to cut around 2,300,000 tCO2eq/year compared to the baseline scenario.  
 
Per capita emission in beneficiary countries, including agriculture and forest sectors (WRI/CAIT, 2014)  
Beneficiary  tCO2e per 
capita   Beneficiary  tCO2e per 
capita  
Africa :      
Benin  2.29    
Burkina Faso  1.85    
Cameroon  8.84      
Côte d’Ivoire  1.74     
Egypt  2.97  Latin -America :   
Kenya  0.64    
Madagascar  2.1  Ecuador  5.94 
Mauritius  4.62    
Morocco  2.34    
Namibia  8.29    
Nigeria  2.79    
Senegal  2.09      
South Africa  9.74      
Tanzania  5.48      
Togo  1.88


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 93 
 C 
Uganda  1.54      
 
Vulnerability baseline and objective of change  
According to the ND -GAIN index ranking, 10 target countries are in the first quartile in terms of resilience, i.e. among 
the least resilient countries worldwide (Benin, Burkina  Faso , Cameroon, C ôte d’Ivoire, Kenya, Madagascar, Nigeria, 
Tanzania, Togo, and Uganda – ND-GAIN, 2016). Four countries are in the second quartile ( Ecuador, Egypt, Namibia, 
and Senegal). The remaining eight countries are in the third quartile.  
 
Most  of the target countries are therefore severely vulnerable to climate change , which mean there are potential 
opportunities for the private sector in terms of adaptation investments. The medium vulnerable recipient countries have 
climate policies in some cases, which will act as an enabling environment for the Programme . They  also have 
significant market size s (for example Mauritius, and Morocco). In this context , the Programme  aims to boost emerging 
climate resilient business by plugging additional money into the banking service s to accelerate investment in the climate 
sector and to demonstrate additional business  opportunities in a changing climate, both for companies and financial 
service providers. Given the average size of  the project s supported in the SUNREF portfolio and the preliminary 
pipeline identified in the country notes, it is estimated that more than 450 companies will develop climate resilience 
investment and services, which will contribut e to the resilience pathway of their local economy. The total number of 
beneficiaries from increased resilience is estimated  to be 1. 3 million.  
 
Key barriers and challenges  
Depending on the local context, a number of obstacles can hold back the implementation of climate  investments . These 
are:  
• Policy and regulatory barriers : lack of legal structures and systems to push the market and open up the 
sector; lack of climate and environmental regulation and legal binding targets which is often a hindrance to 
progress in the sector; lack of incentives for climate investments; lack of planning, policy and regulation 
capacity in: energy planning and modelling integration of RE into energy planning, and capacity in integrated 
climate resilience issues into policy frameworks; Target setting; Grid integration; Policy frameworks for mini 
grids; Support for regulatory frameworks (PPAs etc); Market regulation particularly for eq uipment 
standardization; etc.  
• Financial barriers : high perceived risk of climate related investments, limited or inappropriate financial 
instruments (interest rate and tenor) to incentivize investments, preference for short -term benefices rather than 
long term benefices, lack of attractiveness of climate finance resources, lack of financing structures and 
systems, high cost of capital, etc.;  
• Technical barriers : limited access to technology; insufficient experience of LFPs and private sector companies 
in originating commercially viable climate related projects; lack of technical knowhow among LFPs and private 
sector companies to assess the financial and technical feasibility of climate related loan applications and 
investment proposals; lack of awareness amo ng LFPs and private sector companies about the benefits of 
climate related projects; lack of awareness about energy costs saving opportunities and of the positive impacts 
that sustainable energy production and consumption have on energy security, environme ntal benefits, health 
and livelihoods in general . 
Consequently, the specific objectives of the Programme will:  
1. For the LFP, to scale up climate finance in the countries targeted by the Program me by: 
- addressing financial barriers : 
o financing pilot and innovative projects and ensuring a significant dissemination for such projects  
- addressing technical / institutional barriers : 
o building the capacity of LFPs for the identification and implementation of adaptation and mitigation 
projects  
o promoting sound envi ronmental and social risk management and gender policy in operations  
o building LFPs’ climate marketing and communication strategies  
- addressing policy and regulatory barriers : 
o helping LFPs in taking an active stance in the national/regional/international dialogue on climate 
finance


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 93 
 C 
 
2. For the end beneficiaries, to have a structural effect to ensure their mobilization in the long run by:  
- addressing financial barriers : 
o addressing the private sector needs (the demand) with adapted tools (including financial and  technical 
innovation)  
- addressing technical / institutional barriers : 
o increasing competitiveness of the private sector thanks to up -to-date technologies and/or regulatory 
compliance  
o creating new job opportunities in the green economy  
o disseminating technical know -how and good practices, thus ensuring technological transfer and 
ownership  
o reducing the negative impacts on the population and on the local and global environment by building a 
resilient economy and reducing CO2 emissions  
 
3. For the local Governments, to serve key public climate -related policies and NDCs implementation by:  
- addressing policy and regulatory barriers : 
o supporting delivery of NDCs and the global 2°C target  
o contributing to giving feedback to governments to ensure impro vement in public policies (reduction of 
grants of subsidies to fossil fuels, financial and technical support to the private sector, etc.)  
o participating  in institutional debates and policy dialogue on climate finance, to support, example work 
with local regulators to create simplified regulatory frameworks / support the national regulatory and 
legal frameworks to drive investment in low emission technolog ies. 
 
C.3. Project / Programme  Description  
 
The Programme  will have three complementary components:  
 
Component 1. Credit facilities to local financial partners with adapted financial incentives and eligibility criteria 
tailored to foster the best local climate investments . The funds provided under the Programme  to the LFP will be 
on-lent to the final beneficiaries for financing investments that fit with these defined eligibility criteria.   
The financial  and technical eligibility criteria will be refined according to :  
o The TFSC Programme’s objectives ; 
o The logical framework and associated impact indicators detailed in Section H ; 
o The indicative list of climate technologies eligible for investment through the TFSC Programme (in Annex A) ; 
o The national context  of each country of intervention (existing market barriers, legal framework for green 
investments, bank appetite for specific sectors, etc.) .  
The list of eligibility criteria will be defined by AFD teams in coordination with LFPs during the appraisal proc ess. They  
will ensure that investments have maximum climate and development impacts in line with the local public policies and 
NDCs.  
 Similarly, financial incentives may include longer ten ure, grace periods, lower interest rates , or investment premiums 
depending on the local needs . The financial gap to close can be very different across countries and sectors, LFP s, and 
project developers. For instance, in most of the SUNREF programme s, this concessional/grant portion is essential to 
maintain the attractiveness of the climate eligible investments and to ensure the fulfilment of high requirements in terms 
of impacts and outputs for such projects.  
Component 2. Dedicated technical assist ance (TA) programme s. This component  will predominantly be assigned 
to the credit facility to support and expand the financing market for climate investments. The technical assistance of the 
Programme  aims at removing technical barriers at the level of both LFPs and project developers . Technical assistance 
includes:


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 93 
 C 
a. support for the identification and development of eligible and bankable climate -related projects : 
building of the LFPs’  pipeline of projects and programme s, eligibility assessment of sponsors’ projects, review 
and improvement of projects’ business models  carried by project developers , etc. The TA is tailored to the 
size and complexity of the project and can be provided at all project stages  for both LFPs and project 
developers  (feasibi lity study for developing a project idea, support with the loan application, technical -financial 
assessment of the project, monitoring of implementation, and verification);  
b. support in the definition and implementation of LFPs’ climate strategies : definitio n of climate 
objectives/indicators within the LFP  in line with the public policy, setting up of dedicated operational 
procedures, strategies and internal organization of the team, establishment of assessment tools for climate 
related projects (CO 2 measurement, etc.), knowledge transfer on climate -related technologies, etc.;   
c. assistance in the management of environmental and social risks : assessment of the financial, 
reputational and legal risks in sectors that can have significant E&S impacts, meas uring the resilience of 
companies to climate change  to anticipate and mitigate the risk of environmental non -compliance, etc.;  
d. support in the definition and implementation of a gender policy : gender diagnosis  within the LFPs  and 
development of related action plan,  formalisation of gender policy and gender standards, training about 
gender equality  to raise awareness  among the LFPs’ employees , etc.;  
e. support for marketing and communication activities : structuring a climate  offer, defining a  related 
marketing plan, providing leaflets and communication tools  for LFPs  to promote the offer , etc. with the aim to 
develop the visibility of LFPs’ climate  offers among the public, stimulate  the demand for such offers, and  
therefore bridge the gap between suppl y and demand  for climate -related financial tools .  
The capacity building activity will benefit approximately 1 200 bank officers that will develop skills in the identification of 
and support for climate relevant projects even beyond the time span of the Programme.  
 
For more details on the TA activities , please refer to Section C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements .  
 
The TA is often essential for the success and sustainability of the Programme : strengthening capacities and raising 
awareness of  local financial institutions and their clients , as well as other key local  stakeholders (governments, 
professional organizations, etc.) , is needed to create a favo urable environment and to ensure the development of 
climate finance in the long run. AFD’s approach to TA is complementary to that of  other international financial 
institutions , as AFD systematically looks for a local institution to be responsible for the TA.  The local institution  
responsible for TA will be selected based on the expertise needed to support the project, and the synergies this 
institution could generate  with associated local networks and local authorities. The aim is  to select a local institution 
able to draw from the experience of the project implementation to nurture policy dialogue and structure a lasting pool  of 
expertise.  
Component 3. Credit guarantees  of up to 70% per loan will be proposed in order to share the credit risk between the 
LFP and AFD in cases where the LFP does not want to bear the full risk (e.g. high -risk investments because of the 
targeted sector or country). This risk will then be counter guaranteed by  GCF and AFD as shown in the Term Sheets. 
Indeed, a significant number of challenges specific to climate investments (e.g. uncertain rates o f return or financial 
modelling  issues, high collateral requirements, risk of new technologies, off -taker risk) have been identified in many 
countries. Guarantee schemes can address some of these barriers and help unlock private investment by leveraging 
additional financing, functioning in a countercyclical manner, and effectively supporting policy objectives. Thanks to the 
afore mentioned effective leverage ratio they provide, guarantees are typically more cost -efficient than other 
interventions.  
Concerning the guarantee component , it is expected to operate in the following way : 
Step 1: The LFP receives a credit request for investment by a company. If the credit risk is estimated to be too high to 
be borne by the LFP on its own, the LFP requests a silent loan guarantee to AFD. The company will not be informed 
about the guarantee in order not to distort its behaviour . 
Step 2: After assessment of the company and its investment, AFD approves or declines the request. The loan can be 
guaranteed by up to 70%. As soon as the guarantee is approved, the LFP can grant the loan to the company.  
Step 3: The company then starts to pay interest and to repay the loan. Based on the outstanding principal amount , the 
LFP pays an annual commission to AFD. If the company stops repaying  the loan, the LFP can claim the guarantee from


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 93 
 C 
AFD. Trigger events for claiming a guarantee are: an acceleration event expressed by the bank, the company is in a 
payment default situa tion, or the client is insolvent.  
Step 4: AFD then claims the counter guarantee to GCF who will be requested to proceed to a repayment of the 
outstanding principal amount according to the GCF coverage as defined in the Term Sheets.  
 
Guarantees will be granted over the same period as the loans, namely 3 years. For Portfolio Guarantees an additional 
imputation period of 2 years needs to be added, during this period the different loans granted by the LFI can be 
included into the Portfoli o Guarantee. Claims are expected during 15 years following the signature of the last guarantee 
with LFI. Subsequently, a settlement period of 3 years for the balance payment should be counted.  
The illustration  below  summarizes the specific implementation a rrangement  of the guarantee component of the 
Program me to be deployed in each country:


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 93 
 C 
 
The following illustration summarizes the implementation scheme  of the Program me to be deployed in each country . 
 
 
 
An operational manual  will be  built at the Programme level to further detail, (i) the c ontext of the Programme, (ii) the role 
of the main stakeholders, (iii) the eligibility of investments and (iv) the operational monitoring schemes, etc. TFSC 
operational manual will be built in particular considering the GCF specific objectives, the TFSC logical framework and 
impact indicators , and the indicative list of climate technologies  eligible for investment . 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme  Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
 
 AFD has local-offices in each target country and has therefore extensive and comprehensive knowledge of the local 
context (incl. climate policies and targets, subsidies and pricing structures, etc.), which will be leveraged in the 
framework of the Programme’s impl ementation to assess the market potential and address the financial and technical 
barriers to climate finance in the targeted countries.  More specifically, AFD local offices have a strong knowledge and 
experience of LFPs as AFD is already in a business rel ationship with many of them and can therefore capitalize on the 
feedback and lessons learned from previous experiences.   
 
AFD has been very active in the target regions as indicate in the figure below .


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 93 
 C 
 
 
 
 
AFD has a number of existing programmes including SUNREF,  Agreenfi, Adapt’Action  and ARIZ upon which the GCF 
Programme will build . 
 
Background information  on SUNREF  
AFD has launched the SUNREF initiative  in 2006. To date, 50 SUNREF projects have been successfully implemented 
in partnership with 70 local banks in  more than  30 countries, for a total commitment of over EUR 2. 6bn of loans 
allocated by AFD, including EUR 1. 9bn already disbursed.   
Here below are two short video that explain the structuration and implementation of a SUNREF project:  
SUNREF: How is a green finance project structured?  
SUN REF: How is a green project implemented?  
 
Below is a map of SUNREF’s ongoing or achieved programmes:


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 93 
 C 
 
 
 
Concrete examples of SUNREF programme  are: 
• Success story 1: Mitigation project in Kenya turning avocado waste into green energy  (2015)  
The objective of the project “Olivado Biogas” was to turn avocado pulp into biogas and to use the resultant biogas to 
run the oil factory Olivado, an avocado oil production company based in Kenya.  Due to the need for sustainable energy 
supply, Oli vado ventured into biogas production with the financial support of SUNREF East Africa, using the avocado 
waste to produce biogas.  Olivado has installed 2 digesters financed by SUNREF East Africa to produce 300 KW of 
renewable energy, which allows to power  the entire factory.  The project resulted in the production of 460 MWh/year of 
green energy, which has led to 1031 tCO2 emission reductions on an annual basis, providing important mitigation 
efforts. The total project cost was USD 1.7 million, of which AF D contributed to USD 1.5 million as a part of the Chase 
Bank SUNREF credit facility.  
Thanks to SUNREF East Africa, Olivado was able to access financing in order to invest in the construction of a biogas 
power plant in Kenya. AFD’s role was to validate the technical choices proposed in the design of the project, to ensure 
that Olivado purchased performant equipment at affordable prices, as well as to make sure that production and 
consumption of energy was optimised. This technical assistance was highly value d as biogas investments are a 
typically technically complex form of renewable energy. AFD’s support also gave confidence to the partner bank, Chase 
Bank to move forward with the project.   
The project results in additional co -benefits. Environmental co -benefits include landfill waste avoidance, as previously 
90% of avocado pulp was wasted during the oil production process. This resulted in the reduction of methane 
emissions. The biogas plant also provides a stable and consistent source of electricity which is important as Olivado 
was suffering significant losses as a result of frequent power cuts which negatively impacts the avocado ripening 
process. The project also provides social benefits to the community as the company operates under fairtrade principles . 
This means a premium paid by consumers is available to be invested into community development projects such as 
schools, basic infrastructure such as water wells.  The produced electricity powers the factory and the excess energy is 
used for powering tract ors of local farmers. Olivado guarantees employment and a market to local communities for the 
abundant avocado crop, ultimately providing long -term benefits to the local economy.  
• Success story 2:  Adaptation project on Mauritius Island in the agriculture sector at Omnicane (2015)  
Omnicane, one of the largest sugar  producer and refinery company on Mauritius Island, specialises in growing sugar 
cane and in producing refined sugar and has now diversified into energy production thanks to the financial and 
technical support provided by the SUNREF programme. The project objective was to use the waste products from the 
sugar cane industry to produce ethanol and sustainable energy. The project involved the construction of an ethanol


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 93 
 C 
production plant from the distil lation of molasses.  All the company’s energy needs are provided through the combustion 
of bagasse (fibre residue from sugar cane).  
For a total project cost of EUR 15.6 million, AFD contributed to EUR 3.5 million through their partner bank SBM. AFD 
also pr ovided technical assistance to ensure that the environmental benefits were fully optimised, and to support 
Omnicane to define their MAAS (Multi Annual Adaptation Strategy) for the sugar industry. The project resulted in the 
emission reduction of 24,000 tCO 2 per year.  
The project provides a good example of a closed -loop production as a number of the by -products are used as a 
revenue -generating output as opposed to being wasted. The by -projects produced by the ethanol distillery include 
bioethanol, natural fe rtilizers (72,000 tons per year) and alimentary CO2 to supply the local gas -drink market. Benefits 
for the environment include a reduction of imports of chemical fertilisers and fossil fuel dependence. This operation is 
well aligned with the government’s a mbition to transition the sugar industry towards greener production.  
 
• Success story 3: Mitigation project in Benin using solar mini grid to electrify a poultry farm (2016)  
In order to cut its diesel consumption and secure its energy supply, the Beninese c ompany PA CONSEILS benefited 
from the support of AFD through SUNREF program. Thanks to financial investments and a tailor -made support, PA 
CONSEILS was able to supply so lar energy to its poultry farm.  
The company Productions Animales Conseils (PA CONSEILS)  is a consulting agency in livestock production based in 
Cotonou. As the farm is located four kilometers away from energy grid, it required the development of an autonomous 
and reliable solution to cover its energy needs in a stable and continuous way, in particular to supply its incubators, 
which must operate 24/7.  
To respond to these energy supply needs, and for economic and environmental reasons, PA Conseils decided to invest 
in an autonomous solar photovoltaic facility to supply electricity to its farm.  This project consists in building a 11 kWp 
rooftop solar power station, in setting up a battery system of 200 Ah (16 batteries), and in building an under ground mini 
grid of 400 meters.  
Thanks to SUNREF, PA Conseils benefited from financial and technical s upport through specialized experts to realize 
this renewable energy project. Orabank Benin, SUNREF West Africa partner bank, granted a €30,000 credit to finance 
the building of a photovoltaic mini power station in one of its farms and to cover nearly 80% o f the project financial 
requirements.  
In addition to financial support, the experts of SUNREF West Africa technical assistance conducted an overall project 
assessment: the identification of investment opportunities, the set -up and follow -up of the project,  the selection of the 
most adapted technologies and the follow -up of environmental and so cial impacts of the investment.  
The 11kWp photovoltaic power station will be able to produce around 10,7 MWh of green energy per year. It already 
supplies energy to th e two farm incubators 24/7, which energy needs are evaluated to 9,36 MWh per year. The 
available energy surplus will supply the other farm installations through the underground mini grid built in the framework 
of the project.  
Thanks to SUNREF West Africa, PA Conseils could acquire quality, efficient energy equipment at attractive conditions 
and benefited from the support of experts to get advice on its investment selection.  
 
Other success stories can be found here below with testimonies from our local finan cial partners and projects 
developers in South Africa and Mauritius:  
SUNREF: Encouraging green energies in South Africa  
SUNREF: Financing solar energy in Mauritius  
 
Overall, SUNREF projects have contributed to  : 
- 15 million CO2 teq saved per year  
- 1.1 billion kWh saved per year  
- 670 MW  of new green capacity


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 93 
 C 
- 2.5 million MWh of green energy generated per year  
Alongside its operational programme s, AFD also wishes to provide its partner banks with an opportunity to exchange 
experiences and best practices across continents and topics, institutions and methods, and operations and risk 
management. T he SUNREF Club is a community whose members all shar e the same goals and challenges in order to 
implement a successful ecological transition. AFD is strongly convinced this community can play a key role to bring 
innovative ideas to international policy  makers on green finance. The first SUNREF Club w orkshop  took place in 
Marseille in June 2016  and the second workshop in the Republic of Mauritius  in November 2017.  The workshop s 
allowed for successful technical exchanges among participants on methods, processes, and tools to better mainstream 
green finance.  
More information on SUNREF ’s existing projects and partners can be found  here:  
www.sunref.org/projet/  
https://www.sunref.org/en/partenaires/banques/  
 
Background information on AGREENFI  
AGREENFI  supports the transformation of the practices of partner financial institutions to promote financing for 
economic activities, including agricultural activities, in rural areas. These activities mainly focus on family farms, 
producers’ organizations, cooper atives, as well as microenterprises and small and medium -sized enterprises.  
Thanks to a range of financial services tailored to the needs of local financial institutions, as well as customized 
institutional and technical assistance, AGREENFI also supports the implementation of local public policies for 
agriculture and rural territories. The ultimate objective is to facilitate access to appropriate financial services and 
technical, financial and management assistance for rural and agricultural actors. AGREEN FI thereby stimulates the 
development of productive agricultural activities and their integration into value chains, basic services and non -
agricultural income -generating economic activities.  
AGREENFI is based on four main operating methods which increase  and improve the local range of services (tailored 
to the specific nature of agricultural and rural activities) and reduce risks for actors who contribute to financing the 
sector. The four methods are as follows:  
Appropriate financial resources for local financial institutions  
- A guarantee  mechanism for financial institutions  
- Support for capacity building for financial partners and actors in the agricultural and rural sector  
- A possible investment grant mechanism for project initiators.  
 
AGREENFI has been supporting the development of the practices of financial actors and helping countries address 
development challenges since 2008. 64 projects and EUR 682m have been committed for sustainable investments to:  
- Promote access for rural actors to financial services and thereby allow them to protect themselves against 
economic shocks  
- Develop non -agricultural economic activities in rural areas and support the processing of agricultural products  
- Support the structuring of sectors and contract farming  
- Help agribusinesses upgrade to health standards  
- Promote the protection of natural resources, as well as climate change adaptation and mitigation  
- Assist actors in sustainable forest management  
By ensuring the viability of production systems and de veloping productive agricultural practices, AGREENFI contributes 
to reducing vulnerabilities and to improving incomes and living conditions for rural populations. The program also helps 
the agriculture sector strengthen its resilience to climate change by its contribution to preserving ecosystems and 
building its adaptation capacities.  
More information and projects details can be found here: AGREENFI  AFD's agricultural finance label  
Here below a  short  video summarizing the structuration and implementation of an AGREENFI project :  
AGREENFI: How is an agriculture finance project structured ?


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 93 
 C 
 
Background inform ation on ARIZ  
ARIZ  is AFD’s guarantee  mechanism providing MSMEs with access to finance. Created in 2007, ARIZ offers partial risk 
coverage to financial institutions (FI) guaranteeing their MSME loan portfolio. It thus supports the development of loan 
activity targeting micro -enterprises, SMEs and microfinance institutions (MFIs), which essentially decreases the 
financing gap MSMEs are confronted with. The facility is based on a shared loss mechanism between AFD and the FI:  
in case of default of payment by the creditor, the FI receives a first payment (advance payment) representing 25% of 
the estimated loss based on the outstanding capital and the estimated value of the collaterals.  After the indemnification 
period , a final payment (balance payment) is made to the financial institution , taking into account the collaterals which 
could have been recovered.  
ARIZ offers eligible FI either a single deal guarantee scheme or a portfolio guarantee scheme in EUR, USD , or the 
respective local currency.  
- The ARIZ Individual Guarantee is granted on a loan -by-loan basis. Based on the credit file produced by the FI, 
AFD provides a silent sub -participation of up to 50% with a guarantee amount not exceeding 2 M  EUR over a 
tenor of 2 -12 years.  
- The ARIZ Portfolio Guarantee is a partial guarantee (up to 50%) on a pre -defined future loan portfolio of the FI. 
Over a period of 2 years and up to a pre -defined portfolio guarantee amount, all loans granted by the bank are 
automatically included if  they adhere to a set of eligibility criteria: 1 -7 years loan maturity, 10 -300 K  EUR loan 
amount,  as well as  other criteria (e.g. geographical restriction, limitation to certain sectors, etc.).  
 
The guarantees will be granted in local currency or, if requested by the LFP, in EUR or USD. This implies that  if 
the guarantee is claimed,  the payment to the LFP will be made in the local currency as well. Therefore, in case 
of a guarantee provided in local currency, the counter -guarantee will cover the equiva lent amount in EUR or  
USD.   
AFD has established an ARIZ partnership with over 100 financial institutions. The mechanism is available in 39 
countries in AFD’s geographical areas of operation, mainly in West and Central Africa (80%), but also in the Caribbean 
(AFD has local agencies in  Haiti and the Dominican Republic), South east Asia , and the Mediterranean Region.  
Since 2007 , AFD has issued more than 850 M  EUR of guarantees. In total, 7,500 loans have been guaranteed with an 
average amount of 240 K  EUR. ARIZ has contributed to:  
- the fi nancing of more than 6,000 SMEs  
- the creation or sustainment of 200,000 jobs  
 
As part of the ARIZ partnership, AFD has founded the “Club ARIZ ”, a community uniting the stakeholders of SME 
financing in order to encourage  reflection on current challenges on the field, such as digitalization, the assessment of 
start-ups and very young businesses , and adequate loan structuring. Eighteen FI from the countries of intervention 
were present at the annual workshop in March 2018.  
 
Adapt’Action  
 
AFD has launched Adapt’Action  to support countries seeking technical assistance for the institutional, methodological 
and operational implementation of their commitments in relation to climate change.  
 
With an objective of EUR 30 M over a four -year period, Adapt’Action is support ing 15 countries with a priority 
focus on Africa, the least developed countries (LDCs), and Small Island developing States (SIDS), which are 
among the most vulnerable countries to climate change.  
 
The Adapt’Action program me aims to bring about climate projects that can be financed by AFD and international


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 93 
 C 
climate finance. Priority is given to  adaptation to the impacts of climate change, a field for which the most vulnerable 
count ries have expressed a specific need for assistance.   
 
This facility ultimately aims at giving countries the technical and institutional tools they need to strengthen climate 
governance and mobilize international climate finance (such as GCF) and bi/multila teral banks (such as AFD) to scale 
up their action and therefore produce a leverage effect.  
 
Adapt’Action is based on the three following areas of intervention (complementary and carried out simultaneously):  
• Support for climate capacity building and govern ance for the consolidation, implementation, and supervision of 
the NDCs;  
• Support for a better integration of the commitments made in the NDCs into sectoral public policies, particularly 
in the field of adaptation to climate change (water resource managemen t, agriculture, management of extreme 
climate events, etc.);  
• Support for the preparation of structural program mes in the field of adaptation to climate change with the view 
to help access international climate finance.  
 
As of February 2017, eight identific ation missions had been conducted in the first beneficiary countries of the 
Adapt’Action Program me: the Comoros, Niger, the Dominican Republic, Tunisia, Madagascar , Mauritius, Guinea 
Conakry, and the Congo. These missions analyzed the specific vulnerabilities to climate change of each country, 
identified the priority sectors, and determined potential areas of technical assistance and capacity building to be 
deployed by Adapt’Action.  While continuing the ongoing work with our first country partne rs, seven additional countries 
are being considered for 2018.  
 
The implementation of the Adapt’Action Programme will pave the way for the GCF Programme implementation, 
as it will help strengthen the intervention framework in the countries that are part of  the two programmes:  
- Memoranda of understanding have already been signed with Madagascar and Mauritius;  
- Senegal, Côte d’Ivoire, and Cameroon are included in the 2018 work program me. 
Background information on Proparco  
Proparco ’s strategic orientations are fully in line with the UN’s SDGs and, as far as climate is concerned, the 
operational mandate entrusted by Proparco’s board specifically incorporates SDG #13 “climate action”, SDG #7 
“affordable and clean energy” , and SDG #12 “responsible consumption and p roduction”.  
In terms of climate finance, Proparco has pledged to deploy €2bn between 2017 and 2020. In 2017 itself, Proparco 
committed €647  M of new climate financing, i.e. over 150% of the annual target set out for 2017. Climate activities 
accounted for 4 7% of Proparco’s total operations in 2017. In 2016 , Proparco had engaged €504m of new climate 
financings, representing 39% of its total commitments.  
Financial intermediation represents on average about 40% of Proparco’s climate activities.  
Over the last 1 0 years, Proparco has deployed over €1bn of climate loans through financial intermediation with 
partnerships forged with more than 25 banks in 20 countries. Proparco’s offer to banks in this area typically consists of 
a financial component at market condit ions and, when needed, a non -financial component such as technical support.  
A typical example is the long -term partnership forged with Garanti Bank in Turkey. Proparco helped set up a 
sustainability approach/department within the bank back in 2009 , while encouraging Garanti Bank to finance renewable 
energy projects. The first two financings granted to Garanti Bank ( in 2009 and 2011) enabled the bank to (i) finance 10 
wind and hydro projects , representing an installed capacity of almost 600 MW and (ii) beco me the largest financier of 
wind farms in Turkey with an estimated market share of 40%. In 2016, Proparco sanctioned a third climate loan to 
Garanti Bank for 100  M EUR . The latter included both more restrictive eligibility criteria and a commitment from th e


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 93 
 C 
bank to shift towards more innovative projects.  
In 2016 and 2017, Proparco implemented innovative projects, contributing to:  
- structuring the first North African FI green bond (in Morocco);  
- fostering green sustainable buildings in the textile sector ( in Bangladesh);  
- structuring first investments in the off -grid sector (in Africa);  
- launching the w orld’s largest green bond fund.  
 
The strong experience of  AFD and Proparco in  climate finance will be employed and leveraged throughout the 
Programme implementation.  
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
 
A market overview and potential are provided in the country forms in the Annex with detailed information on:  
• relevant national policies to ensure the project  enables the investment environment in the relevant sectors;  
• capacity of appropriate intermediaries in the region to support the Programme ; 
• investment potential, evidence of demand and flow of suitable subprojects to finance, potential project 
developers , and identification of the barriers that impede investment financing;  
• identification and availability of the necessary products and services;  
• the financial and technical assistance framework necessary to create the investment opportunities;  
• types of projec ts to be targeted and their anticipated financing.  
 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
All operations financed by AFD are required to comply with the national regulations of the country where the operation 
is implemented, including regulations for financial and accounting, anti -money laundering, environmental and social 
issues , and operating licenses and permits needed.  
In addition, since regulations in the countries where AFD operates are sometimes incomplete or being developed, AF D 
uses a number of rules, good practices , and directives produced by international standard -setting organizations as a 
reference.  
In particular, in the framework of the credit facility agreement, LFPs will commit to:  
• apply the procedures of implementation  of vigilance with respect to its customers,  in accordance with the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards on money laundering;  
• promote compliance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social standards  and fundamental conventions 
of the Internatio nal Labour Organization (“ILO”).  
 
Describe applicable taxes an d foreign exchange regulations. Provide details on insurance policie s related to 
project/ programme . 
Usually, AFD is exempted from taxation. However, this shall be analyzed for each country using  legal and TA services. 
For Foreign Exchange regulation s, the LFP shall answer to the local regulation s set out by the Central Bank.  
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 93 
 C 
 
1. Agreement between GCF and AFD  
The Programme  is a multi -product offering (financial and technical assistance) to financial institutions in different 
countries and therefore needs to be multi -faceted , taking into account the provisions of the Accreditation Master 
Agreement.Drawing on the experience o f the AFD in designing such operations, the proposed structure is guided by 
the partnership arrangements, the scope of operations, and the need to ensure flexibility, effectiveness, transparency , 
and accountability. Important considerations taken into acco unt during the structuring of the Programme  include : (i) 
compliance with current AFD operational policies and procedures; (ii) simplicity in implementation; and (iii) acceptability 
of the structure to partners.   
The AFD will oversee the implementation and monitoring of the Programme  and take corrective action as necessary. 
The supervision and monitoring procedures of the Programme  will follow normal AFD requirements and will be in line 
with the GCF Results Management Framework (RMF) and Performance Manageme nt Framework (PMF). Each FI will 
be required to provide adequate periodic reporting to indicate progress on fund utilization as well as development 
outcomes, which will be complemented by regular supervision and monitoring on -site visits.  
The AFD team  in the local agencies and in the Paris headquarters will be responsible for structuring , implementation 
and global monitoring of the Programme.   
 
2. Credit Facility Agreement between AFD and LFPs  
Loan agreements will be signed with each of the selected LFPs. The loan agreement will specify the eligibility criteria , 
including the targeted final beneficiaries (see the description of operational arrangements below).  
 
The selection of the LFP depends on multiple criteria such as their credit risk, their stra tegy regarding climate finance, 
their appetite for such activities, the availability of staff who could be dedicated to climate finance (for instance if ther e is 
a coordinator engaged  on the topic). The selection will also be based on their client portfoli o (if it is energy -intensive or 
in a strategic sector which contribute to climate impacts in the country, if it is more focused on small and medium -scale 
loans), their internal procedures from the identification of projects at the level of commercial branc hes to the 
final execution of the loan (including their credit risk appraisal process). This selection is crucial to ensure a strong 
involvement of the LFP in the Programme (including in the long run).  It is possible to only work with one financial 
institution if the selection process doesn’t end up with other institutions fitting the criteria. In addition, in some emergi ng 
countries, certain local financial institutions have developed strategies/action s to finance climate investments 
(marketing, trainings, internal strategy, capacity building to their clients, etc.). They can bring this added value and go 
further with the adapted tools proposed by the Programme (developing new green loan products, furth er develop their 
portfolio of targeted clients, etc.).  
LFPs will identify the investment potential and the most promising thematic areas (renewables, energy efficiency, 
adaptation to climate change such as agro -forestry projects, water management projects,  etc.) within their existing 
clients or prospects in accordance with a set of eligibility criteria in line with the local public policy and climate change  
priorities. They will assess the creditworthiness of these potential eligible investments and structu re a financial offer in 
line with the needs of green projects to reduce the barriers to investment in the targeted country.   
 
In addition, AFD, as a financial institution, is subject to the French Banking Law and is bound by the French Monetary 
and Financi al Code (art. L561 -2 and onwards), which governs notably the fight against money laundering and -terrorist 
financing (AML/CFT) in all French financial institutions.  
  
Due to the specific nature of its activities and linked counterparts (which might differ from “conventional” banks i.e. : no 
deposit accounts of individuals or companies, no payment means nor fund transfer services), AFD set up an adapted 
internal AML/CFT procedure using a risk -based approach in accordance with French and EU regulations . Thes e 
procedural texts list a certain number of control points that AFD operational team must verify at every stage in the 
project life cycle in order to prevent and detect any AML/CFT risk or breach of national, UN or EU financial and trade 
sanctions. The ext ent of controls depends on the degree of AML/CFT risk posed by the counterpart, which is based on 
the AML/CFT risk classification matrix. The purpose of these control points is to ensure that AFD has extensive and up -


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 93 
 C 
to-date knowledge on the counterpart th roughout the business relationship. They are reflected in a set of due diligence 
efforts that must be carried out, which aim to identify and verify the identity of the counterpart and its ultimate beneficia l 
owners before beginning the business relationshi p (“Know Your Customer” or KYC efforts).  The frequency at which this 
data is updated depends on the level of risk that the counterpart represents with regards to money laundering and 
terrorist financing as sets out in AFD’S AML/CFT internal procedures.  
  
Under the Programme the AFD team will carry out due diligence and assessments on each project in line with AFD’s 
AML/CFT procedure. More specifically, AFD team will identify and verify the identity of and conduct due diligence on all 
LFPs and relevant share holders in order to identify the beneficial owner of the LFPs before entering in a business 
relationship and during the course of the business relation with the LFPs. AFD will also conduct mandatories financial 
and economical sanction lists’ screenings on its LFPs and relevant shareholders. In addition to these measures, AFD 
also set up in all its conventions specific clauses addressing AML/CFT, integrity and sanctions issues. For LFPs already 
in relationships with AFD, the Agency has filed existing LFPs ba ckground checks and exposure to risk with regards to 
AML/CFT, tax and other integrity issues.  
 
3. Guarantee agreement between AFD and LFPs  
If the risk of the eligible investment is perceived as too high by the LFP, the guarantee mechanism can be applied to 
share the credit risk. The loans will be made directly to the LFP . 
 
Guarantee agreements will be signed with LFPs. The guarantees shall be final loss guarantees in the form of both 
Individual or Portfolio Guarantees. The Guarantee agreement will specify the eligibility criteria and the targeted final 
beneficiaries.  
 
4. Grant  agreement between AFD and the local entity responsible for the TA  
Once the LFP is selected, a grant agreement will be signed between AFD and the local programme  entity responsible 
for the TA. The p roject management entity in charge of the TA will be in mo st cases the LFP (mostly for public financial 
institutions or development banks) or a local institution (Ministry, local association supporting private sector, chamber of 
commerce/ other business networks, etc.) or in some other cases , directly a consulting company. This entity shall i) 
ensure that the TA is operational from the start (in order to support the local stakeholders from the early stages of the 
investment) and ii) contribute to institutional changes in the country (through a policy dial ogue) . 
 
One consortium of consultants or several consultants responsible for the TA  shall then be procured  by the local entity . 
The consultants will provide a significant diversity of expertise and ensure follow -up of the projects financed by the LFP 
from the project idea until its implementation. The TA will also oversee  the LFP’ s climate strategy’s implementation and 
provide feedback to local authorities on the lessons learn ed from the implementation of the Programme . The TA will 
ensure a day -to-day implementation transverse follow -up of the different project’s aspects , whereas AFD will perform 
supervision missions regularly as requested in the credit agreements.  
 
Assistance to prepare the portfolio of investments  
The TA will provide marketing and tec hnical support to push for the identification and implementation of climate 
investments in close coordination with the local partner responsible for the implementation of the TA and the LFP (if 
different). The purpose is not only to create an initial pipeline of projects, but also to stimulate the continuous 
emergence of high quality sub -projects to ensure the sustainability of the Programme.  
The TA will also support potential investors , providing technical input for their feasibility studies/project b usiness 
plan/ structuring and input for preparing their loan application if needed. The TA will support investors throughout the 
sub-project process, from inception to completion.  
 
Selection of the investments financed by the Programme  
The TA will control the project compliance to eligibility criteria. After reviewing the relevant information provided, the TA 
will confirm whether the project meets the eligibility criteria for allocation of the project to the Programme. The TA will 
also confirm whether the p roposed performance indicators and expected values are relevant (MW installed, ha of agro -


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 93 
 C 
forestry, energy savings, reduction of CO 2 emission…).  The TA will base its appraisal on the review of supporting 
documentation, including feasibility studies. On thi s basis, AFD will provide or withhold its approval on the use of funds 
under the Programme and approve the disbursement of its loan , which will be on -lent by the LFP.  
 
Capacity building and transfer of knowledge, policy dialogue   
The TA will disseminate technical knowledge to allow new projects to be financed (replication effect), it shall liaise with 
local authorities to provide feedback on how public policy can be improved to catalyze the private sector leverage effect 
towards sustainable climate financ ing and investments. The TA will ensure the gradual empowerment of the local 
partners (including the LFP) to ensure the sustainability of these activities after the end of the project. This gradual 
empowerment will be implemented through actions such as:  (i) assisting the LFP in establishing a strategy for climate 
financing; (ii) building a sustainable green offer (including marketing, an Environmental and Social management 
system , and a gender policy); (iii) providing standardized documentation to recruit expertise; (iv) advice on human and 
financial  matters  which can be dedicated by the local financial institutions after the end of the project; (v) providing 
trainings, etc.  
This shall strengthen the local partners’ appraisal skills for specific projects li kely to be funded through the Programme. 
This will help develop a better understanding of existing technologies and a better awareness of the profitability of these 
investments, which will ensure the sustainability of their project appraisal practices once  the Programme terminates.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation of the Programme  
The TA will ensure the administrative, technical (key performance indicators such as greenhouse gas emission 
reductions in teq CO 2, total amount of investments financed ), and financial monitoring of the Programme  as a 
transverse  task applying to each TA sub -component . It will ensure the verification of project implementation through site 
visits and control of contractual documents/justifications on a sample basis. At the e nd of the Programme, an ex -post 
evaluation will be conducted to build on the lessons learn ed from this experience and further improve the Programme’s 
standards.  
 
Development of a climate finance community  
In parallel to the SUNREF programme, AFD has made a  dedicated platform available to climate finance actors (local 
financial institutions, companies, donors, and public authorities) which allows them to share, disseminate , and capitalize 
on best practices. This website gives an additional understanding of the green finance projects implemented, 
SUNREF’s innovative approach and its benefits, its partners, and the types of eligible financing. The website also 
provides brochur es and videos, documentation and toolkits on green finance and E&S management (for further 
information , see  www.sunref.org ). In addition, in 2016 , AFD initiated a SUNREF club which gathers its local financing 
partners and aims at creating an ecosystem for climate finance. Every year a three -day seminar is organized to provide 
actors in the sector with feedback on innovative and effective operational approaches, to present innovative pilot 
projects and technologies, to s hare experiences on the implementation of the SUNREF programme, to participate in 
site visits, and to deal with specific issues related to climate finance (e.g. green bonds issuance, risk management, 
etc.). Webinars are being implemented to promote dialogu e and community animation – some of them have been 
designed in cooperation with IDB.  
The Programme will benefit and add value to this community by engaging more local financial institutions and local 
stakeholders. The objective is to scale  up and boost th e climate finance community in the Southern countries.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME ME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 93 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/ Programme  Implementation  
The table below provides a tentative timeline for the implementation of the Programme :  
Start of Programme  implementation : Q1 2019 (expected effectiveness  date of FAA between GCF and AFD)  
 
Last date for AFD’s approval to LFPs : up to three years from the date of effectiveness of the FAAs ( expected Q1 2022 ) 
 
Total lifespan of the Programme : 20 years  from the l ast date for AFD’s approval to LFPs  (taking into account the monitoring of impacts)


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME ME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 93 
 C 
Component s and activities  
2019 
2020  
2021  
2022  
2023  
2024  
2025  
2026  
2027  
2028  
2029  
2030  
2031  
2032  
2033  
2034  
2035  
2036  
2037  
2038  
2039  
2040  
2041  
Component 1.  : Loan  
Sub-component: Mitigation/ Adaptation                         
Output 1. :  
 
Commercially 
viable climate -
related and 
sustainable 
projects are 
identified, 
financed and 
implemented  Activity 1.1:  
Providing loans 
supporting the 
financing of 
climate and 
sustainable 
investments 
(adaptation and 
mitigation)  Commitment  Q1   Q1                    
Drawdown  Q1      Q1                 
Repayment    Q1                    Q1 
Component  2. : Grant                         
Output 2. :  
 
Climate -related and 
sustainable projects 
technical and financing skills 
are successfully integrated  Activity 2.1: Identification  
& bankability  Q1       Q1                
Activity 2.2: Climate 
strategy  Q1       Q1                
Activity 2.3: E&S  risk 
management  Q1       Q1                
Activity 2.4: Gender  
mainstreaming  Q1       Q1                
Activity 2.5: 
Communication  
&marketing  Q1       Q1                
Component  3. : Guarantee  
Sub-component  : Mitigation/Adaptation                         
Output 3 . : 
 
Climate -related 
investments have 
access to finance 
projects are 
identified, 
financed and 
implemented  Activity 3.1:  
Structuring and 
signing 
Guarantee 
agreements 
between AFD and 
LFPs in line with 
the eligibility 
criteria for 
Guarantees.  Commitment  Q1   Q1                    
Imputation  Q1     Q1                  
Claim period  Q1                  Q1     
Settlements  Q1                     Q1


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME ME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 93 
 C 
  
 
The table below presents the typical timeline of a project to be financed under the Programme , from appraisal to completion : 
1. Project appraisal  
a. Selection and assessment of the LFP (incl. risks management, AML policy, E&S management system, 
activities and strategies regarding climate finance, etc.)  
b. Structuration of the Programme  in the selected country (financial and technical approach to be put i n place)  
c. AFD’s Board Approval  
2. Formalisation of the agreements  
a. Signing of the credit facility agreement(s)  and the portfolio guarantee agreement(s)  
b. Signing of the grant agreement in case there is a TA programme  Usually from 8 to 12 months  
3. Early stages of implementation  
a. Recruitment of consultants  
b. First Technical Assistance actions: pipeline consolidation, projects appraisals  
c. First disbursement of the credit facility  combined with signing Individual Guarantee agreement(s) if 
applicable  Usually from 6 to 14 months  
4. Follow up on Programme  implementation   
Follow -up on disbursements and instalments  
Monitoring of the TA action plan, impacts measurement, pursing dialogue with public bodies  Usually from 2 to 8 years  
5. End of the Programme   
Ex-post evaluation  Usually 6 months  
 
The Guarantee component will be completed as follows : 
1. Formalization of the agreements  
a. Signing of the Portfolio guarantee agreement(s) + 2 years of imputation period starting at the signature  
b. Grating of the Induvial Guarantees  Usually from 1 to 3 years + 2 
years  
2. Follow -up on guarantee mechanisms  
Payment of the called guarantees (including 3 years indemnification period for the final payment), considering the 
maximum maturity of the guaranteed loans of 1 5 years  
  
Usually from 1 to 2 3 years  
It is important to note that most guarantees are claimed (if they are claimed ) within two to three  years. This implies that the majority of the payments by 
GCF are expected between year two and five . The imputation period describes the period after the signature of a Portfolio Guarantee, when the LFP 
grants the loans which will be included into the Portfolio Guarantee.  
Please refer to the country forms for additional information at country level.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 93 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
i. The GCF has a crucial role to play in mobilizing private sector investments in climate mitigation and adaptation 
in developing countries. The GCF’s involvement in supporting the proposed Programme will directly allow AFD: 
to diversify/increase sectors of i ntervention and areas, , strengthen ing the involvement of private sector 
(MSMEs, riskier projects) .  This will have a particularly positiv e impact in climate resilience that are perceived 
by the private sector as expensive and complex because the environmental advantage of more resilient 
investments and practices is not well recognized . TA and the promotion of adapted financial tools such as 
guarantees  and concessional loans will give final beneficiaries the comfort to try innovative practices. The GCF 
funds, through the financing of TA, will help determine the best technical options, provide support for 
developing and appraising projects and r emove non -financial barriers. Softening the financial conditions 
through a lower interest rate and providing guarantees will cover the high upfront costs induced by new and 
innovative equipment and practices and allow the private sector to take more risks on projects often seen as 
non-priority investments. Therefore, the provided GCF tools will contribute to supporting a nascent green 
market.   
ii. to target new geographical areas where climate finance usually does not flow  
iii. to provide a wider range of financial instruments with the view to respond all of types of needs  
iv. to provide local financial institutions with a guarantee scheme that en courages them to invest in sectors that 
they traditionally do not venture.  
 
v. to target smaller and less served beneficiaries: small enterprises, women, individuals in remote areas, and 
more vulnerable communities . 
vi. to accompany second -tier banks  
vii. to structure a deeper public dialogue through local public entities about different areas  of impacts (financial 
regulation, fiscal policy, budgetary support mechanisms, etc.)  
viii. to provide additional grants for TA to counterparts in countries where AFD is not able to provide grants, to build 
banks’ capacities in mobilizing and managing internatio nal climate finance and to support the sustainability and 
transformational effect of the Programme  
ix. to increase the volume of climate financing and fill the market gap thanks to concessional funding where 
necessary  
 
Without GCF ’s contribution, it would  take considerably longer for existing market barriers to be removed . In the 
meantime, access to finance for climate investments would remain limited to a certain number of borrowers and remain 
too costly for many others . GCF ’s contribution  will unlock the considerable potential for climate mitigation and 
adaptation in many countries.  
More specifically, the added  value  of the GCF funding will help to operationalize the commitments made by the 
countries in the Paris Agreement and to serve as a concrete exampl e of actions which can be implem ented in the 
private sector.  
 
The demand from f inancial institutions for guarantees is substantial and AFD is currently unable to satisfy this demand 
with the ARIZ guarantee facility. In addition, a  large number of MSMEs (including , but not limited  to: green, agricultural, 
women -owned, youth, and start-up) are financially underserved and present a high-risk profile which ARIZ is unable to 
guarantee. ARIZ can not go beyond a certain risk threshold , due to constraints in the sustainability requirements of its 
financial model. Together with the GCF , AFD would be able to design a guarantee mechanism for climate -related 
investments, based on the successful ARIZ example , but able to finance high -risk sectors  and more important 
investments of up to 10 M  EUR.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 93 
 
 
 D 
D.2. Exit Strategy   
The GCF contribution will strengthen the LFPs’ capacity to identify, evaluate and finance climate change adaptation 
and mitigation projects by identifying markets, developing knowledge and structuring innovative financial products. The 
objective of the Programme is to sustainably  increase the LFP’s market share of climate change adaptation and 
mitigation projects. Providing capacity building to different stakeholders will ensur e the benefits will continue beyond 
the life of the project. The T A will contribut e to the LFPs’ strategy to become greener banks and to increase the portion 
of their portfolio on such projects. By combining both financing and technical skills, the Program me gives an 
outstanding advantage as it strengthens LFPs’ capacity to develop  more complex products that need to be 
commercially viable to be implemented in the market.  
 
TA to LFPs and project investors in how to prepare and appraise eligible projects will create favourable  conditions for 
the emergence of the corresponding markets in the longer run, ensuring a widespread roll -out of investments. 
Moreover, the profitability requ irements of the credit line instrument will be ensured , which will guarantee the 
replicability of the investment. With enhanced understanding of the climate change sectors and their profitability  in 
particular for mitigation projects , LFPs  are expected to continue to provid e finance to the  private sector . Following the 
successful track -record in lending to these projects, it is expected that there will be a greater demand for financing 
climate projects and that LFPs  will start using their own resources for climate lending.  
The Programme  will also disseminate its results through policy dialogue to increase awareness on replicable projects 
and contribute to the improvement of public policies.  
Lastly, the implementation of environmental and social risk management systems will enable the LFPs to disseminate 
good practices (Equator Principles) within financial institutions and will encourage the regulators to make these 
procedures mandatory.  The Programme  will have institutional impacts on the financial se ctor (environmental and social 
risk management system) and on the operationalization of national environmental policies  in the long run.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 93 
 
 E 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/ programme  to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
As part of its new Climate Strategy for 2017 -2022, AFD’s first commitment is to ensure a 100% Paris Agreement -
compatible activity: ma king all interventions consistent with low -carbon and climate -resilient development and 
support ing countries in their formulation of low -carbon and climate -resilient developm ent trajectories.   
AFD responds as a donor to countries’ transition challenges and to the expectations of the Paris Agreement , which  
require s the enhancement of its approach to the climate -development nexus . Therefore, AFD is shifting  its approach 
based on the direct impacts of projects , towards an approach that actively seek s the consistency of all interventions 
with low -carbon and climate -resilient development pathways.  
With regards to operational diligence processes, this evolution will  be based on the implementation of specific 
modalities that complement those already deployed within the Group:  
➔ For all countries, an analysis of their public policies, NDCs, prospects for low -carbon and climate -resilient long 
term trajectories, and the inclusion of these analyses in to the country intervention strategies.  
➔ A systematic analysis, within the framework of the Group’s sustainable development assessment, of the 
coherence of interventions with the countries’ low -carbon and resilient transition  trajectories, as well as how they play 
on the redirection of investments.  
A specific tool for the analysis of project consistency with low carbon and climate -resilient trajectories will be 
incorporated into the sustainable development assessment analysis framework in use at AFD. Consistency will be 
assessed on criteria including  alignment with climate policies, the effects on public policies, mobilization of financial 
and private actors, virtuous knock -on effects or, conversely , virtuous lock-in effects, a nd the management of 
uncertainty.  
Country and project analysis along these dimensions will allow de facto for selectivity of operations, in line with the 
objective of all interventions be ing consistent with long -term low -carbon and climate -resilient development.  
 
In accord ance  with the local context and climate policy of the country  being  targeted by the Programme , the funds 
will aim at financing various climate -friendly technologies and sect ors, including: RE production, EE, Housing, Water 
and Waste management, Agriculture and Forestry.  
Consequently, the main mitigation and adaptation indicators used to monitor the Programme ’s impacts will be as 
follows:   
 
Investment criterion  
Impact 
potential - 
MItigation  The Programme  supports the achievement of a transition towards a low carbon development 
pathway in participant countries through significant mitigation co -benefits:  
• 2,300,000  tons of CO 2 eq to be avoided or reduced per annum  
• 270,000 individuals (males and females) with improved access to low -emission energy 
sources  
• 360 MWs of low -emission energy capacity installed, generated and/or rehabilitated  
• 260 GWh e nergy intensity/improved efficiency of buildings, cities, industries and 
appliances  
• 53,000 h ectares of land or forests under improved and effective management that 
contributes to CO 2 emission reductions  
• 14 institutional and regulatory systems that improve incentives for low emission


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 93 
 
 E 
planning and development and their effective implementation  
Impact 
potential - 
Adaptation  The Programme  supports the achievement of a transition towards a resilient development 
pathway in participant countries through sizeable investment in climate resilient activities for 
local companies :  
• 1.3 million  expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries  
• 1.3 million  of males and females benefiting directly and indirectly from the adoption of 
diversified, climate -resilient livelihood options (including fisheries, agriculture, tourism, 
etc.) 
• 440 M€ of physical assets made more resilient to climate variability and change, 
considering human benefits  
• 220,000 males and females with year -round access to reliable and safe water supply 
despite climate shocks and stresses  
• 50,000 food-secure households (in areas/periods at risk of climate change impacts)  
• 8,000  males and females made aware of climate threats and related appropriate 
responses  
• 1,100 companies u sing of climate information products / services in climate -sensitive 
sectors  
• 14 institutional and regulatory systems that improve incentives for climate resilience 
and their effective implementation  
 
 
 
It should be noted that the climate impacts will be monitored at project level through a set of mitigation/adaptation 
indicators, defined in cooperation with the LFPs and in accordance with the projects and targeted sectors through the 
credit line, in line  with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Frameworks.  
The final impacts are not known ex  ante, as they will depend on the portfolio of eligible projects that the LFPs will 
present to the Programme  in line with the set of eligibility criteria proposed. The TA will be in charge of measuring 
and controlling these impacts.  
Expected impact targets are provided in section H.1  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t Annual  2,300,000


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 93 
 
 E 
core 
indicators  CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Lifetime  46,000,000  
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by 
gender  (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population , disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  260,000 direct beneficiaries and 
1,050,000  indirect beneficiaries (among 
whom 50% of women)  
Percentage 
(%) 0.20% (number of direct  and indirect  
beneficiaries to total population of the 
targeted countries)  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  1,200  bank officers  trained to develop technical and financing skills adapted to climate -related and 
sustainable projects  
680 companies successfully developing low carbon investment or  service  
450 companies successfully developing climate resilience investment and services  
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
Details of the GHG methodology applied by AFD are given in Annex B. A sectoral breakdown (e .g. renewable  
energy , EE, waste, etc.) of the Program me’s total financing (excluding the grant  and guarantee component s) has 
been elaborated based on the pre -defined sectors to be financed under the Programme ( Cf. country forms in the 
Annex).  
Average performance indicators (tCO 2eq avoided or reduced/M  EUR invested) were calculated for each sector 
based on:  
- 2014 -2016 SUNREF track record for EE/RE projects. In this case, impacts have been assessed ex ante by 
the partner banks with the support of the TA and subsequently consolidated and verified by the AFD tea m 
responsible for the SUNREF programme;  
- AFD carbon footprint assessment for sustainable land use sectors (agriculture and forestry) and waste 
management. In this case, carbon balances have been carried out by AFD climate experts and/or an 
independent third  party for direct project financing in the related sectors (please refer to Annex  B “AFD 
carbon footprint”)  
The expected metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided have been calculated by 
assuming that 60% of the Programme would be dedicated to mitigation projects, including RE (35%), EE (20%) , and 
waste management projects (5%). The calculation also includes the projects dedicated to ag riculture (25%) and 
forest (5%) sectors as cross -cutting investments. Investments in the water sector (10%) are excluded from the 
calculation , as they are considered mainly as adaptation.   
Finally, results have  been analysed  considering that impacts have been anticipated for both the project’s lifespan and 
afterwards, namely 20 years.  
 
On the adaptation side, direct beneficiaries of the Programme correspond to the number of people employe d by the 
companies developing climate -resilient investments or services through adaptation projects  and benefiting from the 
Programme . Adaptation projects represent 40% of the total financing Programme and are related to water 
management (10%), agriculture (25%) , and forest sectors (5%).  
Indirect beneficiaries are th e households  who benefit from the services of the companies financed by the 
Programme , which is rather conservative since the calculation doesn’t include the clients of the stakeholders of the


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 93 
 
 E 
companies benefiting from the Programme . 
It is estimated that 5 0% of the direct and indirect beneficiaries will be women, since the projects aim at addressing 
sectors and local issues involving men and women  indiscriminately . Please refer to the Annex Gender Equality 
Approach and Strategy . 
 
Describe how the project/ programme ’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator 
values for a similar project/ programme  in a comparable context).  
As an illustration, below are some of the cumulated impacts measured for all SUNREF programme s between 2 006 
and 2016 : 
• Over 50 projects successfully implemented by AFD since 2006  
• Over 70 partner financial institutions  
• Over EUR 2. 6 bn of loans allocated by AFD , including over EUR 1. 9 bn already disbursed  
• Annual reduction of 15 M tons of CO 2 equivalent  
• Annual saving of over 1 .1 bn KWh  
• Creation of a new green capacity of 670 MW  
• Annual generation of 2.5 M MWh of green energy  
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/ programme  investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
The Programme is innovative because it represents the first opportunity to invest at this scale in both mitigation and 
adaptation and to harness AFD’s lessons learned from implementing SUNREF since 2006. This will allow catalyzing 
at scale climate related investments by unlocking access to financing source through appropriate terms regarding 
investment size and risk -return profiles for priv ate sector. The Programme will support the rapid development of 
banking products targeting local companies, thus helping to leverage financing for similar projects and ensuring a 
widespread roll -out of investments: scalability is a core objective of the Pr ogramme.  
 
The Programme will leverage AFD’s networks with LFPs and link together private sector actors and local financial 
institutions for the benefit of scaling up low carbon investments worldwide. The rationale is that only the local 
financial sector ha s the reach and capacity to deliver climate finance to service the demand for investments in 
climate related solutions. Delivering these investments requires mechanisms that can identify, develop, finance and 
deliver large numbers of relatively small proje cts implemented in and by hundreds of private sector actors.  
 
AFD financial strategy aims to build inclusive, sustainable and responsible financial systems around the world 
through an intervention strategy with 3 priority objectives: to promote access to financial systems, to consolidate 
financial systems and to supp ort the emergence of a new model of sustainable finance. The proposed GCF 
programme is aligned with the AFD financial strategy and should enable financial systems to play a key role in 
speeding up the changes in the energy and environmental transitions.  
 
We estimate a replication multiple of at least 3 based on the large potential market size in the countries in which the 
Programme will be implemented, the strong demonstration effect of the financial instruments, and the technical 
assistance activities tha t will deliver change at a systemic level (institutional within LFPs and policy dialogue with 
governments). We have referred to the GEF indirect bottom -up “replication” and top -down “causality factor” 
methodologies (GEF STAP March 2013). We estimate that t he “causality factor” is 40% (modest).  
 
Financial intermediation is an efficient tool to build capacity, raise awareness among LFPs and sub -borrowers and 
enable large scale uptake of new product lines such as climate -related technologies. The transformatio nal benefits


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 93 
 
 E 
of the Programme will include:  
• Implementing and adapting public policies to private companies : having a demonstration effect on how 
the private sector can serve the public policy and contribute to the improvement of these policies towards the 
private sector by participating to institutional debates and policy dialogue on climate finance and 
environmental protection.  
• Accessing and developing new markets related to the climate transition  by providing dedicated 
financing and consulting services,  
• Creating new job opportunities in the green economy  
• Structuring a sustainable banking offer  around the green economy  
• Disseminating technical know -how, good practices and building local expertise  through the local 
entities that will implement the technical a ssistance  
• Ensuring regulatory compliance on climate and environmental issues  (anticipation of future regulations, 
compliance with the requirements of international clients, carbon avoidance, etc.);  
• Improving the competitiveness of the private sector  (companies and individuals) by upgrading 
production facilities and giving access to new climate -related technologies at affordable costs,  
• Increasing societal recognition and demand by clients , employees, civil society and financial partners.  
 
LFPs and business es have limited involvement in the development of low carbon and resilient pathway s because of 
their low capacities to identify climate relevant investment (low awareness, idea of complexity, lack of proportionate 
advisory service) and to access finance for such investment (no thematic financial products, low awareness on 
opportunities a mong LFPs, upfront cost such as vulnerability assessments). The project aims to unlock this by 
providing specific TA to build capacity within LFPs in identifying bankable climate projects through eligibility lists and 
screening tools to offset upfront cost  and simplify climate action for LFPs in the target countries. In addition , the 
project will add additional and thematic resource s to increase the offer of climate financing and attract demand from 
the banking sector at affordable rates. Given the size of the Programme, momentum will be given to climate credit 
line relevancy . The tools and approach developed for the Programme will still be operable after the project  has 
ended  and will sustain the offer and identification of projects aligned with the low car bon and resilient development 
pathway. The combination of TA and additional thematic finance to unlock the current situation and pave the way for 
autonomous scaling up of LFP financing towards low carbon and resilient business is the theory of change 
devel oped by this Programme.  
 
The Technical Assistance programme  will ensure a dissemination of the Programme ’s results to increase 
awareness on replicable projects based on the monitoring and evaluation of the activities financed . 
Demonstration projects will be used to illustrate the benefits of this type of operations and to build a framework of 
technologies and projects. The dissemination of the Programme ’s results aims at increasing awareness on replicable 
projects and instigati ng a self -sustaining market for climate investments.  
In addition, the profitability requirements of the LFPs and the objective to increase  local companies’ profitability  
/competitiveness  through climate investments make sound economic sense and foster good  perception of such 
markets , thus increasing the sustainability of such projects through their replication. For instance, r educing energy 
costs contributes to investments with relatively short periods for the return on investment in the energy efficiency 
sector, which guarantees the reproducibility of the investment.  
The snowball effect on entrepreneurship and LFP s of a wave of projects successfully developed and supported 
through the incentives of the Programme  is also an important element for ensuring su stainability.  
 
Last but not least, despite the proposed incentives of the Programme , it is expected that over time, as relevant 
technologies become more widespread and accepted and as climate investments become more and more familiar to 
LFPs and sub -borrow ers, the latter would become increasingly more willing to invest in and finance climate -related 
projects with a reduced concessional component .


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 93 
 
 E 
The theory of change of the Programme is presented in annex C. 
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
 
The TA will be designed to  provide training to LFPs and final beneficiaries in how to prepare and appraise 
climate -related projects.  This shall create favourable  conditions for the emergence of a dedicated climate 
market  which is often considered as a new  market and which still encounters technical barriers.  
 
The Programme is expected to transfer and build expertise related to green investments among financial institutions 
and sub -borrowers.  
 
Most local LFPs are not familiar with financing green projects and do not have in -house capacity for  an appraisal of 
such projects. The programme will enhance their understanding of evaluating climate  investments and change the 
risk perceptions towards the se new financing opportunities. T he TA will work with the LFPs to contribute to the 
structuring of their climate strategies, the development of their climate loan offer, and/or their internal processes 
associated to this change (creation of a climate unit and/or dedicated products). Coordinators dedicated to climate 
financing will be identified at the early stage of the Programme. The programme  will deliver trainings on business 
development and risk management in the climate related technologies . This will include increase knowledge on the 
opportunities and benefits fo r lending  such projects , on the potential of energy saving projects, on how to structure 
and analyze climate mitigation business proposals, etc.  LFPs will therefore become more familiar with the appraisal 
and financing of such investments.  
 
Advisory support to investors will include recommendations on new technologies, business models , and shifts in the 
processes as neede d. Beneficiaries will benefit from technical support on  how to structure climate business plans to 
make them bankable , on the requirements of loan applications, on how to conduct feasibility studies or energy 
audits, on the risks associated and the financial returns of such investments, on the eligibility assessment against the 
lists of best available technologies, etc.  The sub-borrowers are expected to become more familiar with climate 
financing opportunities  and financial institutions’ requirements for climate -related projects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 93 
 
 E 
 
The Programme  will contribute to creating an enabling environment for climate related investments through targeted 
capacity building, awareness raising activities and connecting a diverse range of private sector stakeholders. 
Activities will include organizing networki ng opportunities as well as consultation with local stakeholders in the 
climate finance sector. By raising awareness among a diverse range of private sector stakeholders about the green 
issues and the benefits of climate technologies at market levels and b uilding the capacity of the private sector actors, 
the Progamme  will stimulate demand for climate investments and directly contribute to the creation of markets for 
these products in the targeted countries.  
The Programme  will also support the enabling env ironment for climate  investment through AFD’s  on-going policy 
dialogue activities with host governments where AFD has local offices to improve the regulatory environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
 
To address legal market barriers in the target countries, AFD will maintain a close relationship with host governments 
through policy dialogue activities that will aim to identify policy and regulatory bottlenecks. AFD will carry out policy 
dialogue activi ties, not as part of the Programme but in parallel, that will be informed by the activities of the 
Programme. Regular feedback on the Program me implementation will be provided by AFD and the TA to local 
authorities to ensure a link and constant alignment w ith the regulatory framework for climate protection.  The lessons 
learned from the implementation of the Programme will be shared with the respective Governments and shall 
contribute to improving the public policies of the respective country. The implementation of the Programme will 
support the national regulatory and legal frameworks to systematically drive investment in climate technologies or 
activities . Finally, the successful performance of the project will encourage national and local authorities to prioritise 
policy improvement in the mitigation and adaptation  sectors.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 93 
 
 E 
 
 E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
In addition to the climate benefits described in sections E .1 and H .1, the expected co-benefits  of the Programme  in 
terms of Sustainable Development are the following:  
1. Sustainable economic development:  
- Strengthening of local economic development through financing of sustainable infrastructures, improved 
access to sustainable energy , and energy efficiency for industries,  
- Creation of jobs,  with particular attention to women and youth employment  
- Development of income -gener ating activities,  with particular attention to women and young people  
- Support for LFPs in the development of a financing offer , taking in to consideration sustainable 
development issues and particular ly climate impact and E&S risk management,  
- Reduction of the dependence on fossil fuel and of the related burden on public finance, companies ’ 
competitiveness, and household budget (increased purchasing power),  
- Development of green value chains and green markets led by local financiers and investors  through (i) 
developing better risk awareness and management to encourage LFPs to finance sustainable projects and 
develop green financing offer s and (ii) capacity  building of investors thanks to the dissemination of 
technical knowledge on such projects,  
- Development and strengthening of local expertise in evaluation and development of climate projects.  
 
2. Social wellbeing of populations and reduction of social inequalities  
- Sound social risk management to avoid negative social impacts of projects,  
- Improved and  more sustainable access to basic services such as energy and water,  
- Improved living conditions through green and energy efficient housing, reduction of negative impacts of 
pollution on health, etc.,  
- Creation of jobs,  
- Sound stakeholder engagement in Progra mme  activities.  
 
3. Gender equality  
- Reduction of women ’s vulnerability to climate change and increase of women ’s participation in adaptation 
and mitigation projects through a gender -specific analysis of exposure to climate change,  
- Capacity  building of LFPs and other Project partners on gender -related topics,  
- Support for women ’s economic participation through the promotion of gender equality activities in the 
workplace for LFPs and their clients, support for women ’s entrepreneurship and financial inclusion, e tc., 
- Equal access to services such as energy , water, and housing, with specific attention to female -heade d 
households and taking into account domestic chore allocation and specific related burden s on women.  
 
4. Biodiversity conservation and preservation of natural resources  
- Sound environmental risk management to avoid negative impacts on biodiversity and natural resources,  
- Development of sustainable environmental practices in agriculture and forestry, preserving agricultural 
diversity , and integrated natural r esource management,  
- Reduction of polluting emissions,  
- Sound waste management,  
- Improved management of natural resources (water in particular),  
- Reducing fossil fuel consumption and the related greenhouse gases emissions of private companies and 
households  due to energy savings and renewable energy supply .


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 93 
 
 E 
 
5. Sustainable governance  
- Promoting sound E&S risk management and gender integration in all LFPs ’ operations and therefore 
participating in the dissemination of good E&S and gender practices within the pri vate sector,  
- Development of  a participatory approach , stakeholder consultation , and engagement on financed projects.  
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
 
The target countries do not have the same vulnerability to climate change. Though metric s on adaptation and resilience are still 
under discussion, some cutting -edge work such as the Notre Dame Global Initiative on Adaptation (ND -GAIN) are providing 
transparent data to approach country vulnerability and allow for preliminary comparability acros s 181 countries. The table 
below gathers the country resilience ranking of our target countries. This ranking presents the intrinsic vulnerability score  and 
the readiness of countries in term s of implementing adaptive actions.   
 
 ND-GAIN rank  
 (2016) /181  Quartile    ND-GAIN rank  
 (2016) /181  Quartile  
Africa       
 Latin -America      
Benin  155 1 
    
Burkina Faso  164 1 
    
Cameroon  137 1 
 Ecuador  110 2 
Côte d’Ivoire  147 1 
    
Egypt  98 2 
    
Kenya  151 1 
    
Madagascar  33 1     
Mauritius  50 3 
    
Morocco  73 3 
    
Namibia  103 2 
    
Nigeria  145 1 
    
Senegal  130 2 
    South Africa  77 3 
    Tanzania  150 1 
    Togo  143 1 
    Uganda  155 1 
          
     
The Programme  will mainly target countries from the first and second quartiles in terms of resilience, i.e. extremely and highly 
vulnerable countries with very low readiness capacity. In these countries , the services provided by the Programme  are 
particularly relevant as they are responding to absolute needs. In the countries in the third quarti le, though they are only 
moderately vulnerable, there is a potential higher demand due to better readiness capacity and more conducive business 
opportunities , i.e. an expanded pool of tentative clients. In other words, t he Programme  will cover a vast typol ogy of vulnerable 
countries with needs but different capacities.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 93 
 
 E 
 
Besides these absolute vulnerability considerations, the Programme has undertaken a country -by-country diagnosis to assess 
the main vulnerabilities companies are struggling with (cf. country  form). These preliminary studies underlie the preliminary 
eligibility list annexed. The list and  the individual country diagnosis show the sectoral needs and the sectoral demands are 
rather similar in nature, even if we expect different size s in term s of investments and intensity of the sectoral needs . This is 
confirmed by the alignment of the Programme  key sectors with the priority areas of the NDCs of the different countries (see 
section E.5.1) . 
 
One particularity and innovation of the proposal is that the beneficiaries are companies  rather than  households or individuals. 
Since the Programme  adopt s a demand -based approach, it is not possible to assess the individual vulnerability of each 
beneficiary  ex ante . By supporting the company and the company’s clients ’ resilience  to climate change , the overall 
vulnerability of the country is being reduced .  
 
The Programme , mainly loan -based, does not aim to target the lowest income level and the most vulnerable  people . 
Nevertheless , by creating momentum for climate investment by companies and reducing the country’s overall vulnerability to 
shocks, the Programme  promote s a transition that will have spillover effects on income level by nudging climate -resilient 
economy and jobs .  
 
The following box is an example of an adaptation project in the Mauritius Islands  which has been support by SUNREF and 
which could be replicated for the GCF programme.  
 
• Success story : Adaptation project funded by SUNREF in Mauritius Island  
For over a century, “Médine Investment” has been active in the domains of real estate and agriculture. In 2015, the society 
benefited from financial support from the SUNREF Indian Ocean programme through a loan provided by a partner bank, MBC 
for a total s um of USD 564,644 million. The funds were invested in the construction of a primary school of over 300 students, 
where energy and water efficiency measures were implemented.  
The project consisted of integrating bioclimatic architecture measures and construction principles that provides substantial 
improvement to the level of comfort within building – in a way that avoids the use of mechanical air conditioning.   
This approach has resulted in energy savings of an estimated 93,000 kWh/year, and an emission reduction of an estimated 91 
tCO2eq per year. The key innovations of the project include the installation of vertical sun -shades, verandas and deep eaves 
to avoid direct sunlig ht, improved natural ventilation by altering heights of the ceiling and the position of openings, as well as a 
placing a layer of reflective and isolating material on the roof.  
The reduction of electricity consumption linked to lighting was also implement ed (movement detectors, LED lamps, openings 
to improve natural lighting), as well as the installation of a solar water heating system.  
To save on water, two reservoirs collect rain water and is then used for watering purposes within the school. This syste m also 
serves as a pedagogical tool to raise awareness amongst students about water usage and saving. Additionally, a double -flush 
function and push -taps results in an automatic interruption of the water flow, resulting in substantial savings.  
Thanks to SUNREF, the Médine Society benefited from financial support as well as technical assistance to realise these green 
investments. This project is aligned with  the GCF programme objectives through its contributions to protecting the 
environment as well as the  replicability of the measures available to other school buildings.  
 
Adapt’Action  
As already developed in Section C.4 , AFD has launched Adapt’Action to support countries seeking technical assistance for the 
institutional, methodological and operational implementation of their commitments in relation to climate change.  The 
Adapt’Action program me aims to bring about climate projects that can be financed by AFD and international climate finance. 
Priority is given to  adaptation to the impacts of climate chan ge, a field for which the most vulnerable countries have expressed


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 93 
 
 E 
a specific need for assistance.  This facility ultimately aims at giving countries the technical and institutional tools they need to 
strengthen climate governance and mobilize international  climate finance (such as GCF) and bi/multilateral banks (such as 
AFD) to scale up their action and therefore produce a leverage effect.  
  
The implementation of the Adapt’Action Programme will pave the way for the GCF Programme implementation, as it 
will h elp strengthen the intervention framework in the countries that are part of the two programmes:  
- Memoranda of understanding have already been signed with Madagascar and Mauritius;  
- Senegal, Côte d’Ivoire, and Cameroon are included in the 2018 work program me. 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
 
For local financial institutions  which are evolving in a very competitive environment, their need is to meet the demand, to 
distinguish their offer compared to their p eers, and to improve their image/societal recognition: access to new markets related 
to green growth is therefore very important for them and will also prevent them from ending  up with stranded assets.  
However, local financial institutions generally lack expertise to assess and finance climate investments and do not always 
have a realistic view of the risks associated. Climate -related projects are still viewed as complex, risky , and having high 
transaction costs. Therefore, these investments are only sligh tly funded and when they are, the requested collaterals are 
significant and represent a heavy burden for private companies (especially SMEs).  
In addition, climate investments need mid - to long -term loans that LFPs may have difficulties to propose.   
 
For m any companies , the needs are to develop new production methods strengthening  the resilience of their company to 
external shocks and increas ing their competitiveness. More and more companies realize the need to manage environment -
related risks to be more ad apted to their environment, to reduce the cost of their energy/water/waste bill , and to reduce their 
risks of being non -compliant with environmental protec tion rules thanks to a better anticipation.  
However , project investors do not always have sufficien t skills to offer attractive and bankable projects. Most of the time, audits 
and feasibility studies are needed but represent a significant cost.  
To overcome these barriers, the GCF contribution  is needed to set up a TA programme  for LFPs and companies and 
to develop concessional funding/financial incentives to trigger their investment.  GCF contribution  will allow address ing 
financial barriers by providing LFP with long -term capital (green credit lines and guarantees). This funding will be allocated on 
favorable terms on the basis of certain criteria (maturity of green financing market, type of investment, target client base) in 
order to reduce the cost of borrowing for companies . The outcome will be an increased access to more affordable lending by 
comme rcial banks in the target countries  for climate related projects.  
 
The purpose of the Programme  is also to answer indirectly to other needs of investors  such as (i) the access to low -cost new 
technologies, (ii) the use of renewable energies, which are often the only way for isolated households to access energy , and 
(iii) the use of more environmentally  friendly and less harmful solutions to adapt to clima te change


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 93 
 
 E 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs  and 
NAPs  
 
The country notes (see the Annex es) describe how the Programme  will contribute to existing climate policies in each target 
country . A cross comparison of the priorities of the NDCs and the target sectors of the Programme (including renewable 
energy, energy efficiency, water management, waste management, green building, climate smart agriculture and sustainable 
forestry, urban transportation)  shows a good alignment in all target countries .  
 
This summarized view prioritiz es NDCs since they are usually the document s that consistently deal with adaptation and 
mitigation in each of the target countr ies (adapted from ClimateWatchData,  2017):  
 
Programm e priorities vs . NDC priorities  
  Matching  
rate     Matching  
rate  
Africa    
 Latin -America    
Benin  86%  
   
Burkina Faso  100%  
   
Côte d’Ivoire  86%  
 Ecuador  86%  
Egypt  86%  
   
Kenya  100%  
   
Madagascar  100%     
Mauritius  86%  
   
Morocco  100%  
   
Namibia  71%  
   
Nigeria  71%  
   
Senegal  100%  
   
South Africa  71%  
     
Tanzania  100%  
     
Togo  86%  
     
Uganda  86%  
     
 
There is an overall match between the Programme  key investment sector s and the priority sector s for climate investment. The 
Programme  will contribute directly to address ing the countr ies’ priority needs and will contribute to the achievement of their 
climate action engagement. By providing companies with resources for low carbon and resilient development on the one hand 
and by building climate financing capacities of local financial partne rs on the other , the project contribut es to the 
implementation of national policies geared towards the achievement of the Paris Agreement.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 93 
 
 E 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
 
Track record in climate activities: overview  
Since 2009 , AFD has channelled  on average 2.6  bn EUR of climate finance per year and this trend is ris ing (more than 3  bn 
EUR  in 2016 and 4  bn EUR  in 2017). France’s Presidential commitment is to reach 5 bn EUR per year by 2020. Adaptation 
activities have represent ed 20% on average since 2009 , but there is an increasing trend and the new climate strategy of AFD 
aims to reach 1.5  bn EUR  per year for adaptation and 3.5  bn EUR  for mitigation by 2020.  
In 2017, the clim ate activity of the AFD GROUP in developing countries reached a level of 50% on new commitments in a 
context of a 10%/year increa se in the group's commitments.  
 
 
 
With more than 3  bn EUR  per year, AFD is an experienced manager of climate project s, both using its own resources and as an 
implementing agency of external climate finance resources such as the EU and more recently the GCF ( two projects granted to 
date).  
 
As a member of IDFC, AFD is using the MDB -IDFC Common Principle for climate finance t racking and is used to designing and 
identifying climate -relevant activities for investment programme s. AFD has also developed specific tools for ex ante mitigation 
assessments (Carbon footprint software Bilan Carbone AFD ) and for identifying climate vulne rability of projects (Climate 
screening AFD). This track record of nearly 10 years in the area of metrics and ex  ante assessment of climate risk/benefits is 
shared with partners , including LFP s. The private sector branch of AFD, Proparco , is also supporting many climate relevant 
investments worldwide for companies and the group is using the same corporate tools. Then AFD has unique tools and 
experience to support climate mainstreaming within partner institutions such as local banks and companies.  
 
As for the type of innovative activities proposed in this Programme , AFD has been managing the SUNREF activities for many 
years. Since 2006, SUNREF has invested over EUR 2.6 nb of loans in approx.  50 projects in over 70 LFP. These investments 
have led to a n annual reduction of 15 million tons of CO 2 equivalent. The current proposal will expand the financing capacities of 
AFD and explore new vulnerable countries and thematic investments, but AFD ’s track record proves its ability to undertake this 
ambitious Programme  in an efficient manner. In addition, AFD country offices are present in most of the target countries and will 
be in a position to act timely for the best implementation of the Programme . Finally, AFD has extensive experience in mobilizing 
TA to su pport climate finance operations, particular ly specific expertise to ensure smooth and efficient disbursement of climate 
credit loans.  
 
Thematic track record on adaptation financing  
In 2016 , the sectoral breakdown of financial commitments for climate change adaptation in AFD was dominated by a large


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 93 
 
 E 
number of financial allocations to improve water resources management  and the security of water supply in regions marked by 
a risk of water stres s exacerbated by climate change (over half the Group’s adaptation activity). The agriculture and biodiversity 
sector  was the Group’s second main area of operation for adaptation (almost a third of commitments in 2016 if the agricultural 
credit line to IFAD  is included). This financing in particular promoted the development of agricultural practices adapted to the 
impacts of climate change, mainly in Sub -Saharan  Africa and the Mediterranean, and actions to preserve natural capital, 
particularly in Asia. The Programme  presented to the GCF will obviously build on this extensive experience.  
 
Thematic track record on climate change mitigation  
In 2016, the Group’s mitigation activity was marked by a sharp increase in the amount of financing for public transport, f ollowing 
a significant decline in 2015. The eight  projects in this sector accounted for 35% of mitigation financing (i.e. close to 1 billion  
EUR ) and financed the construction of the Nagpur metro in  India, the extension of the metro  lines of Mexico City and Istanbul, 
and the upgrad e of Alexandria’s tramway in Egypt. There was a sharp increase in the volume of direct financing for renewable 
energy projects (all technologies taken together), which accounted for almost a third of the Group’s mitigation activity in 2016 
(ratio stable compared to 2015). These projects have contributed to increasing water production capacity in Pakistan and Côte  
d’Ivoire and to solar energy development in Bolivia, Benin , and Central America, for example. The crea tion of the African 
Renewable Energy Scale -Up (ARE -Scale Up) Facility will also contribute to the implementation of ReN projects in Africa. 
Energy efficiency projects, which saw a decline compared to 2015, involved upgrading power transmission and distribu tion grids 
in Sri Lanka, Brazil , and Pakistan. Support for renewable energies and energy efficiency via banking intermediation continued to 
be a major trend for the Group’s mitigation activity in 2016, although there was a slight decrease in volume compare d to 2015. 
This type of financing is more effective in reaching key actors in the energy transition: small and medium -sized enterprises, 
industries , and local authorities. The amounts earmarked for mitigation in the fields of solid waste management and san itation 
(biogas development) and biological sequestration (carbon storage in soils and vegetation) stood at 96  M EUR and 155  M EUR 
this year, respectively. AFD has thus extensive experience in financing the sectors targeted in the current proposal.  
 
Instru ments mobilized to finance climate  projects  
In 2016, 61% of the Group’s climate activity was financed via sovereign or non -sovereign concessional loans , which accounted 
for some 2.2 bn  EUR , a sharp rise compared to 2015. However, the Group’s level of climate activity financed via non-
concessional and non -sovereign instruments fell by 30% compared to the previous year, despite the increase in PROPARCO 
financing and in 2016 stood at over 1 bn  EUR (i.e. 31% of climate allocations). Finally, despite the fact that the proportion of 
grants earmarked for climate projects remains relatively low compared to total Group commitments (8%), the amount more than 
doubled compared to 2015, with some 300  M EUR. This is due to the increasing effort to mobilize external resources delegated 
to AFD and to the creation of various climate project preparation funds (such as Ciclia, Euroclima+). In 2016 and 2017, AFD 
also obtained its first two Green Climate Fund  financing of 15  M EUR and 20  M EUR  to support a flood risk control programme  
for urban areas in Senegal and p rovide sustainable irrigation to improve the climate resilience of subsistence oasis farming and 
larger -scale date and olive agriculture within the  Boudnib Valley in Morocco , respectively . 
 
A new and ambitious climate strategy  
The new AFD Climate Strategy for 2017 -2022 is built on  four key objectives to which the current proposal is fully aligned:  
 
Objective 1 : Make the entirety of financing consistent with low carbon and resilient development  and support the construction of 
low-carbon and resilient long -term trajectories by countries. The portfolio should be then 100% aligned with Paris Agreement 
objectives.  
Objective 2:  Enhanced level of climate financing:  
• 5 bn EUR /year in 2020 for climate action (1 .5 bn EUR  for adaptation and 3 .5 bn EUR for mitigation ) 
• 50% of AFD group commitments should have climate co -benefits  
Objective 3:  Contribute to redirecting financial flows  
Develop operational partnerships to contribute to the redirection of financial flows towards green investments:  
• Develop climate policy loans  
• Develop partnerships with local financial actors (SUNREF)  
• Mobilize co -financers and dedicated climate windows (GCF,  EU…)


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 93 
 
 E 
Objective 4:  Co-construct solutions and standards  
Develop new partnerships with a view to enhance AFD’s role and contribution  
 
For the additional experience and track record of the accredited entity (AFD) and executing entities (AFD and Proparco) , please 
refer to paragraph C.4 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
 
Consultations at appraisal  
Stakeholders’ consultations have been carried out during the Program me appraisal phase at country level to ensure the 
alignment of the Program’s objectives with the governments’ climate policies and countries’ NDCs. Stakeholders involved in th e 
country consultations include governmental and non -governmental organizations, re presentatives of the private sector , 
potential project developers and civil society and financial institutions.  The table below outlines AFD engagement with each 
actor and describes the initial stakeholder consultations that took place in all target countr ies. AFD local offices have engaged  
in dialogue through bilateral or multilateral meetings with the NDAs of all target countries and have organised in some countries 
workshops involving, more broadly, all stakeholders and potential beneficiaries.   
 
Country  Stakeholder consultations  
Africa  
WAEMU Area – Benin, 
Burkina Faso, Ivory 
Coast, Senegal, Togo  A country by country stakeholder consultation has been carried out in the five West African countries involved in the GCF 
Programme. Each NDA has been consulted, which led to broader consultations within the Ministries or with other local 
stakeholders. The  different processes in the countries had their own specifics but they systematically followed the same 
purpose: making sure the GCF Programme will fully associate national authorities with the initiative.    
AFD agencies in the WAEMU area are used to work  with local stakeholders, including with the different NDAs, sometimes 
as part of former projects designed in close collaboration (such as in Senegal where a GCF project has already been 
funded, or in Togo where local authorities were associated with an AF D’s project related to flood management in Lomé).    
Thus, the consultation process came to an end and the non -Objection Letters (NOLs) were signed by each NDA.  
Several banks have also expressed their interest for the financing of climate -related projects  under the GCF Programme 
that could benefit from the SUNREF experience (including Oragroup, Ecobank or BOA groups which have national 
subsidiaries in several countries of the area)  
Cameroon  In April 2017, the Agency met the Director of Renewable Energies and Energy Management for a presentation of the 
SUNREF project to finance investments related to renewable energies, energy efficiency and sustainable forest 
management. Following on from thi s meeting, the Agency received a request for assistance from the Ministry of Water and 
Energy in the context of the development and financing of the activities of the energy efficiency action plan in the electric ity 
sector in Cameroon (PNEE). In the contex t of the same project, the Agency met the Ministry of the Environment for a 
presentation of the environmental competitiveness component of the SUNREF project, and in order to find synergies with 
the projects led by this Ministry.  Finally, the Agency met N DA, from the Ministry of Environment, Nature Protection and 
Sustainable Development, to which the outline and future stages of the project were explained.   
NDA’s no objection has been sent to headquarters.  
Ivory Coast  As part of the various programs financed by AFD in the country, the agency interacts on a regular basis with the Ministry of 
Salubrity, Environment and Sustainable Development (“MINSEDD”) which prepared the INDC document, and is in char ge 
of monitoring the implementation of measures to m eet the INDC and hosts the NDA in its premises. AFD and Proparco 
have been in contact with the NDA in order to discuss the GCF proposal.  
Egypt  AFD Cairo office has met several times the climate change unit at the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EE AA), 
focal point of the GCF in Egypt. AFD discussed the implementation of the GCF Programme with the Egyptian GCF 
Steering Committee in February 2018 which included representatives of the Ministry of Env ironment, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Ministry of Energy , Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation among others.  
The appetite of Egyptian banks for climate financing has been assessed during the discussions held under the


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 93 
 
 E 
implementation of the Sustainable Energy Financing Facility, targeting the financing by  local banks of renewable energy 
and energy efficiency investments.  
Kenya  The programme has been presented to the National Treasury of Kenya in October 2017. A presentation has been also 
done during the  Stakeholders’ Consultative Workshop on Kenya’s GCF Strategy on October 11th 2017 with a number of 
stakeholders attending including representatives of the Kenyan ministries, of local banks and of bilateral and multilateral 
donors.  
Madagascar  During the id entification phase of a SUNREF Madagascar project, AFD met the major banks in the country: BNI 
MADAGASCAR, BFV -Société Générale, BOA, BMOI (BPCE group) and Mauritius Commercial Bank (MCB 
MADAGASCAR).  AFD also had meetings with : - ADER, the agency for the  promotion and development of rural 
electrification - Donors involved in the field of renewable energy such as GIZ, WORLD BANK, European Union - Non-
governmental Organizations such as GRET - Civil societies, employer’s organizations : SIM, FIVMPAMA - Priva te sector : 
MADO, SOCOLAIT, STAR.  
AFD also met and presented the project to the local NDA (Bureau National de Coordination contre le Changement 
Climatique) which gave its no objection on October 2017 to include the project in the funding proposal.  
Mauriti us The NDA, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, has shown a strong interest for the GCF Proogramme, 
Transforming Finance System for Climate project, and has issued the Non Objection Letter, on the 6th of October 2017. 
Other Mauritian stakehol ders are also involved in climate change mitigation actions that could be linked to this programme: 
such as the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities, the Mauritian utility Central Electricity Board (CEB), the private secto r 
represented by Business Mauri tius, Private Banks participating to SUNREF credit lines: Mauritius Commercial Bank (MCB) 
and State Bank of Mauritius (SBM) are the ones which expressed strong interest to be part of the project.  
Morocco  The GCF Programme “Transforming Financial Systems f or Climate” program, has been discussed with the Moroccan NDA, 
M. Nbou, Director of Climate Change, Biodiversity & Green Economy. An abstract of the project summary together with the 
concept note have been provided to the NDA in support of this discussion.  It is worth to mention that the NDA expressed its 
support on the program by sending the non -objection letter on October 12th 2017.  
Namibia  All relevant stakeholders have been consulted at an early stage of the preparation of the programme, and further 
consultations will be organized along the preparation and appraisal of the programme, to ensure local ownership of the 
programme, alignment wit h national objectives and strategies.  
a) Commercial banks (Nedbank Namibia, Bank Windhoek and FNB Namibia), as the beneficiaries of SUNREF Namibia, 
currently in implementation, have engaged discussions with AFD on the possibility of developing a second phase  of 
SUNREF in Namibia, with higher ambitions in terms of impacts (increased focus on adaptation issues, higher share of 
MSME financing, focus on less mature technologies). All commercial banks have shown a strong interest in working 
on a second phase for S UNREF, to increase their portfolio in these sectors, as they are seen by the banks as critical 
to further development of their business in Namibia.  
b) The NDA and the Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia (EIF) have been consulted mid -2017. AFD shared the 
concept note of GCF programme to be developed in Namibia, as a second phase of SUNREF. Overall feedback from 
the NDA and EIF was positive, provided the objectives and target sectors of the programme were aligned with the 
priorities of the Namibian Governme nt with regard to the fight against climate change.  
c) AFD was also asked to build the GCF programme on the basis of the lessons learned from the SUNREF programme 
in Namibia, currently under implementation.  
Nigeria  The stakeholders consulted range across a wide set of players: from government  bodies (Federal Ministry of Energy, Rural 
Electrification Agency, States’ gove rnments), potential investors from the private sector (for on grid and off grid projects), 
other development and donor institutions who are supporting the development of renewable energy in Nigeria (GIZ; World 
Bank; EU with whom AFD is already co -financing projects in the power sector).  
South Africa  Informal consultations have been held with representatives of the Department of Environmental Affairs to inform them of 
AFD’s willingness to apply to GCF funding to support key climate change projects in South Africa. Valuable feedback was 
provided by these officials. In particular, it has been highlighted that applications to GCF should be aligned  with the 
priorities of the South African Change Response Policy, and more particularly with the Climate Change Flagship 
Programmes.  
Tanzania  In order to assess the relevance and potential of its climate and private sector programmes, AFD has consulted al l major 
stakeholders in Tanzania. AFD has met most Tanzanian financial institutions in bilateral meetings, from comm ercial and 
development banks to microfinance institutions. AFD also has close relations with other development partners 
(international donor s) in order to gather their opinions and benefit from their experience in the targeted sectors when 
relevant.


---
*Page 53*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 93 
 
 E 
AFD i s a key player in Tanzania in the renewable energy and energy efficiency through its programme SUNREF. To 
present the GCF programme, AFD has  organized a workshop in January 2017 with the Bank of Africa -Tanzania 
(BOATanzania), the Confederation of Tanzanian Industries, the Ministry of Energy (AFD’s partner). The workshop gathered 
80 representatives of the Tanzanian industries, local banks (CRDB , NMB, DTB Tanzania…), donor institutions (GIZ, KFW, 
WB, AFDB, JICA), Tanzania Electricity Supply Company (TANESCO) and Rural Electrification Agency (REA).  
Finally, AFD also consulted public entities, non -profit organizations, and sector associations. Among them, The Permanent 
Secretary – Office of the Vice President, as the NDA who organized a stakeholders meeting on 28th November 2017, 
including: local bank s (NMB, CRDB, Akiba bank…), Ministry of environment, Ministry of agriculture, Ministry of finance and 
planning. The NDA issued the no objection letter on 27th December 2017 after these consultations.  
Togo  Taking into account the early -stage of the projec t and because AFD Lomé is willing not to develop high expectations 
among stakeholders that could be disappointed in case of not implementation, stakeholders consultation has been limited 
so far.   
AFD is currently working with the NDA on another project in  Togo related to flood management in Lomé and maintains 
good relations with the NDA. The NDA has welcomed the opportunity of a new project with AFD and the GCF that has 
materialized in a no -objection letter.   
The West African Development Bank (BOAD) is a strong and long term partner of AFD. AFD has implemented a large 
number of projects with this counterpart, including projects within agricultural sector and energy sector. AFD has also 
contributed to the realization of the CRRH project, which provides a fi nance solution to promote property access. AFD is 
also currently working with the BOAD on a waste landfill facility under construction. The BOAD has not been consulted on 
this particular project so far but AFD is confident that the BOAD would be willing to  join this project, as it answers to the 
BOAD’s need for more opportunity to work with AFD in climate oriented financings. Indeed, the BOAD has engaged 
discussions with AFD on experience sharing in climate finance that started during the last “Journée AFD -BOAD” that took 
place in Paris in October 2017.   
In terms of private financial institutions, AFD Lomé has been working with Oragroup since 2014 through SUNREF initiative 
(Please refer to the WEAMU regional form), which is about to end in 2018. Orabank Tog o, Oragroup Togolese subsidiary 
has expressed a need in agricultural sector financial support in order to endorse the financial of both seasonal credit and 
investment loans.  
Société Générale Togo could be interested in developing new climate -related finan cial products, such as Ecobank, a 
current financial partner. Finally, Bank of Africa has recently expressed to AFD its ambition towards climate friendly 
projects.  
Uganda  In the rural and agricultural sector, AFD has initiated a study carried out in 2017 i n order to fully grasp the needs for 
financing, technical assistance and capacity building. This study compiles the findings from consultation of 17 key 
stakeholders in the sector. A restitution of the study was organized in October 2017 with all entities.  Bilateral discussions 
are still ongoing with key identified stakeholders.   
AFD is a key player in Uganda in the renewable energy and energy efficiency through its programme SUNREF. For this 
programme, AFD has organized many workshops with local financial  institutions such as DTB -U (AFD’s partner) or 
Barclays. Therefore key stakeholders and current partners are regularly consulted including financial institutions, Uganda 
Manufacturers Association (UMA) and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (ME MD).  
Latin -America  
Ecuador  Meetings have been organized with:  
1) each targeted public financial institutions ie:  
• BDE (Banco de Desarrollo del Ecuador) which finances the municipalities of Ecuador  
• CFN (Corporacion Financiera Nacional) which finances the private sector / industry/ production activities  
• BanEcuador which finances finances the agriculture sector  
• Banco del Pacifico which finances the private sector on a commercial basis  
2) the Ecuatorian  NDA ie Ministry of Environment (on the global program, and more focused on water & sanitation as 
well as transports)  
3) the CONGOPE/Association of Provinces in Ecuador  
4) the AME Association of Municipalities in Ecuador  
5) the Ministry of Agriculture and Livesto ck - the Ministry of Industry and Productivity  
6) the Ministry of Water and corresponding authority for water regulation (SENAGUA and ARCA/ Agencia de Regulación 
y Control del Agua)  
7) the Ministry of Electricity and Renewable Energy -  the Ministry of Finance


---
*Page 54*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 93 
 
 E 
All of these partners confirmed their strong interest in the GCF program.  
 
Consultations throughout the Program me’s implementation  
Ensuring that projects are effective and sustainable requires partnerships with civil society and/or consultation during the 
preparation, implementation , and evaluation of projects. In this respect, AFD ensures in all its operations that the views of local 
authorities, affected populations , and local NGOs are taken into account concerning the impacts of projects that are sub mitted 
for financing, particularly when they carry a high environmental and social risk. Accordingly, AFD’s project cycle requires that 
AFD receives a request letter from a local authority or company in the case of non -sovereign operations, specifying the amount 
of funding needed for the operation and a short description of the project. This requirement ensures the alignment of the 
proposed project with the national and local strategies and priorities.  
In addition, in the case of AFD’s country intervention frameworks, a dialogue with stakeholders (local authorities, donors, 
private sector, NGOs, etc.) is systematically conducted prior to the drafting of AFD’s strategic areas of operation. This dia logue 
is facilitated by AFD ’s local-offices network of 85 agen cies worldwide , which are in daily contact with our local stakeholders, 
especially state entities.  
This strong local base will be leveraged throughout the implementation of the Programme, for engaging in dialogue with NDAs 
and respective governments , thus ensuring the adequate country ownership and sustainability of the Programme.  
In the framework of the Program and in line with GCF ’s approach to stakeholder engagement, AFD will also require LFPs to 
ensure the effective engagement of communities, vulnerabl e populations, groups and individuals, indigenous peoples, local 
communities , and other marginalized groups of people and individuals that are affected or potentially affected by Program 
activities.  
Finally, AFD Group prioritizes partnerships and dialogue with the other development actors: donors, private sector 
organizations, academic institutions , and think tanks. For several years, AFD has been scaling up partnerships with the other 
development finance institutions (bilateral/multilateral and regional) w ith the objective to strengthen technical and financial 
cooperation in order to increase its impacts on development.  
Engagement  with potential future GCF Direct Access  Entities  (DAEs)  
AFD, as an international entity, committed through its AMA signed with the GCF to support potential subnational, national and  
regional entities to meet the accreditation requirements of the GCF in order to enhance country ownership.  
Through the implementa tion of the TFSC Programme, which includes a TA component aiming at strengthening the capacities 
of the LFPs targeted by the Programme, AFD will play this role. While the financial component will provide additional climate  
finance flows to the countries, t he TA component is designed to remove the barriers preventing the financial institutions from 
financing climate investments. Through this specific and tailor -made technical support , the implementation of the TFSC 
Programme will help the LFPs wishing to dir ectly access the GCF resources, to develop their capacities, awareness, 
operational track record, climate strategies and E&S standards, all required in the GCF accreditation process.  
In addition, peers dialogue between LFPs and AFD teams could take place during the implementation of the Programme on 
climate finance, E&S standards and risk management, compliance and fight against money laundering and terrorism financing 
or procurement process.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/ programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency


---
*Page 55*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 93 
 
 E 
 
The Programme is built on high standards of effectiveness with estimated impacts expected to be significant across sectors. 
The GCF cost per tonne of CO2 avoided has been estimated at US$ 8, taking into account the high value and diversity of 
projects and associated co -benefits.  
 
The Programme is designed to address efficiently the various bottlenecks  restraining green investments : lack of funding, 
human or material resources and technical skills to significantly invest  in segments  which are perceived as risky . The use of 
complementary financial instruments (soft loans and guarantee) will encourage the private sector to engage into green sectors , 
while grants will fund TA that  will support LFPs in structuring  a green offer in the long run.   
 
Regarding the substantial anticipated impacts that will be generated by the Programme and its potential to generate systemic 
and self -sustained effects,  and given the rather low GCF cost per tonne of CO2 avoided,  the Prog ramme’s costs represent a 
sound investment.  
 
Please also refer to section F.1.  
 
E.6.2. Co -financing, co-leveraging ratio and mobilized long -term investments   
 
The co-financing ratio is calculated based on the GCF and AFD financing amount. . Hence,  AFD will bring almost twice the 
GCF  total amount, in order to leverage enough funds to generate systemic effects.  
  
 Co-financing (AFD)  GCF  Co-financing ratio  
 M EUR   552 330 1.67 
 
 
The co -leveraging ratio is calculated based on the methodology described in Part B.1 by integrating the top -up funding brought 
by the LFPs and the equity investments brought by end beneficiaries. In addition, equity investments can be multiplied by a 
revolving factor: a revolving factor should be applied to reflect th at the credit line may be revolving (because of a longer tenor 
of the credit line relative to the average tenor of the sub -loans and reflows). Please refer to the full methodology in the Annex 
for further details.  
Below, the projections anticipated for LFP s and project sponsors co -leveraging.  
 
 Co-leveraging (AFD 
loans + LFPs top -up + 
equity)  GCF  Co-leveraging ratio  
 M EUR  1,651  330 5 
 
Please refer to E.6.5 Expected volume of finance to be leveraged.  
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
 
At project level (LFP  level)


---
*Page 56*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 93 
 
 E 
As far as the selection of LFPs is concerned, AFD will apply the same procedures and criteria as for any lending operation it  
currently implements.  
The process for project appraisal is summarized here below:  
1- Identification : The identification process is a critical step during which AFD will select project ideas that are in line with AFD’s 
strategy and sustainability objectives , GCF’s investment framework  and the Programme’s objectives.  
The identification and selection of LFPs will depend  on multiple criteria such as their credit risk, their strategy regarding climate 
finance, their appetite for such activities, the availability of staff who could be dedicated to climate finance. The selecti on will 
also be b ased on their cl ient portfolio , their internal procedures from the identification of projects at the level of commercial 
branches to the final  execution of the loan (including their credit risk appraisal process). This selection is crucial to ensure a 
strong involvement o f the LFP in the Programme.  
The main objectives of this step will be : 
- To define the general framework of the project, in particular the indicative amount of assistance and the proposed product 
(subsidy, guarantee, concessional/non -concessional)  
- To iden tify and prioritize risks and issues related to the project and define accordingly the necessary procedures and due 
diligence that needs to be carried out to address various types of risks (and opportunities) such as financial, environmental , 
social, etc.  
- To conduct preliminary analysis and seek expert’s advice on technical, financial and any other topic that could have an impac t 
on the GCF -AFD Programme and the project (anti -money laundering and terrorist financing, financial situation of the 
counterpart , etc.).  
- To secure the resources that are deemed necessary for the carry on project instruction, to determine its timing, to appoint a  
project manager and team and ensure that there are no conflicts of interest.  
AFD’s Committee of Identification will meet at the end of the Identification period and will determine whether the project can 
enter the Instructio n phase or has to be abandoned.  
 
2- Instruction : This step will consist in deepening and broadening the research and work started in the identificati on phase and 
in defining the terms of the agreement with the LFP before they are presented to AFD’s Credit Committee.  
Experts from other departments or from the AFD project team will be  called upon all along this step to review various aspects 
of the proj ect, in particular:  
- A deep financial analysis of LFPs will be conducted by the AFD team, which will lead to an internal rating. Depending on this  
rating and the targeted operation, AFD will be able to fine tune the financial conditions provided to the LFPs  for loans and 
guarantees  (if applicable) and their impact on the normative  balance of the AFD, as well as management arrangements ;  
- The compliance of the project, including anti -money laundering and terrorist financing;  a thorough investigation will be  
conducted to identi fy potential fiduciary  risks related to potentials  LFPs;  
- Environmental and social issues  (cf. E&S framework for the Programme) ; 
- Climate and Sustainable development issues;  
- Specific issues in supporting capacity building.  
AFD project manager will have  to collect experts’ advice before the Credit Committee . The members of the Credit Committee


---
*Page 57*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 93 
 
 E 
will take these opinions into account  and decide whether or not the project should be presented to AFD Board.  
 
3- Funding/Board decision : during this phase, AFD project manager will be  responsible for finalizing the structuration of the 
project  with the assistance of the financial expert, responsible for the counterpart analysis and the financial aspects (financial 
structuring, drafting and negotiation, term sheet  and financial agreement) and the sectorial expert, responsible for the technical 
and sectorial parts. Th e project  will be  presented to the Board who then will make the decision on whether to fund the project.  
In addition, all the standard conditions apply ing to the international senior loans legal framework will be deployed in order to 
ensure the financial viability of AFD operations under the Programme (pari passu, Acceleration of Credit, Events of Default, 
etc.).  
 
At sub -project level  
LFPs will identify the investment potential and the most promising thematic areas (renewables, energy efficiency, adaptation to 
climate change such as agro -forestry projects, water management projects, etc.) within their existing clients or prospects in 
accordance with a set  of eligibility criteria in line with the local public policy and climate change priorities. They will assess the 
creditworthiness of these potential eligible investments and structure a financial offer in line with the needs of green proj ects to 
reduce th e barriers to investment in the targeted country.  
The TA will also support LFPs in the identification and definition of projects to ensure their bankability and improve their 
profitability.  
Please refer to section D.2 for GCF exit strategy.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
 
Technical Evaluation on each sub -project will be conducted by the LFP with the support of the TA team. The TA programme 
will be designed to help the project promoter to select the most appropriate technology available in the  market to build a robust 
financing plan  and increase climate impacts  before submitting it to the LFP. The TA team will consist of local or international 
experts who can be mobilized on demand depending on the complexity of the technology considered. On a case -by-case 
basis , but without burdening the appraisal process, it c an be proposed that local entities emit “Certificates of eligibility” to 
ensure LFPs that the investments submitted to their approval are correctly designed and the technical evaluation has been 
regularly implemented.  
Overall , the Programme will seek to en sure that best available technologies are promoted and used. An indicative list of 
technologies eligible to the Programme is provided in Annex A . This list may evolve depending on market development and 
local needs identified during the Programme implement ation.  
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)


---
*Page 58*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 93 
 
 E 
 
 With finance leveraged 
(GCF/AFD /top-up/equity)  GCF/AFD  only 
(a) Total project financing  (mitigation)  US$ 1,747,000,000  US$ 1,088,000,000 
 
(b) Requested GCF amount (mitigation)  US$ 366,000,000  US$ 366,000,000  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions 
overtime  46,000,000 tCO 2eq 31,850,000 tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 38 / tCO 2eq US$ 3 4 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq 
removed (e = b / c)  US$ 8  / tCO 2eq US$ 11,5  / tCO 2eq 
 
Calculations consider  the exchange rate of March 29th, 2018  : 1 EUR= 1,233  USD  
 
Indicators (d) and (e) were calculated based on the Programme’s expected lifetime emission reductions (c) , 
which result from the sectoral breakdown of the Programme’s pipeline and related performance indicators 
(tCO2 avoided or reduced per M  EUR for each sector). These performance indicators were based on AFD 
carbon balance assessments and the 2014 -2016 SUNREF track record. Please refer to Section E.1.2 for 
further details.  
As a comparative benchmark, from 2006 to 2016, the annual reduction of the SUNREF Programme reache d 
15 million metric tons of CO 2 equivalent for EUR 1 .9 billion of loans disbursed.  
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources  
 
It is expected that the Programme will contribute to around 50% of the debt financing of the underlying 
projects; 30% is mainly brought by the private and public LFPs. Around 20% of equity will be brought by 
project developers, which then can be multiplied  by a revolving factor.  
 
Total  GCF  AFD FI Equity  including 
RF 
 1,981  MEUR  330 MEUR  552MEUR  315 MEUR  784 MEUR  
 
     
Volume of private finance to be leveraged by 
GCF on mitigation  Volume of private finance to be leveraged by 
GCF/AFD on mitigation  
224 M EUR  660 M EUR  
 
The leverage ratio is expected to be even higher for the Programme and GCF proceeds, by taking into 
account the leverage effect of guarantees.


---
*Page 59*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 93 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/ programme  appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
The economic and financial analysis of the blended operations that will be implemented in partnership with LFPs 
through the Programme  will be conducted as follows:  
1. The LFP selects a set of eligible projects based on a technical and financial assessment. Th is assessment phase 
can be implemented with the support of the TA team. However, the LFP will select the eligible projects according 
to its own financial criteria, including requirements of collaterals if needed. In the markets where the financing 
barriers  are too high, the concessionality of GCF loans, the guarantee  mechanism , and the TA will enhance the 
bankability of climate -related projects. Considering this “package”, the LFP will submit to its Board a set of eligible 
and bankable projects in accordanc e with its own appraisal procedures.  
2. The projects approved by the LFP’s appraisal committee will then be submitted to AFD for non -objection. AFD 
will only check that proposed projects comply with eligible criteria defined for the Programme . 
3. For LFP which have signed a Portfolio Guarantee , all loans which respect the predefined eligibility criteria will be 
automatically included into the Portfolio Guarantee. Individual Guarantees have to be approved case by case 
based on the bank ’s credit file.  
4. Once the gua rantee has been granted in combination with a loan, the guarantees can be claimed by the LFP and 
trigger the payment by AFD/GCF.  
Note: AFD Group has set up a framework for the use of concessionality in blended operations dedicated to the 
private sector. Pr ovided that the project has positive externalities in terms of sustainable development or public 
interest, concessionality can be mobilized to target the following objectives:  
• Catalyze private investment by making the risk/profitability trade -off acceptabl e for LFPs;  
• Lower negative externalities linked to social exclusion that could occur from an operation implemented at 
market conditions (especially i n education and health sectors) ; 
• Support private actors that undertake a mission of public interest;  
• Support emerging technologies that have a positive effect on a specific community or a given category of 
population;  
• Facilitate the replication of projects that have a strong demonstrative effect;  
• Ease the development of a nascent market;  
• Support the effec tive deployment of a public policy through private actors;  
• Accelerate or reach higher impacts in terms of environment protection or social inclusion . 
Concessional funding is a critical tool to spur investment in climate -proof technologies.  Hence, transferr ing 
concessionality and all “positive” terms of AFD/GCF funding provided to LFPs for the benefit of end -beneficiaries is 
key. On that respect, AFD has a long practical experience on negotiating such transfer.  
To be fully well -designed,  the use of concessi onality for private actors has  also to be in line with the following 
principles:  
• The amount of concessionality mobilized is adapted to the targeted investments and the market conditions;  
• The mobilization of concessionality should not have any crowding out effect on private actors. On the 
contrary, concessionality has to be used to ensure private sector participation.  
• Concessionality tools need to allow the Programme  to reach development results that could not be achieved 
without these resources.  
• Exit strateg ies need to be designed and discussed with the stakeholders at the beginning of the Programme ;


---
*Page 60*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 93 
 
 F 
• The use of public resources is precisely monitored and justified over the duration of the Programme . 
This approach will be used in the course of the Progr amme, which will ensure an efficient and appropriate use of GCF 
and AFD conces sionality.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please refer to section E.6.4  and Annex A on the indicative list of climate technologies . 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework has been developed for the Programme , based on AFD and 
GCF’s safeguard standards and approach to E&S risk management. The approach to E&S risk management for the 
Programme  is based on capacity  building of LFPs and the development and implementation of sound E&S 
Management Systems (ESMS) to ensure E&S risks are properly mitigated on subprojects.  
The E&S due diligence process will be based on the project life cycle, following  the steps  below : 
• Identification:  the LFP portfolio and the expected Project activities are screened against AFD ’s Exclusion 
List to ensure no activity on this list will be financed. Then, the AFD E&S expert considers the LFP’s existing 
management system and portfolio  for E&S  and classifies the Project as FI -A (High -risk portfolio), FI -B 
(Medium -risk portfolio), or FI -C (Low -risk portfolio). This category defines the E&S due diligence to be 
implemented in the subsequent stages.  
• Instruction: in-depth analysis of the LFP ESMS is conducted by an AFD E&S Expert through a review of 
E&S existing documentation and, where necessary, through exchange sessions with the LFP teams, 
integration of E&S aspects to be addressed by the feasibility study,  and analysis of specific sectoral and/or 
country -specific E&S aspects. A gap analysis is conducted against AFD -GCF requirements and, as required , 
an E&S Action Plan (ESAP) is defined for LF Ps in need of strengthening their ESMS. E&S contract clauses, 
including the ESAP, are drafted.  
• Commitment:  E&S clauses are finalized and integrated into the credit facility agreement.  
• Supervision:  where applicable, AFD E&S Expert follows up the technical a ssistance activities dedicated to 
E&S support through definition of the TA programme , meetings and exchange session s, and a  
documentation review. For all Projects, the AFD E&S Expert monitors ESMS operational aspects through at 
least the review of E&S annu al monitoring report and, if necessary, on -site visits of subprojects and review of 
subprojects ’ documentation.  
Gender -related aspects are considered through  a specific gender analysis of Projects and Subprojects, aiming at 
ensuring men and women benefit from the Programme  in an equal manner. Gender analysis is systematically 
conducted on Projects and gender is integrated into E&S due diligence for Projects and Subprojects. The possibility 
and opportunity of defining gender equality objectives in Projects is considered during project appraisal, in line with 
AFD’s gender equality strategy and the related methodology. Where necessary, TA programme s will be defined in 
order to cover E&S risk management and gender -related topics and to strengthen LFPs ’ capacity on such topics.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Financial Management  
At Programme level:  
The detailed provisions regarding financial management of the GCF resources by AFD will be described in the three


---
*Page 61*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 93 
 
 F 
FAA related to the grant, the loan , and the guarantee components. Reporting will be provided by AFD to the GCF 
specifying among other s: 
• The amounts already committed and disbursed by AFD to local partners, by country and by instrument;  
• The remaining amount on the different GCF accounts;  
• A provisional disbursement schedule on a one -year rolling horizon;  
• For the loan component, if any, a list of the incidents recorded during the repayment period of t he loans 
provided to LFPs;  
• For the guarantee component, if any, a list of the claims under the guarantees provided to LFPs . 
At LFP level:  
A credit risk monitoring will be carried out by AFD through the assessment of the financial statements of LFPs, 
monitoring of financial covenants, etc.  Audits may also be performed to assess the use of the funds  under the 
Programme.  
Procurement  
AFD’s Procurement rules are in line with international standards provided by the World Bank Group. The AFD 
Procurement guidelines will apply to local partners that will be in charge of implementing the Programme . For 
instance  regarding the grant component,  in accordance with these guidelines , the TA Consultant will be recruited by 
local partners through an international bidding process. For a detailed presentation of AFD Procurement rules, see 
the Procurement Guidelines for AFD Financed Contracts in Foreign  Countries available on AFD ’s website 
(https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2017 -09/directives -passation -marches -etats -etrangers -engli sh-version.pdf ).


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 93 
 
 H 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/ programme  objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
 
The main technical risk identified is the slow uptake of 
the Programme  by the LFPs (being early adapters in a 
new field of lending) due to the need for building new 
skills and products within the LFPs and due to the 
timeline for some projects’ maturation related to 
regulatory constraints (biofuels, net metering for PV 
electr icity, etc.).  Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
These risks will be mitigated by the eligibility criteria, the pipeline identification , and the  planned awareness training 
sessions of the TA programme . The technical assistance also ensures that the relevant sub -borrowers have the 
capacity to implement and operate the projects.  
The technical assistance will have a key role to support the identifica tion of a diversified portfolio of eligible projects 
by LFPs. Specific attention will be paid to the variety of projects and sectors in order to build a constant deal flow for 
LFPs. In addition, the TA will have to be available at the early stage of the Programme  implementation in the 
different countries in order to make sure that there will not be any latent period for LFPs.  
 G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
 
The main risk factors are related to  (see below for a more detailed presentation) : 
• The implementation of the technical aspects of the Programme : slow uptake of the Programme  because of 
technical barriers , ability of LFPs to identify climate -related projects and monitor results , etc. ; 
• The financing of subprojects: ability of LFPs to closely assess credit risk, to monitor financial performance  of 
eligible investments , to manage forex risks, etc. ; 
• The correct use of GCF and AFD Funds: in each country of deployment, AFD will have to establish an 
explicit  and precise  set of eligibility criteria, with LFPs checking the process for eligible investments, etc.  
• The environmental and social risks: given the variety of sectors targeted (agriculture, infrastructure, forestry, 
water, etc.) and the typol ogy of projects (greenfield, rehabilitation, etc.) financed under the Programme , the 
Programme  may be exposed to E&S risks on financed activities through LFPs.   
Thanks to the experience on the SUNREF Programme , AFD has a solid track record in efficiently mitigat ing these 
different types of risks.


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 93 
 
 H 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Appropriation of climate -related reporting and 
accountability framework by LFPs.  
 Technical 
and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
One of the main challenges of the Programme  will be to mainstream climate -related strategies within financial 
institutions , some of which  are not very familiar with this topic. The capacity building of the TA programme  will be of 
major importance to support the implementation of climate -oriented po rtfolio management habits within LFPs , 
including climate and gender specific issue s. At the beginning of the Program me, some of the LFPs could have 
difficulties  in identify ing eligible investments due to a lack of a simple benchmark or toolkits that could  allow 
commercials to rapidly  identify  investments with positive impacts o n the climate.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
LFPs will be exposed to credit risk once they finance 
subprojects through the Programme . As these projects 
can be quite innovative or rely on new technologies or 
specific financial structuring, LFPs will have to pay 
attention to the decision -making process  and the tools 
they mobilize to monitor this specific portfolio.  
 Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The TA team will be in charge of supporting the LFPs at each stage of the decision process to make sure that all 
required technical information regarding the sub -project is available and reliable. In addition, the TA can provide the 
LFPs with dedicated monitoring  tools in order to secure the correct implementation of subprojects and the 
effectiveness of expected results (energy consumption reduction for example). The track record on the SUNREF 
Programme  shows that subprojects have  only rarely  met difficulties during the implementation phase that ha d 
significant consequences on the repayment capacity of the borrower.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of misuse of the GCF Funds by LFPs.  
 Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
AFD’s process to select and target eligible investments is now well established . The selection of LFPs rel ies on (i) 
their interest for the climate change topic, (ii) their willingness to deploy a specific strategy to finance climate -related


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 93 
 
 H 
projects , and (iii) their financial ability to do so. In addition, the eligibility criteria will be explicitly specified in  the loan 
contracts between AFD and LFPs. On a case -by-case basis, a specific monitoring process is implemented by AFD 
to ensure that subprojects are eligible for GCF and AFD funding. At least, all subprojects are subject to eligibility 
analysis after each  disbursement to LFPs and before the Programme  ends.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
The main stakeholders of the Programme  (LFPs, 
ministries, public entities, industry associations, 
ESCOs, etc.) often highlight the relevance of 
SUNREF’s approach at a crucial time for the ecological 
transition. The major risk often remains the effective 
and coordinated implementation of these positive 
intentions expressed by the local authorities.  
 Other  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Programme  will be implemented over a long time period , therefore leaving time to serve more ambitious public 
policies. The experience of AFD on SUNREF programme s – more broadly related to dialogue with public entities 
and a strong coordination between all the stakeholders involved – will help mitigate this r isk. AFD local offices will 
maintain close relationship with host governments through policy dialogue activities that will aim to identify policy 
and regulatory bottlenecks.  
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  risk 
occurring  
 
The sub -loans granted under the Programme  will be 
either in hard or local currencies whereas the 
Programme ’s credit lines will either be in EURO or 
USD. In these conditions, the LFPs will have to bear a 
temporary currency mismatch in their balance sheet.  
 Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The management of foreign exchange risk by the LFPs (through hedging mechanisms) is always deeply analysed  
and is a condition for implement ing such programme s. In emerging countries, most often, this is a risk that local 
financial institutions are used to manag ing. Besides, the credit risk of the sub -loans will be mitigated by LFPs’ due 
diligence prior to the approval of each loan and by setting adequ ate loan conditions. In certain conditions, other 
foreign exchange risk mitigation tools can be implemented if needed (TCX, currency swap with local institutions, 
etc.).  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 93 
 
 H 
occurring  
Specific E&S risks according to the sectors financed ,1 
such as poor labor and working conditions, land 
acquisition and involuntary displacements, pollution 
and negative impacts on biodiversity and natural 
resources, impacts on community health and safety, 
poor engagement of communities and stakeholders,  
and negative impacts on indigenous peoples and 
cultural heritage.  
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Every Project to be financed under the Programme  will comply with AFD and GCF E&S and gender requirements, 
as per the Programme  E&S Framework. The Programme  will ensure LFPs ’ capacity to ensure E&S risk 
management on their portfolio, so as to ensure E&S risks are properly managed and mitigated on subpro jects.    
In order to mitigate E&S risks, LFPs will be supported in the development and/or strengthening of ESMS, in order to 
ensure E&S due diligence in their portfolio. For each subproject, the level of E&S risk will be identified, appropriate 
E&S evalua tion will be conducted (e.g. through E&S Impact Assessment), and mitigation measures will be defined 
(E&S Management Plan).  
This approach will significantly lower the risk s. E&S risks will be avoided, minimized or, if this is not possible, 
compensated.  
Additional information can be found in section F.3 and in the Program me’s E&S Framework.  
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Potential market distortion risk through the incentives proposed by the Programme  
Such risks will be mitigated by includ ing several LFPs within the same country in the Programme  to ensure 
competition on the loan market. Besides, the design of an incentives scheme is always linked to the performance of 
subprojects (minimum required performance standard level) , which represent a  niche market at the time of the 
Programme ’s implementation.  
 
 
  
                                                             
1 E&S potential risks on Programme funded sectors are detailed in the E&S framework.


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 93 
 
 H 
H.1.  Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level2 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  Targeted paradigm shifts: I ncreased climate -resilient sustainable development  and s hift to low -
emission sustainable development pathways .  
Financial intermediation is an efficient tool to build capacity, raise awareness among 
LFPs and sub-borrowers , and enable large scale uptake of new product lines such as 
climate -related technologies.  It may appear to be more uncertain concerning impacts 
when compared to direct financial support, but it  bring s though significant additional 
value in shifting paradigms since it generates:  
- Better stakeholders ownership since LFPs and borrowers are directly involved . 
- Better replication effects, since both LF Ps and borrowers learn about 
opportunities and get a better understanding of their benefits ; and  
- More systemic impacts, as borrowers are motivated to use funds cost effectively;  
Therefore, the Programme’s  financial intermediation  scheme will leverage substantial 
transformational benefits  feeding into  increased climate -resilient and low-emission 
sustainable development pathways , by: 
• Implementing and adapting public policies to private companies , having a 
demonstration effect on how the private sector can serve public policy and 
contribute to the improvement of these private sector policies by participating in 
institutional debates and policy dialogue on climate finance and environmental 
protection ; 
• Accessing and developing new markets related to climate transition  by 
providing dedicated financing and consulting services ; 
• Creating new job opportunities in the green economy ; 
• Structuring a sustainable banking offer  around the green economy ; 
• Disseminating technical know -how and good practices and building local 
expertise  through the local entities that will implement the TA;  
• Ensuring regu latory compliance on climate and environmental issues  
(anticipation of future regulations, compliance with the requirements of 
international clients, carbon avoidance, etc.);  
• Improving the competitiveness of the private sector (companies and 
individuals) by upgrading production facilities and giving access to new climate -
related technologies at affordable costs  
• Increasing societal recognition and demand by clients, employees, civil 
society, and financial partners.  
 
 
                                                             
2 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_ -
_Performance_Measurement_Frameworks__PMF_.pdf/60941cef -7c87 -475f-809e -4ebf1acbb3f4


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 93 
 
 H 
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Basel
ine Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if 
applicable)  
Q2 2022  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
Shift to low emission sustainable development pathway  
M1.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy access 
and power generation  1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2eq) reduced or 
avoided  
 LFP and / or 
Verification 
consultant 
(ex ante 
calculation 
at sub -
project level 
to be 
financed 
under the 
AFD -GCF 
Programme)  
AFD local 
office (first 
level 
control)  
AFD Project  
manager 
(second level 
control)  
AFD Climate 
division (on 
a case by 
case basis)  
Independent 
auditor (on a 
case by case 
basis)  
 
 0 4,600, 00
0  
tCO 2eq 13,900, 00
0 
tCO 2 eq Assuming 35% of 
financing in the RE 
sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
Assuming projects 
deliver intended 
carbon savings  
Assuming 20 -year 
asset life  
 
M3.0 Reduced emissions 
from buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances   
3.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2eq) reduced or 
avoided  
 
 
 0 4,000, 00
0 
TCO 2eq 12,100, 00
0 TCO 2 eq Assuming 5% of 
financing in the 
waste management 
sector and 20% of 
financing in the EE 
sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
Assuming projects 
deliver intended 
carbon savings  
Assuming 20 -year 
asset life


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 93 
 
 H 
M4.0 Reduced emissions 
from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and 
through sustainable 
forest management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks   
4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2eq) reduced or 
avoided  
 
  
 0 6,700, 00
0 
TCO 2 eq 20,200,00
0 
TCO 2 eq Assuming 30% of 
financing in the 
forestry and 
agriculture sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
Assuming projects 
deliver intended 
carbon savings  
Assuming there is 
sufficient buy -in 
from communities 
to ensure sustained 
delivery of 
interventions  
Increased climate resilient sustainable development   
A 1.0 Increased resilience 
of health and well -being, 
and food and water 
security  1.2 Number of males 
and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate -
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  Same as 
above  0 430, 000  1,300,000  
 Assuming 30% of 
financing in the 
agriculture and 
forestry sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
Assuming there is 
sufficient buy -in 
from communities 
to ensure sustained 
delivery of 
interventions  
A 2.0 Increased resilience 
of health and well -being, 
and food and water 
security  2.2 Number or food -
secure households 
(in areas/periods at 
risk of climate change 
impacts)  Same as 
above  0 16,5 00 50,000  
 Assuming 25% of 
financing in the 
agriculture sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
Assuming there is 
sufficient buy -in 
from communities


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 93 
 
 H 
to ensure sustained 
delivery of 
interventions  
A 2.0 Increased resilience 
of health and well -being, 
and food and water 
security  2.3 Number of males 
and females with 
year -round access to 
reliable and safe 
water supply despite 
climate shock s and 
stresses  Same as 
above  0  73,000  220,000  
 Assuming 10% of 
financing in the 
water management 
sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change  3.1 Value of physical  
assets made more  
resilient to  
climate variability 
and change,  
considering human  
benefits (reported 
where applicable)  See above  0 145 M€ 440 M€ Assuming 40% of 
financing in 
adaptation  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 93 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/ Programme  level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)   Final  
Project/ Programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems  5.1. Institutional  
and regulatory  
systems that improve  
incentives for low 
emission  
planning and  
development and  
their effective  
implementation  
  
AFD local 
office  
TA 
AFD Climate 
division  
National 
publications 
(statistics , 
decree, etc.)  0 3 14 Assuming a t least 1 
project 
implemented in 
each country 
targeted by the 
Programme  
Assuming political 
ambition to foster 
development and 
climate change 
mitigation 
strategies  
Assuming  that 
dialogue and 
consultations 
carried out with   
public authorities 
will enable to 
strengthen  
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
in the end  
Assuming sufficient 
buy-in from the 
institutional 
counterparts 
(success rate of 
80% )


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 93 
 
 H 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low -emission power 
suppliers  6.2 Number of 
individuals (males 
and females) with 
improved access to 
low-emission energy 
sources  LFP and / or 
Verification 
consultant 
(ex ante 
calculation at 
sub-project 
level to be 
financed 
under the 
AFD -GCF 
Programme ) 
AFD local 
office (first 
level control)  
AFD Project 
manager 
(second level 
control)  
AFD Climate 
division (on 
a case by 
case basis)  
Independent 
auditor (on a 
case by case 
basis)  0 90,000  
individu
als  
 270,00
0 Assuming 35% of 
financing in the RE 
sector, excluding 
rehabilitation.  
 
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
Assuming no major 
change in energy 
prices.   
 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low-emission power 
suppliers  6.3 MWs of low -
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated  
 0 
MW  120 
MW  360  
MW  Assuming 35% of 
financing in the RE 
sector, excluding 
rehabilitation.  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
 
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances  7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  
 Same as 
above  0 
GWh/yea
r 85 
GWh/ye
ar 260 
GWh/y
ear Assuming 20% of 
financing in  the EE 
sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions  9.1 Hectares of land 
or forests under 
improved and 
effective 
management that 
contributes to CO 2 
emission reductions  Same as 
above  0  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Assuming 30% of 
financing in the 
agriculture and 
forestry sector  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
Assuming


---
*Page 72*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 93 
 
 H 
 
17,7 00  
53,000  communities are 
cooperative and 
adopt enhanced 
practices  
Assuming extreme  
weather events do 
not happen during 
the project 
implementation  
Calculation 
assumptions are 
based on  projects 
tackling drip 
irrigation and  
reforestation with 
high value species 
only  
Additional mitigation 
outcome  Number of 
companies 
successfully 
developing low 
carbon investment 
or  service  AFD local 
office  
TA 0 230  680  
 Assuming 60% of 
financing in 
mitigation  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development  5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems 
that improve 
incentives for climate 
resilience and their 
effective 
implementation  AFD local 
office  
TA 
AFD Climate 
division  
National 
publications 
(stasitics, 
decree, etc.)   
 
 
0  
 
 
3  
 
 
14 Assuming 40% of 
financing in 
adaptation  
Assuming at least 1 
project 
implemented in 
each country 
targeted by the 
Programme  
Assuming 
institutional 
ambition to foster 
development and 
climate change 
adaptation 
strategies  
Assuming  that 
dialogue and 
consultations


---
*Page 73*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 93 
 
 H 
carried out with   
public authorities 
will enable to 
strengthen  
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
in the end  
Assuming sufficient 
buy-in from the 
institutional 
counterparts 
(success rate of 
80%)  
A6.0 Increased 
generation and use of 
climate information in 
decision -making  6.2 Number of 
companies using   
climate information 
products / services 
in climate -sensitive 
sectors  AFD local 
office  
TA 
AFD Climate 
division  0 370  1,100  Assuming 40% of 
financing in 
adaptation  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the 
programme’s 
investment targets  
 
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk -
reduction processes  8.1 Number of males 
and females made 
aware of climate 
threats and related 
appropriate 
responses  AFD local 
office  
TA 0 2,700  
  
8,300  
 Assuming 40% of 
financing in 
adaptation  
Assuming  1,100 
companies use 
climate information 
products / services 
in climate -sensitive 
sectors  
Assuming sufficient 
buy-in from the 
companies’ 
employees  (success 
rate of 66 %) 
 
Additional adaptation  
outcome  Number of 
companies 
successfully 
developing climate 
resilience investment 
and services  Same as 
above  0 150  450  
 Assuming 40% of 
financing in 
adaptation  
Assuming AFD 
achieves the


---
*Page 74*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 93 
 
 H 
 programme’s 
investment targets  
 
Project/Programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Loan component:  
Commercially viable 
climate -related and 
sustainable projects are 
identified, financed and 
implemented   
 
Volume of financing  
(MEUR)  LFPs 
Monitoring 
report  
AFD 
monitoring 
report  
Independent 
audit report 
(if relevant)   
0  
365   
1100   
Financial and 
technical resources 
deployed in the 
course of the 
Programme will 
enable the 
emergence of 
climate -related 
projects  
  
2. Grant component:  
Climate -related and 
sustainable projects 
technical and financing 
skills are successfully 
integrated  Number of people 
trained  
Number of climate 
strategies 
implemented or 
strengthened  
Number of E&S and 
gender policy  
implemented or 
strengthened  
Number of marketing 
strategy and 
communication 
campaigns  
 LFPs 
Monitoring 
report  
AFD 
monitoring 
report  
Independent 
audit report 
(if relevant)  0 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
0 400  
 
15 
 
 
15 
 
15 1200  
 
40 
 
 
40 
 
40 Around 30 people 
trained per LFP  
Around 40 LFPs 
financed under the  
Programme  
3. Guarantee component: 
Climate -related 
investments have access 
to finance  
 Number companies 
benefitting indirectly 
of the guarantee 
mechanism  
 
Volume of loans 
guaranteed  (M EUR)  
 LFPs 
Monitoring 
report  
AFD 
monitoring 
report  
Independent 
audit report 
(if relevant)  0 
 
0 NA 
 
NA 20 
 
80 
MEUR  
 
 Assuming a total 
amount of 
guarantee of 56M€ 
 
Assuming a % of 
cover of 70%  
 
Assuming an 
average ticket size 
of 2,7MEUR


---
*Page 75*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 93 
 
 H 
 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Output 1. Loan 
component  
 
Activity 1.1:Financing of 
climate and sustainable 
investments (adaptation 
and mitigation)  
 Providing credit facilities to local 
financial partners with adapted 
financial incentives and eligibility 
criteria tailored to foster the best 
local climate investments : apprai sal 
process of LFP , structuring project in 
line with eligibility criteria, execution 
of relevant l oan agreements  with 
LFPs , monitoring and reporting, 
project evaluation   
 Financial  
resources to finance 
adaptation and 
mitigation projects  
  
Mobilisation  of financial 
resources with adapted 
conditions (tenor, grace 
period, interest rate)  
Output 2. Grant 
component  
 
Activity 2.1:  Support ing 
the identification and 
development of eligible 
and bankable climate -
related projects  Buildin g LFPs’ pipeline of projects , 
eligibility assessment of sponsors’ 
projects, review ing and improving  
projects’ business models, assessing 
technical and financial risks of 
projects  Financial  
and 
technical expertise  
deployed to  
develop, assess,  
and report  
on projects  
  
Mobilisation of technical and 
financial experts to support 
LFPs and projects sponsors in 
the following sectors: 
renewables, energy efficiency, 
water, waste, forestry, 
agriculture  
Output 2. Grant 
component  
 
Activity 2.2:   Support ing 
the definition and 
implementation of 
climate strategies  Defining climate strategies, d efining  
climate objectives/indicators, setting 
up of dedicated operational 
procedures, establishment of 
assessment tools for climate related 
projects (CO2 measurement, etc.), 
knowledge tran sfer on climate -
related technologies.  
 
 Expertise and skills  
transfer for  
LFP’s  
capacity  
enhancement on 
climate  Mobilisation of Climate 
experts  
Implementation of climate 
policy,  procedures and 
assessment  tools  
Internal training  
Field visits  / Sharing of 
experience


---
*Page 76*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 93 
 
 H 
 
  Output 2. Grant 
component  
 
Activity 2.3: Capacity 
building:  management of 
environmental and social 
risks  Supporting LFPs in defining and 
implementing an E&S management 
system, training LFP on how to 
assess, reduce, mitigate E&S risks, 
raising awareness on E&S issues in 
different sectors.  Expertise and skills  
transfer for  
LFP’s  
capacity  
enhancement on E&S 
risk management  Mobilisation of E&S experts  
Implementation of E&S risk 
management policy and  
procedures  
Implementation of sector -
specific guidelines  
Internal training  
Field visit  / Sharing of 
experience  
 
Output 2. Grant 
component  
 
Activity 2.4: Support ing 
the definition and 
implementation of a 
gender policy  Supporting LFPs in defining a Gender 
diagnosis and Gender action plan, 
training of LFPs’ employees, raising 
awareness  within the LFPs through 
events , information sharing . Expertise and skills  
transfer for  
LFP’s  
capacity  
enhancement on 
gender  
 Mobilisation of gender 
experts  
Implementation of gender 
policy and sector -specific 
guideline s 
Internal training  
Field visit  / Sharing of 
experience  
 
Output 2. Grant 
component  
 
Activity 2.5: Support ing 
marketing and 
communication activities  Supporting LFPs in structuring a 
green climate offer,  defining a related  
marketing plan, designing  leaflets 
and communication tools for LFPs to 
promote the offer.  Marketing and 
communication event 
using internal and/or 
external resources  Mobilisation of marketing, 
communication and web -
design experts  
 
Mobilisation of training 
engineering experts  
 
Output 3. Guarantee 
component  
 
Activity 3.1:  Provide a 
guarantee mechanism to 
climate and sustainable 
investments  by LFPs  Structuring and signing Guarantee 
agreements between AFD and LFPs 
in line with the eligibility criteria for 
Guarantees.  
 Provide silent 
guarantees to loans 
granted by LFP to 
final beneficiaries   Mobilization of AFD’s local 
and international guarantee 
experts  
 
 
Guarantees have a huge 
leverage impact on financing  
green investments


---
*Page 77*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 93 
 
 H 
 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements laid out in AMA, please provide project/ programme  specific institutional setting and 
implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please indicate how the interim/mid -
term and final evalua tions will be organized, including the timing.  Please provide methodologies for monitoring and 
reporting of the key outcomes of the project/ programme . 
 
At project  level 
During the disbursement period, AFD  will receive reports from LFPs implementation to track progress and identify 
potential issues as well as improvement opportunities . In this document, LFP s will report on a semi -annual or annual 
basis  on performance indicators (e .g. MW installed capacity, TeqCO2 avoided, etc.) , as well as qualitative info rmation 
(climate strategy, training, growth of green portfolio, etc.) , as defined in the AFD -LFP credit facility agreement.  
AFD local agencies will ensure the day -to-day monitoring by overseeing the implementation of projects, meeting with 
LFPs on  a regula r basis, ensuring coordination with TA, exchanging with local government , etc. Every semester , they 
will review projects’ performance and assess any potential risks. The local agency staff will be able to check the validity 
and robustness of the projects’ results thanks to their proximity , strong knowledge of the situation on the ground , and 
these regular exchanges and visits.  
Project Managers (based in AFD ’s Paris headquarters) or accredited consultants will visit projects and meet LFPs on 
average once in a year . Following this mission, a project implementation report will be shared with all the project 
stakeholders (e.g. LFP s, local authorities , and other parties involved). Project Managers will be responsible for 
overseeing project implementation and for approving funding disbursements. On a yearly basis, all projects will be 
assessed through an internal quality review process based on several i ndicators (technical implementation, 
disbursement, procurement, outcomes, etc.). Red flag projects that meet any kind of difficulties are subject to a specific 
monitoring process before returning to a regular implementation pathway.  
Controls will be perfor med before every disbursement so as to continuously oversee the correct implementation of 
projects. In particular, AFD  will ensure that the required conditions have been fulfilled before proceeding with a 
disbursement. Accounting and financial audits could  also be conducted by the Group AFD  or an independent third  
party.  
At the end of the disbursement period, AFD will prepare a project completion report summarizing the main events of the 
implementation phase, the results achieved , and the lessons learned. T his report will also provide recommendations for 
future improvement.  
During the repayment period, a biannual monitoring of the use of funds  will be carried out by the local agencies and at 
corporate level by the middle  office.  
In addition, about a year after the drafting of the project completion report, the Evaluation department of AFD may 
conduct an ex -post evaluation of projects or appoint a local consultant  to do so . In most cases, AFD prefers to select a 
local consulting firm based in the country where the project is located. This allows the Agency to take advantage of 
deep contextual knowledge and to help develop local evaluation skills.  
The consultant will be tasked with evaluating the impact of the project (economic, environmental, etc.) and wri ting a 
report that will be shared with all relevant stakeholders (central and local governments, companies, NGOs, etc.) and 
could also be made public.  
It is worth not ing that the evaluation function within AFD refers to the same evaluation principles and c riteria developed 
by the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) and its evaluation protocols are similar. AFD adheres to its 
principles for evaluation, which are impartiality and independence, credibility, usefulness, participation (of local 
partners)  and coordination (with other donors). The evaluations aim to improve future projects and programme s by


---
*Page 78*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 93 
 
 H 
 deriving lessons from experience and to find ways to make aid more effective.  
 
At Programme  level 
 
An Annual Performance Report s (APR) will be submitted to the GCF  following reporting requirements under the AMA 
and FAA , in parallel to performance and financial information at country and LFP -level.  In particular, the APR will 
include a  narrative report on the implementation progress  based on the logical framework, considerations on the 
ongoing performance of the Programme , updates on the indicators , and a report on ESS as well as gender.  
The APR will be submitted to the Secretariat on an annual basis for the period ending on 31 December within 60 days 
after the end of the relevant annual period . The first APR will be submitted following the end of the calendar year after 
the Parties have entered into the relevant FAA and the last APR will be submitted within six months of the end  of the 
relevant reporting period.  
 
The implementation reporting period of the Programme  will start from the date of effectiveness of  the FAAs until the 
Programme implementation end  date. Financial reporting will continue until full repayment of the loans . 
 
The mid -term and final  independent  evaluation of the Programme  will be organized and managed by the Evaluation 
department, on the same basis as any project funded under the Programme .


---
*Page 79*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 91 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
  I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility Study  (if available)  : See the c ountry forms  
☐ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if applicable ) – 
non applicable  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (If applicable)  
☒ Project/ Programme  Confirmation /Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement  and Term -sheet  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan  (cat 
I-1 Programme) :  
https://www.afd.fr/fr/cadre -environnemental -et-social  
https://www.afd.fr/en/environmental -and-social -framework  
https://www.afd.fr/es/marco -ambiental -y-social  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/fil es/2018 -02-12-10-22/Environmental -social -framework -arabic -
version.pdf ☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) – Non applicable  
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) – Non applicable  
☒ Map indicating the location of the Project/ Programme – cf. section A.1.3  
☒ Timetable of Project/ Programme implementation – cf. section C.8  
☒ Programme procurement plan  
☒ Gender action plan  
☒ Indicative list of eligible climate technologies  (Annex A)  
☒ AFD carbon assessment methodology  (Annex B)  
☒ AFD methodology approach for estimating private climate finance mobilized by credit lines


---
*Page 80*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 91 
 
 I 
ANNEX  A: INDICATIVE LIST OF CLIMATE TECHNOLOGIES  
 
This list is indicative and may evolve depending on the market developments and local needs identified during the 
implementation of the Programme. The Programme will seek to ensure the use of best technologies available in each 
market.  
 
Key: 
Mitigation technolog ies are shown in green  
Adaptation technolog ies (to be confirmed according to the local context / vulnerability assessment)  are shown in red  
 
Category  Sub-category  Type of Climate Technologies  
1. Renewable 
Energy  1.1 Electricity   
Generation  Wind power  
Geothermal power (only if net emission reductions can be 
demonstrated)  
Solar power (concentrated solar power, photovoltaic power, solar 
home system (SHS))  
Biomass, biofuel or biogas power with positive carbon balance  that 
does not threaten food security  
• Rehabilitation/construction of biomass units for heat and/or 
electricity generation (combustion, pyrolysis, gasification, 
etc.) 
• Rehabilitation/construction  of biofuels plants (biodiesel, 
ethanol, etc.)  
• Rehabilitation/construction of biogas valorization plants 
(cogeneration, purification, etc.) in waste treatment plants 
(landfill, organic waste treatment plants, etc.)  
 
Ocean power (wave, tidal, ocean currents, salt gradient, etc.)  
Small and Medium Hydropower plants (only if net emission 
reductions can be demonstrated) with environmental and social 
impacts’ mitigation  
Renewable energy power plant retrofits  
1.2 Heat Production or 
other renewable Solar water heating and other thermal applications of solar power in 
all sectors


---
*Page 81*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 91 
 
 I 
energy application  Thermal applications of geothermal power in all sectors  
Wind -driven pumping systems or similar  
Thermal applications of sustainably/produced bioenergy in all 
sectors, incl. efficient, improved biomass stoves  
• Plantations of products or sub -products to produce biofuels 
(wood, charcoal, pellets, etc.)  
• Fabrication/distribution of biofuels from biomass (wood, 
agricultural or industrial sub -products, etc.)  
• Conception/construction/distribution of improved cook 
stoves for biofuels  
1.3 Transmission and 
distribution systems, 
greenfield  New transmission systems (lines, substations) or new systems (e.g., 
new information and communication technology, storage facility, etc.) 
to facilitate the integration of renewable energy sources into grid  
Green mini -grid systems or off -grid solutions (including, hybrid 
system of solar PV and diesel generator)  
Improving existing systems to facilitate the integration of renewable 
energy sources into grid  
2. Lower -carbon 
and efficient 
energy 
generation3 2.1 Transmission and 
distribution systems  Retrofit of transmission lines or substations and/or distribution 
systems to reduce energy use and/or technical losses, excluding 
capacity expansion  
Smart metering : rehabilitation/installation of smart and/or 
communicating meters  
Demand -side Management (DSM) : rehabilitation/installation of 
infrastructure and control software for distribution networks  
Installation of equipment toward a better network management 
(service interruption management, loss reduction,…)  
 
2.2 Power Plants  Renewable -energy based hybrid system (e.g. including a renewable 
energy generation component)  
Hybridization of existing power plants through adding a renewable -
energy based component  
Conversion of existing fossil -fuel based power plant to co-generation 
technologies that generate electricity in addition to providing 
heating/cooling  
Waste heat recovery improvements.  
                                                             
3 only if net  emission reductions can be demonstrated


---
*Page 82*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 91 
 
 I 
3.  Energy 
efficiency4 3.1 Brownfield energy 
efficiency in industry  Industrial energy -efficiency improvements though the installation of 
more efficient equipment, changes in processes, reduction of heat 
losses and/or increased waste heat recovery  
 
Installation of co/generation plants that generate electricity in addition 
to providing heating/cooling  
More efficient facility replacement of an older facility 
(old facility retired)  
3.2 Brownfield energy 
efficiency in 
commercial, public 
and residential sectors 
(buildings)  Energy -efficiency improvement in lighting,  appliances and equipment  
Substitution of existing heating/cooling systems for buildings by 
co/generation plants that generate electricity in addition to providing 
heating/cooling  
Retrofit of existing buildings: Architectural or building changes that 
enable reduction of energy consumption  
3.3 Brownfield energy 
efficiency in public 
services  Energy -efficiency improvement in utilities and public services through 
the installation of more efficient lighting or equipment  
Rehabilitation of district heating systems  
Utility heat loss reduction and/or increased waste heat recovery  
Improvement in utility scale energy efficiency through efficient energy 
use, and loss reduction  
3.4 Vehicle energy 
efficiency fleet retrofit  Existing vehicles, rail or boat fleet retrofit or replacement (including 
the use of lower -carbon fuels, electric or hydrogen technologies, etc.)  
3.5 Greenfield energy 
efficiency in 
commercial and 
residential sectors 
(buildings)  Use of highly efficient architectural designs, energy efficiency 
appliances and equipment, and building techniques that reduce 
building energy consumption, exceeding available standards and 
complying with high energy efficiency certification or rating schemes  
3.6 Energy audits  Energy audits to energy end -users, including industries, buildings, 
and transport systems  
4. Agriculture, 
forestry and 
land-use 4.1 Agriculture  Agroecology, conservation agriculture  with in minimal soil 
disturbance, permanent soil cover and crop rotations  
Land project development (soil protection, water protection, 
                                                             
4 only if net emission reductions can be demonstrated


---
*Page 83*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 91 
 
 I 
  
  
  earthwork, etc.)  
Adaptable /  Climate -resilient species (resistant to drought, flooding, 
high temperatures, salinity, etc)  
Reduction in energy use in traction (e.g. efficient tillage), irrigation, 
and other agriculture processes  
 
Rural energy (mill, solar pumping, other renewables)  
Agriculture projects that do not deplete and/or improve existing 
carbon pools (Reduction in fertilizer use, rangeland management, 
collection and use of bagasse, rice husks, or other agricultural waste, 
low tillage techniques that increase carbon contents of soil, 
rehabilitation of degraded lands, etc.)  
4.2 Afforestation and 
reforestation, and 
biosphere 
conservation  
  Afforestation (plantations) on non -forested land, Agroforestry  
Reforestation on previously forested land  
Sustainable forest management activities that increase carbon 
stocks or reduce the impact of forestry activities  
Biosphere conservation projects (including payments for ecosystem 
services) targeting reducing emissions from the deforestation or 
degradation of ecosystems  
4.3 Livestock  Livestock projects that reduce methane or other GHG emissions 
(manure management with biodigestors, etc.)  
Wind / Solar electric fence  
Rehabilitation of degraded grazing area in agricultural or wooded 
area  
4.4 Biofuels, 
Biomass5 Plantations of organic products or sub -products to supply 
bioelectricity/biofuel/biogas production (including biodiesel and 
bioethanol)  
                                                             
5 Only if biomass project  does not threaten the food security and biodiversity of the concerned area and 
does not imply important population displacement; project’s energy balance and carbon footprint must be 
assessed  ; multi -purposes project (food and non -food project) should be preferred, fair and equitable 
benefit -sharing amongst the  project’s stakeholders (incl. gender equality).


---
*Page 84*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 91 
 
 I 
5. Non -energy 
GHG reductions  5.1 Carbon capture 
and storage  Projects for carbon capture and storage technology  that intend to 
prevent release of large quantities of CO 2 into the atmosphere from  
process emissions in industries  
5.2 Air conditioning 
and refrigeration  Retrofit of existing industrial, commercial and residential 
infrastructure to switch to cooling agent with lower global warming 
potential  
5.34 Industrial 
processes  Reduction in GHG emissions resulting from industrial process 
improvements and cleaner production, excluding carbon capture and 
storage  
6. Water  6.1 Integrated water 
resources 
management  Strengthening meteorological and hydrological services  
Providing support for concertation tools, participative water 
management and fair and sustainable water sharing (ex. Basin 
Authorities)  
Develop integrated information system on hydro -meteoro logy 
6.2 Water use 
efficiency  Optimized irrigation techniques  
Installation of rainwater harvesting system  
Installation of water re -use/recycling system  
Rehabilitation of water distribution networks to reduce water 
leakages  
Diversification of water provision resources and installation of water 
production installation ensuring an efficient and sustainable use of 
water  
6.3 Fight against 
saltwater intrusion  Coastal zone protection investments (dykes, protective works,etc.)  
7. Waste and 
wastewater   7.1 Wastewater  Treatment of wastewater if not a compliance requirement (e.g. 
performance standard or safeguard) as part of a larger project that 
reduce methane emissions  (only if net emission reductions can be 
demonstrated)  
7.2 Waste to energy  Waste management and waste -to-energy projects that reduce 
methane emissions and generate energy (e.g. incineration of waste, 
landfill gas capture, and landfill gas combustion)  
7.3 Recycling or reuse  Waste -recycling projects that recover or reuse materials and waste 
as inputs into new products or as a resource (only if net emission 
reductions can be demonstrated).


---
*Page 85*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 91 
 
 I 
 8. 
Infrastructures 
and urban 
development  Resilient infrastructure 
/ Buildings  Dikes to protect economic infrastructures against sea level rise and 
loss and damage due to storms and coastal flooding  
Building protective works, resilient infrastructures to reduce exposure 
to risks and to mitigate impacts of extreme weather events  
Early warning systems enable to improve natural disasters 
management and reduce loss/damages  
Housings to response to climate change  
9. Transport  9.1 Urban transport 
modal change  Urban mass transit. Non -motorized transport (bicycles and 
pedestrian mobility)  
9.2 Transport oriented 
urban development  Integration of transport and urban development planning (dense 
development, multiple land -use, walking communities, transit 
connectivity, etc.), leading to a reduction in the use of passenger 
cars  
Transport demand management measures to reduce GHG 
emissions (e.g., speed limits, high -occupancy vehicle lanes, 
congestion charging/road pricing, parking management, restriction or 
auctioning of license   plates, car -free city areas, low -emission 
zones).  
9.3 Inter -urban 
transport  Railway transport ensuring a modal shift of freight and/or passenger 
transport from road to rail (improvement of existing lines or 
construction of new lines)  
10. Low -carbon 
technologies  10.1 Products or 
equipment  Projects producing components, equipment or infrastructure 
dedicated for the renewable and energy efficiency sectors  
10.2 R&D  Research and development of renewable energy or energy efficiency 
technologies  
11. Cross -
cutting issues  11.1 Support to 
national, regional or 
local policy, through 
technical assistance or 
policy lending, fully or 
partially dedicated to 
climate change policy 
or action  Mitigation and adaptation  national, sectorial or territorial 
policies/planning/action plan policy/planning/institutions  
Energy sector policies and regulations (energy efficiency standards 
or certification schemes; energy efficiency procurement schemes; 
renewable energy policies)  
Systems for monitoring the emissions of greenhouse gases  
Efficient pricing of fuels and electricity (subsidy rationalization, 
efficient end -user tariffs, and efficient regulations on electricity 
generation, transmission, or distribution),


---
*Page 86*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 91 
 
 I 
Education, training, capacity building and awareness raising on 
climate change adaptatio n/mitigation/sustainable energy/sustainable 
transport; adaptation and mitigation research  
Other policy and regulatory activities, including those in non -energy 
sectors, leading to climate change adaptation, mitigation or 
mainstreaming of climate action  
11.2 Other activities 
with net greenhouse 
gas reduction  Any other activity not included in this list for which the results of an 
ex ante greenhouse gas accounting (undertaken according to 
commonly agreed methodologies) show emission reductions


---
*Page 87*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 91 
 
 I 
ANNEX  B: AFD Carbon Footprint  
 
I.1. The AFD Carbon Footprint Tool’s general  principles  
 
A. The  AFD Carbon Footprint Tool’s guiding principle   
The AFD Carbon Footprint Tool’s accounting method uses a project’s or an activity’s operational data to 
estimate its GHG emissions. A carbon footprint calculation is created by making an inventory of a 
project’s activities, using physical data inputs, e.g., kilowatt -hours (kWh) of electricity and/or tonnes of 
diesel consumed; quantities of cement, steel and/or plastic used; amount of waste produced or the 
number of people transported, etc. The quantities  are entered in a spreadsheet that directly computes 
each item’s emissions in carbon dioxide equivalents (CO 2e) via a scientifically determined ‘emission 
factor’ embedded in the spreadsheet. As it multiplies the activity’s ‘observable’ physical data values  by 
this emission factor, the spreadsheet instantly converts each physical value into its CO 2e using kilograms 
and/or metric tonnes as a unit of measure.  
Some examples of emission factors follow:  
- 1 kWh of electricity consumed in China equals 0.74 kilogram s (kg) of CO 2e emissions (source: 
International Energy Agency, 2009).   
- Producing one metric tonne of cement emits 862 kg CO 2e. 
- A short -haul 500 -kilometer (km) airplane flight in business class generates 330 kg CO 2e. 
 
When using the Tool calculator it is im portant to keep in mind the relatively high or low levels of 
certainty for each emission factor: the calculated result remains an approximation. The AFD Carbon 
Footprint Tool aims for flexibility and ease of use more than accuracy so that information repre senting 
orders of magnitude can inform pre -project analyses and support decision -making.  
B. Gases measured  
The AFD Carbon Footprint Tool’s emissions inventory counts the six main greenhouse gases identified in 
the Kyoto Protocol:  
- Carbon Dioxide (CO 2), which results primarily from combusting fossil fuels and from producing 
aluminium, steel, cement and glass.  
- Methane (CH 4), which results from burning and/or decomposing biomass (organic material) and 
from producing and/or refining gasoline and natural gas.   
- Nitrous Oxide (N2O), which results from incinerating solid waste, spreading fertilizers, and/or 
various transportation means.  
- Hydrofluorocarbons  (HFC), which occur as a by -product of industrial processes making 
insulation, refrigeration and air conditio ning.  
- Perfluorocarbons  (PFC), which occur as a by -product of aluminium production.  
- Sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6), which is used for insulation and current interruption in electricity 
transmission and distribution equipment and electronic systems.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 91 
 
 I 
- In additio n, the Tool counts GHG emissions from air travel, such as water vapour trails in the 
stratosphere, various forms of condensed water, nitrogen oxides (NO x), and methane, which 
combined create Ozone (03): these gases are included in the emission factors.  
-  
C. CO 2 equivalent: a common measurement unit for GHG impacts  
Each type of greenhouse gas has a different potency and atmospheric global warming potential. For 
instance, sulphur hexafluoride is the most potent greenhouse gas in existence. It has a global warming 
potential 23,900 times greater than carbon dioxide; one -half kilo of SF 6 has the same global warming 
impact as 11 tonnes of carbon dioxide.  
To reconcile the differences between the warming potentials of various gases and have a consistent 
measure for varying warming impacts, a specific measurement unit – the tonne CO 2 equivalent  or tCO 2e 
– is used. It expresses the equivalency of one metric tonne of GHG to the number of metric tonnes of 
CO 2 needed to generate the same warming effect over one -hundre d years. (For more information, see 
the 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report, page 36: 
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment -report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr.pdf)   
D. Sources of emissions  
AFD’s methodology and the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool use the same sources of emissions and 
nomenclature as the ISO 14069 standard for the ‘Carbon Footprint of Organisations’. Emissions are 
separated into two distinct categories according to the project’s phase – construction vs. operation – 
and further sub -categories, as follows:  
 Project ‘Construction Phase’ emissions sources:  
- Clearing: deforestation  
- Construction materials: production of cement, steel, metals, etc.,  
- Construction energy consumption: fuel and electricity used during constructio n 
 
 Project ‘Operating Phase’ emissions sources:   
- Fuel consumption: combustion of fossil fuels  
- Electricity/heat consumption  
- Other process emissions: includes non -energy producing processes, especially 
decarbonation from cement clinker production, methane released from mining and dam 
reservoirs, methanization of organic waste and wastewater, nitrous oxide released by 
spreading fertilizer or from industrial gases, particularly coolants  
- Purchase of goods and services: includes the production of products cons umed due to the 
project’s activity, especially metals, plastics, glass, paper and cardboard, and chemical and 
agricultural products  
- Freight: moving commodities, inputs and/or finished products by road, rail, air or ocean  
- Passenger transport  
- Waste and waste water  
- Land use: changing how land is used, resulting in emissions from biomass and soil  
- Utilisation: people’s use of utilities and infrastructure and/or factories or other buildings. 
Includes the mix of their use of transportation, electricity, fuels, products, etc., and their 
waste


---
*Page 89*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 91 
 
 I 
- End of life: disposing of built or produced objects  
 
I.2. AFD’s principles for measuring its projects’ climate impacts  
 
A. Transparency  
A common thread ties the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool methodology together: the principle of 
transparency. The assumptions and data sources used for a project’s carbon footprint calculations must 
be explained clearly to ensure a transparent audit trail from the operational data, through the 
assumptions, to the resulting estimates.  
B. Scope of e missions  
The AFD Carbon Footprint Tool calculation is compatible with the definition of ‘Scopes’ 1, 2 and 3 in the 
GHG Protocol6  (see Figure 1).  
Figure 1. GHG Operational Boundaries and ‘Scopes’  
 
Source : Greenhouse Gas Protocol, Corporate Accounting and  Reporting Standard , Chapter 4 ‘Setting Operational Boundaries’ 
(April 2004)  
Scope 1 = Direct GHG emissions,  from sources directly related to a project’s activity, e.g., combustion, 
etc. 
                                                             
6 AFD’s methodology dr aws from Chapter 4 (Setting Operational Boundaries) in the Corporate Accounting and 
Reporting Standard  of the Gree nhouse Gas Protocol Initiative.  http://www.ghgprotocol.org/standards/corporate -
standard


---
*Page 90*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 91 
 
 I 
Scope 2 =  Electricity indirect GHG emissions , from the generation of purchased electricity and/or heat 
needed for the project’s activity.  
Scope 3  = Other indirect GHG emissions , from the production of materials purchased from other 
parties and used in the project’s activity, e.g., production and/or extraction of purchased materials, 
waste disposal, and use of sold products and services.  
The methodology used to measure the GHG emissions of AFD -financed projects accounts for direct 
and indirect emissions, both up - and downstream from a project, as per Scopes 1, 2 and 3.   
The scope of a project’s indirect emissions can be quite large, and the difficulty of obtaining suitable 
data can hamper including them in an AFD Carbon Footprint Tool calculation. The Tool helps resolve 
these issues as follows:   
- All emissions sources that can be quantified with a reasonable effort are included in the 
calculation’s scope  
- Indirect sources that are too difficult to quantify are not included in the calculation, but can be 
the subject of a complementary qualitative analysis  
- The factsheets in the  last section of this guide indicate which direct and indirect emissions 
sources are deemed critical to include – and which are not – for each primary project type  
 
 
Why measure direct and indirect GHG emissions?  
 
Measuring indirect emissions can pose problems: the risk of double counting, no ‘ownership’ or 
control over them, and regulatory frameworks that only cover direct emissions, such as the European 
Union Emission Trading System.  
 
Notwithstanding these issues, AFD’s choice to measure carbon footpr ints using the largest scope is in 
line with its goal to clarify the link between development and the climate, and follows a widespread 
trend:    
 
- in the same way that a project’s development impacts are measured via indirect effects, e.g., the 
number of  children in school or extent of road or air traffic, etc., understanding a project’s emissions 
must include its indirect emissions, e.g., vehicle or airplane emissions, final energy use, etc.  
- a project’s vulnerability to higher costs for fuel and/or to nne of CO 2 is tied to direct emissions and to 
the upstream and downstream value chain, e.g., a carbon -intensive supplier and/or changes in 
demand due to such price increases.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 91 
 
 I 
For example, in the transportation sector, it would not be pertinent to assess a  project’s carbon 
footprint without accounting for the emissions that would result once the infrastructure project was 
built. Thus the AFD Carbon Footprint calculation for a proposed airport or road project includes data 
about the airport’s or road’s activ ity, i.e., the plane or vehicle traffic that serves as the main source of 
the project’s emissions.  
C. Certainty and accuracy  
The AFD Carbon Footprint Tool’s purpose lies in providing an order -of-magnitude accounting for the 
GHG emissions that a future pro ject will create or abate. An approximate accounting is sufficient; the 
inherent uncertainties in some emission factors – as indicated in the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool – and 
the uncertainty of data means it is sometimes hard to determine precise values, es pecially since the 
calculation is made ex ante . However, for most projects, usually the main emissions sources are limited 
in number so any quantitative uncertainty will not affect their relative ranking and should not impede 
taking action in any way. Cons equently, for each primary project type financed by AFD, the Tool’s 
calculation accounts for only the main GHG emissions sources; they are indicated later in this document.  
A carbon footprint measurement – even if approximate – helps AFD analyse projects and guides 
investment and financing decisions; an order -of-magnitude accounting suffices for that.  
D. Conservativeness  
AFD, similarly to the GHG Protocol,7 uses a ‘conservative’ approach in measuring the carbon footprints 
of the projects it finances. The assumptions and values used to calculate the carbon footprint must tend 
towards overestimating emissions and underestimating reductions, especially if data inputs are 
uncertain.  
E. Project lifetime  
The calculation of GHG emissions resulting from a project covers the project’s entire lifetime, which the 
AFD Carbon Footprint Tool user determines. The project lifetime includes both construction and 
operating p hases:  
- Construction phase: If building the project will generate negligible emissions, its construction 
phase is not included in the accounting. If the project’s construction proves emissive, the Tool 
uses a one -year duration by default.  
- Operating phase: For ease of comparison, standardised lifetimes for each type of project are 
suggested below; the Tool user can change them on a case -by-case basis as needed. The 
standard lifetimes are set as:  
- 50 years for dams   
- 30 years for transportation infrastructure  
- 20 years for other projects  
                                                             
7 See The GHG Protocol for Project Accounting , December 2005, Chapter 4 , GHG Accounting Principles, p.22.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 91 
 
 I 
 
Annual GHG emissions are determined by dividing the project’s total lifetime (construction + operation) 
emissions by the total lifetime of the project.   
F. Emissions aggregated over time  
A project’s carbon footprint calculation is presented as follows:  
- Emissions generated during the construction phase in tCO 2e  
- Emissions generated or abated annually during the operating phase in tCO 2e per year  
 
To aggregate data and compare diff erent projects, the values for the construction and/or operating 
phases will be added together to show the average annual emissions over the project’s lifetime . No 
discount rate is applied to annual emissions.  
G. Measurable projects  
AFD’s Tool for measurin g carbon footprints can be used only for a certain type of project, i.e., a 
‘measurable’ and ‘significant’ project, as defined in the third category below.  
AFD categorises projects in three ways:  
- Projects that cannot  be measured with the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool  
This category includes budget support, some financial intermediation, budgetary financing for local 
governments, and capacity -building projects. In the future, changes to the Tool or new 
methodologies may al low measurement of these types of financing, but at present, the Tool can be 
used only with ‘direct’ financing.  
 
AFD is currently developing tools and methods to measure emissions for its intermediated financing 
operations; the difficulty of accurately attributing funds to one project or another poses a challenge.  
 
- Projects that can be measured with the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool  that have a negligible  
carbon footprint  
This category includes projects in sectors that AFD has identified as being weakly emis sive that AFD 
chooses not to measure, to avoid slowing down the project cycle. Among such projects, the 
following sectors stand out:  
o Healthcare  
o Education  
 
- Projects that can be measured and that have a significant  carbon footprint  
Other qualified project types are measurable and generate emissions significant enough to justify 
calculating their carbon footprint. This category includes any project that will reduce more emissions 
than it generates during its lifetime (see Box 1)  
 
- H. Project typology and designation  
AFD has adopted a definition for GHG emissions mitigation projects to improve the transparency of 
climate -friendly actions:


---
*Page 93*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 91 
 
 I 
 
A project contributes to mitigating GHG emissions when the emissions it reduces are greater than 
the emissions it generates over its lifetime.  
 
This definition helps clarify the border between projects that reduce GHG emission in absolute terms 
and those that improve an activity’s carbon intensity – especially by using more efficient ‘clean’ 
technology – but which increase emissions overall, as se en in Box 1 below.   
 
Box 1: Moving from a carbon -intensive to a low -carbon technology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. Emissions attributions  
To remain consistent with current carbon footprint measurement methodology, all emissions or 
emission reductions related to AFD -financed projects are counted without being pro -rated to the 
amount of funding AFD commits and without regard to the funding benefi ciary’s emissions’ ownership 
or scope, i.e., including Scope 3 indirect emissions. AFD uses the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool to measure 
a project’s total carbon footprint to understand a project’s whole impact, not just that part of it 
attributable to AFD’s f inancing activity.  
J. Definition and selection of baseline (reference situation)  
Since the objective in measuring a project’s carbon footprint is to estimate the emissions that it will 
generate or abate, the scenario where the project is financed, built and operated must be compared to 
a ‘reference situation’, i.e., a baseline that est imates what would happen if the project didn’t exist.   AFD qualifies projects as 
‘climate’ projects when 
total GHG emissions 
reach a lower level after 
the project is 
implemented than was 
reached before.  
 
If GHG emission levels are 
higher after a project is 
implemented, e.g., after 
an inc rease in production 
capacity, AFD does not 
give it the ‘climate’ 
project label.  
If the carbon -intensity of 
the project is lower, AFD 
labels it a ‘clean -
technology’ project.  
 
Emissions 
level before 
the project  
Emissions 
before  proje ct 
Trendline 1: Situation 
before  proje ct 
Production  
Tonnes of 
CO 2 emitted  
Trendline  2: Situation 
after proje ct 
Climate project    
Clean -technology 
project


---
*Page 94*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 91 
 
 I 
The reference situation  is defined as the most likely situation to occur in the project’s absence.  
Since it is possible to construct a multitude of scenarios, AFD proposes some standardised ones so t hat 
the results can be compared internally and decisions made about the best strategy to follow. A 
standardised scenario will be used as the reference situation unless a special case justifies a customised 
scenario; in such cases, the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool user must signal use of a customised reference 
situation and explain its basis.  
Note: The scope for calculations in the reference situation is the same as for the project.  
Generally, the standard reference situation represents a situation without the  project . (See Figure 1) 
EXCEPT for renewables, energy efficiency and transport (in line IFI’s agreed methodology)  
Choosing such reference situations makes projects aim for an ambitious counterfactual; this shows 
AFD’s ambition to be a strong actor in add ressing climate change, one who shuns ‘greenwashing’ and/or 
underestimating the emissions of projects it finances.  
 
For example, if a factory -refurbishing project increases energy efficiency, it is expected GHG emissions 
will be reduced, but if the project  also increases the factory’s production capacity, it is expected GHG 
emissions will increase accordingly. Hence, the AFD Carbon Footprint Tool calculation will account for 
both of the project’s effects , i.e., not only the emission reductions. Figure 2 ill ustrates this case:  
1) the red arrow only accounts for the effects of energy efficiency improvements, but not increased 
production (the red arrow shows the decrease in emissions);  
2) the blue arrow accounts for the theoretical effect of the increased effi ciency on post -project 
production capacity;  
3) the green arrow shows the net change in GHG emissions and therefore accounts for both effects, the 
effect of energy efficiency improvements and production capacity increases  
In this example, the reference sit uation adopted by AFD implies that the carbon footprint of the project 
is equal to the green arrow i.e., the difference between the ‘before project’ situation and the ‘after 
project’ situation)  
Figure 2. Examples of baselines for an energy efficiency + inc reased production project and AFD’s 
choice of baseline


---
*Page 95*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 91 
 
 I 
 
 
 
  
Post -project 
emissions 
level  
Project implementation  
Pre-project 
emissions 
level 
(baseline ) 
Time  
Tonnes 
of CO 2 
emitted  
Emissions theoretically abat ed through the approved project (in green 
below) in a scenario  where production capacity increases without any 
improvement in energy efficiency   not accounted for in project’s 
carbon footprint  
Project’s partial impact , counting only the ‘energy efficiency ’ part of 
the project on emissions levels without accounting for the increase in 
production capacity  not accounted for in project’s carbon footprint  
Project’s overall impact  on emissions levels in a post -project scenario 
that accounts for increasing pro duction capacity and improving energy 
efficiency  accounted for in project’s carbon footprint


---
*Page 96*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 91 
 
 I 
ANNEX C: Theory Of Change  
 
 
The theory of change diagram above outlines the theoretical logic of the project. Starting at 
, the project theory assumes that LFPs do not already create the proposed financial 
products because a) they do not recognize the sector as viable, b) their current capacity to 
develop and grow l ending in the sector is insufficient, and/or c) when they are given support 
they are willing and able to grow the market sector . The evidence base linking the supply of 
credit lines and risk guarantees to enhanced supply is high. Experience from AFD and other  
IFIs working on these instruments (i.e. green credit lines) shows that Local Financial Partners 
(LFPs) have a high desire to create such financial products.  
At  and  the P rogramme provides technical assistance to LFPs and project developers and 
this enhances capacity and demand  for such products . At  and  the evidence base can be 
considered to be of a medium -high level . AFD’s experience, including in the SUNREF 
Program me, shows that technical assistance does effectively contribute to the creation of 
demand. Assuming that supply  is enhanced and that  demand a nd capacity are sufficient to 
generate bankable projects at the credit conditions that LFPs provide to end -borrower , this 
will result in climate  projects (see  the link at  ) that deliver the GCF impacts (see ). The 
Technical assistance to Local 
Financial Partners and Project 
Developers / SME s  
To identify and develop projects  
To define & implement climate 
strategies  
To manage E&S  
To develop & implement gender 
policies  
To market and communicate climate 
finance  
To consult / involve beneficiaries and 
civil society  
Finance for Local Financial Partners  
Credit lines with concessional 
conditions tailored to needs  
Risk guarantees for selected loans  
Enhanced demand for 
finance for low carbon / 
climate resilient 
investments in SMEs  
Enhanced supply of 
finance for low carbon / 
climate resilient 
investments in SMEs  
Reduced emissions 
from low emission 
energy access & 
power generation, 
energy efficiency, 
waste management, 
and Land use, land -
use change and 
forestry (LULUF) and 
agriculture  
 
 
Increased climate 
resilient sustainable 
development from 
climate resilient 
livelihood s, food 
security, and 
resilient infra -
structure and built 
environment  
Increase in number of 
bankable climate 
projects  
 
& 
 
Increase in quality of 
projects from climate, 
E&S and gender 
perspectives  
 
…result  in 
 
An increase in the 
number and quali ty 
of financed and 
implemented low 
emission and 
climate resilient 
projects  
Enhanced capacity to 
identify, develop and 
implement climate 
finance projects  
Training, d emonstration and scale effects result in 
Mainstreaming of climate finance in Local 
Financial Partners and Project Developments / 
SMEs  
ACTIVITIES            IMPACTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


---
*Page 97*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 91 
 
 I 
financing provided has a demonstration e ffect and this , coupled with the training of LFP and 
project developers , will  lead to mainstreaming of climate finance in both stakeholder groups 
(see ). Assuming that there  is a positive experience in the Programme from  LFPs and 
developers / SMEs and tha t they realise a competitive return on investment , and given 
Program me activities to communicate and market the Programme benefits, this will catalyse 
impact beyond the Program me by mainstreaming capacity, demand creation and supply of 
finance.


---
*Page 98*
---

MINISTERE DU CADRE DE VIE
ET DU DEVELOPPEMENT DURABLE01 BP3502 -01 BP3621
Cotonou
Tél
.:+229 21318045
dgecmcvdd@gmail.comREPUBLIOUE DU BENIN
N°~DGEC/MCVDD/SACotonou, Benin, October Il, 2017
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
Re:Funding proposai for the GCF by AFD and its subsidiary Proparco regarding GCF-
AFD co-financing programme "Transforming Financial Systems for Climate "
DearMadam, Sir,
Wereferto GCF-AFD co-financing programme "Transforming Financial Systems for
Climate " (hereafter the "Programme") in BENIN as inc1uded in the funding proposal
submitted by AFD and its subsidiary Proparco to us on October Il, 2017.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of AÏNA Martin Pepin, the National
Designated Authority/focal point of BENIN.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08110,the content ofwhich we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
herebycommunicate our no-objection to the Programme as inc1udedin the funding proposaI.
Bycommunicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) Thegovernment of Benin has no-objection to the Programme as inc1uded in the funding
proposal;
(b)The Programme as inc1uded in the funding proposal is in conformity with Benin's
nationalpriorities, strategies and plans;
(c)ln accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the Programme as
inc1uded in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the Programme as
inc1udedin the funding proposal has been duly followed.
Wealso confirm thatour no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope ofthe Programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made public1yavailable on the GCF website.
 P a g e   9 6


---
*Page 99*
---

 P a g e   9 7


---
*Page 100*
---

 P a g e   9 8


---
*Page 101*
---

 P a g e   9 9


---
*Page 102*
---

 P a g e   1 0 0


---
*Page 103*
---

 P a g e   1 0 1


---
*Page 104*
---

 P a g e   1 0 2


---
*Page 105*
---

 P a g e   1 0 3


---
*Page 106*
---

 P a g e   1 0 4


---
*Page 107*
---

 P a g e   1 0 5


---
*Page 108*
---

 P a g e   1 0 6


---
*Page 109*
---

 P a g e   1 0 7


---
*Page 110*
---

 P a g e   1 0 8


---
*Page 111*
---

 P a g e   1 0 9


---
*Page 112*
---

 P a g e   1 1 0


---
*Page 113*
---

  Private Bag X447, Pretoria, 0001, Environment House, 473 Steve Biko Road, Pretoria, 0002 Tel: +27 12 399 9000, Fax: +27 86  625 1042  
 
Batho pele - putting people first  
1 
 
Ref: EDMS 172865  
Enquiries:  Shahkira Parker  
Tel: 012 399 9240    Fax: 012 310 3541    Email:  sparker@environment.gov.za  
 
 
The Green Climate Fund  
Songdo Business District  
175 Art center -daero  
Yeonsu -gu 
INCHEON   
22004  
Republic of Korea  
 
Email: fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Dear Sir/Madam  
 
PROPOSAL FOR THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND BY THE AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE 
DEVELOPPMENT/FRENCH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY  REGARDING THE TRANSFORMING 
FINANCIAL SYSTEMS FOR CLIMATE PROGRAMME  
 
The department  refers to the Financial Systems of Climate  Programme as included in the fu nding 
proposal submitted by the  Agence Française de Developpment/French Development Agency (AFD) 
submitted on 26 February 2018. 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorised representative of the Department of Environmental Affairs, the 
National Designated Authority/focal point for South Africa.  
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which this department  acknowledge s to have reviewed, 
it is hereby commu nicate its  no-objection to the Programme as included in the fu nding proposal .  
 
By communicating the no-objection, it is implied that:  
 the government of South Africa has no -objection to the Program as included in the funding proposal;  
 the Program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with South Africa’s national priorities, 
strategies and plans;  and 
 in accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the proposed project as indicated 
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regul ations.  
 
The department  also confirm s that its  national process for ascertaining no -objection to the Programme  
as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
  
 P a g e   1 1 1


---
*Page 114*
---

PROPOSAL FOR THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND BY THE AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE 
DEVELOPPMENT/FRENCH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY REGARDING THE TRANSFORMING 
FINANCIAL SYSTEMS FOR CLIMATE PROGRAMME  
 
2 
  
It is acknowledge d that this letter will be made publicly available on the Green Climate Fund website.  
 
Yours sincerely  
 
 
 
 
Ms Nosipho Ngcaba  
DIRECTOR -GENERAL  
DATE:   07/06/2018  
 P a g e   1 1 2


---
*Page 115*
---

 P a g e   1 1 3


---
*Page 116*
---

 
 P a g e   1 1 4


---
*Page 117*
---

 
 P a g e   1 1 5


---
*Page 118*
---

 P a g e   1 1 6


---
*Page 119*
---

 P a g e   1 1 7


---
*Page 120*
---

Page 118 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Transforming Financial  Systems for Climate  
Accredited entity  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 1 (I1)  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Environmental and Social Management Plan  (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Environmental and Social Management Framework  (ESM F) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -02-01 
Language(s) of disclosure  English, French, Spanish and Arabic.
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.afd.fr/en/environmental -and-social -framework  
French:  
https://www.afd.fr/fr/cadre -environnemental -et-social  
Spanish:  
https://www.afd.fr/es/marco -ambiental -y-social   
Arabic:   
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2018 -02-12-10-
22/Environmental -social -framework -arabic -version.pdf  
A Environmental and Social Management System  (ESMS ) 
consistent with the requirements for a category I-1 programme is 
contained in the Environmental and  Social Management 
Framework (ESMF).