=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20180205132414+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/ModDate: D:20180206193136+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum XX  
Funding p roposal p ackage for F P078 GCF/B.19/22/Add.20 
6 February 2018 Meeting o f the Board 
27 February – 1  March 201 8 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 15  
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ Acumen Resilient Agriculture Fund (ARAF)”
submitted by Acumen Fund Inc.;
b)No-objection letters issued by the national  designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s); and
c)Environm
ental and social report(s) disclosure;
These documents ar e presented a s submitted b y the accredited en tity an d the national 
designated au thority(i es) or focal point(s), re spectively. P ursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal  titled “A cumen 
Resilient Agriculture Fund (ARAF)”  submitted by Acumen Fund Inc. is being circulated 
on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to 
ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially 
sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.19/22/Add.20 
Page b 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  1  
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal points 103  
Environmental and societal report(s) disclosure    106


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme Title:  Acumen Resilient Agriculture Fund (ARAF)  
Country/Region:  East Africa & West Africa  
Accredited Entity:  Acumen Fund, Inc.  
Date of Submission:  Feb 3rd, 2018


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section H  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
• Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 102 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Acumen Resilient Agriculture Fund (ARAF)  
A.1.2. Project or programme programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     East Africa and West Africa  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Uganda, Ghana, Nigeria  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  Acumen Fund, Inc.  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☒  Direct  ☐  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity  - Equity : Acumen  Resilient Agriculture Fund 
LP, an Ontario limited partnership (to be formed) , will be the 
direct investing entity, which will be managed by Acumen 
Capital Partners LLC, a Delaware limited liability company .  
 Please note that the  Funding Activity Agreement ( FAA)  will 
be between AE and GCF.  The AE will enter  into a subsidiary 
agreement with the GP to ensure compliance with the FAA requirement s. The GP and LPs  will enter an  LPA with the  
terms of the fund operations. T he GP or the Fund will then 
enter into a management agreement with the manager to 
delegate certain GP obligations to the manager as per the 
LPA.   
 
Executing Entity – TA/Grant : The Programme will be 
implemented by Acumen Capital Partners, LLC, a limited 
liability company formed under the laws of the State of 
Delaware, and wholly owned subsidiary of the Accredited 
Entity, as the Executing Entity.  
 
 
Beneficiary:   
1. Approximately 18 - 20 early stage African 
agribusinesses  are intended to benefit through 
financial investment and technical assistance to 
strengthen their business models to provide climate 
adaptation products, services and training to 
smallholder farmers.  
2. 10M smallholder farmers are intended to benefit from 
climate adaptation products, services and training provided by the agribusinesses mentioned above.  
3. Smallholder farmers will benefit more widely across Africa and elsewhere as the new business models 
tested and scaled through this fund can be replicated 
much more widely (paradigm shift).  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☒  Micro (≤10)  
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  Feb 3rd, 2018


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 102 
 
 
 A 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Noor Ullah, Head of Agriculture  
Organization  Acumen Fund  
Email address  snoorullah@acumen.org   
Telephone number  +92 322 4003202  
Mailing address  7 Commercial zone 4th floor Saeed Alam tower Liberty, 
Lahore – Pakistan  
   
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high- speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –  diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐ 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme , including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
 
 
Acumen has a decade of experience working toward increasing agricultural productivity and incomes in Sub -Saharan 
Africa, South Asia and Latin America through investments in early stage agribusinesses that work closely with 
smallholder farmers as customers or suppliers. Our current agricultural investee c ompanies are reaching some of the 
poorest farmers in the world and our companies are helping them improve their productivity, incomes and lives (see 
Section C1). Yet the world’s 2.4 billion smallholders still make up over half of the world’s poor and their  weather -
dependent livelihoods and lack of safety nets also make them highly vulnerable to climate change, particularly in Sub-
Saharan Africa, which is forecast to bear nearly 50% of estimated global adaptation costs in health, water supply, 
agriculture and forestry. In addition, based on our own experience investing in the sector, we have learnt that Climate 
Resilience is key to ensuring long term sustainable increase in agriculture productivity and incomes for smallholder 
farmers. This understanding has b een further strengthened as a result of our engagements with GCF.  
 
With the Acumen Resilient Agriculture Fund (ARAF), Acumen aims to support pioneering and early -growth stage 
innovative agribusinesses that enhance the climate resilience of smallholder far mers (SHFs). ARAF will focus only on


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 102 
 
 
 A 
East and West Africa . These two regions have large populations engaged in primitive agriculture and are very  
vulnerable to the impact of climate change. African agriculture also presents a huge opportunity given its 
underdeveloped nature, as development in the sector can be aligned with climate resilience objectives  without the costs 
of unwinding existing developments and relearning.  
 
Based on our experience in the sector, Acumen believes that to accelerate the achievem ent of climate resilience , in 
addition to direct investments in climate resilience initiatives, the broader enabling systems and services also needs to 
be supported. For example, to enable fast adoption of climate resilient inputs like seeds, a farmer friendly system of 
affordable credit also needs to be enabled since smallholders buy most inputs on credit. Hence ARAF with its focus on climate resilience enabling investments , will also make select investments in the enabling eco- system businesses with 
indirect yet clear and important benefits f or climate resilience.  
 
In order to build climate resilience, it is pertinent to alter the traditional economic relationships between the farmer and 
the rest of the agricultural eco- system. From our experience, we bel ieve this could be achieved through investing in 
platform businesses that act as a channel through which multiple services can be delivered to the farmer. Not only are 
these businesses more impactful due to multiple service delivery but are also financiall y more resilient compared to 
single product/service businesses. The three sub categories of such businesses that we intend to invest in are:  
 
• Aggregator Platforms: Agribusinesses that provide bundled solutions to two or more key needs of the farmer i.e., i nputs, knowledge, finance, buyers. Essentially, these platforms aim to improve smallholder farmers’ 
access to and integration with the market.  
 
• Digital platforms: Information & Communication Technology (ICT) Agribusinesses, providing bundled digital soluti ons to two or more key farmer access needs: access to knowledge, inputs, finance and/or markets. These 
platforms enhance supply chain visibility and efficiency for farmers.  
 
• Innovative Financial Services: Innovative payment, credit and insurance solution providers to farmers at scale 
 
We believe Aggregator, Digital Platform and Innovative Financial Services business models are key to effectively addressing the structural socio- economic challenges that are known to inhibit smallholder farmers’ adaptive responses 
to climate change.  
 
In order to ensure that ARAF investments are focused on climate resilience for smallholder farmers, a number of 
significant steps have been taken.  
• In order to effectively screen investments for their climate resilience potenti al, Acumen has developed a first of 
its kind, specialized resilience screening tool (Agriculture Resilience Investment Screen –  ARIS) in partnership 
with Winrock International. The tool will be used to assess the climate resilience potential of investments  before 
approval.  
• ARAF will have an in- house climate expert to ensure both appropriate screening of projects as well as regular 
monitoring and evaluation.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 4 OF 102 
 
 
 A 
• As part of the decision making process, ARAF will have an independent Panel of Climate Experts to r eview 
ARIS results and make recommendations to the IC before approval of any transactions.  
 
ARAF aims to impact 10 million lives over 12 years by supporting approximately 18 to 20 companies that align with 
climate adaptation objectives of participating countries and their SHFs. The success of ARAF is expected to catalyze 
large scale private sector investments in climate resilient agriculture in Africa. ARAF substantially enhances our 
approach by sharply increased focus on climate resilience and income (and asset) security. We expect to develop new 
insights and work with a range of partners on climate adaptation, including the Green Climate Fund (GCF), national 
Governments, Stanford University and the University of Minnesota.  
 
We are requesting $23M of investment capital from GCF toward a target $50M fund- size. Acumen expects GCF’s 
anchoring investment to catalyze private capital into ARAF by de- risking the investment through a first loss facility. 
Based on the success of ARAF, we expect much larger leverage for GCF’s capital in follow -on funds and lower first loss 
requirements once the commercial viability of investing in climate resilient agriculture is established with ARAF. We are 
also requesting $3M in grant funding from GCF towards a $6M Technical Assistance Facility (TAF), which will provide 
assistance to investees to build climate resilience through raising awareness, driving crop choices in line with climate 
forecasts, spreading adaptation tools and techniques and promoting income stream diversification. We will develop new 
climate adaptation impact measurement tools, which we plan to also serve other investors and drive them to include 
climate adaptation considerations within t heir investment criteria.  
 
We strongly believe the success of ARAF will significantly contribute to increased SHFs climate resilience and as a 
result enhance income stability, besides raising income levels and asset holdings. In addition, it will demonstrate a new 
pathway for the private sector to contribute toward climate resilience in agricultural activity globally. The investments from ARAF are also expected to have a disproportionate beneficial  impact on women given women’s significant 
engagement in small holder agriculture in Africa. In addition, specific gender interventions through TA funding will 
enable for more empowered women participation in the targe t population.  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  05/03/2018  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  31/03/2020  (first close 30/09/2018)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/10/2018  
End:  30/09/2030  
 
TAF timeline  
 
Start: 01/01/2019  
End:  31/12/2029 
Project/programme lifespan  12 years 0 months  (subject to two 1- year extensions)


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 102 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / P rogramme  
Please provide:  
• an integrated financial model in Section I  (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme  
 
 
We have categori zed the types of investment returns for equity  and quasi equity  transactions into three buckets:  
Success, Steady and Loss.    For Lives Impacted,  we have similarly assigned projections for the number of lives 
impacted by each type of investment return cat egory, on the theory that the investments that scale and achieve 
successful financial returns will also have the most scaled impact.  In each of the three cases, we have changed the 
financial return expectations for each individual investment but the proportion of investments in each of the three 
categories have been kept the same.  
 
 
 
• a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, 
and leverage public and/or private finance  
This Fund is being setup with an innovative blended capital structure. There are two tiers of capital planned: 1) Senior 
Equity (SE) –  targeted at $ 25M, 2) Catalytic First Loss Capital (CFLC) –  targeted at $25M. We believe that the CFLC is 
critical to bringing in more risk  averse private capital at the Senior Equity level. The CFLC provides capital protection to 
SE but does not subsidize returns. If ARAF makes a positive return (as projected), both tiers of capital are treated equally and share profits on a pro rata basis. In the instance that ARAF makes a loss the CFLC will cover the loss up to $25M before SE is affected. We believe this structure is essential to crowding- in more risk averse private capital given 
the risk associated with investing in early stage, climate ad aptive agribusinesses.  
 
At the investee level, the early stage enterprises that ARAF will invest in will require long term patient capital to finance 
growth until positive cash flow is achieved, at which point they are more likely to attract commercial capital.  ARAF will 
provide both equity, self -liquidating and debt capital to companies based on their individual capital requirements.  The 
long-term life of ARAF -  12 years including two 1 year extensions -  should provide enough time for these innovative, 
early stage companies to develop, iterate, refine, and build financially viable business models that provide social impact 
at scale.  ARAF plans to invest in companies that address the needs of low -income smallholder farmers, who are often 
extremely difficult to reach. There is a critical need for the type of long- term investment capital that ARAF is planning to 
invest in these enterprises, as traditional investors are often put off by the risks and the relatively long time horizons required to build such companies and achieve a positive financial return.   
 
• a breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub- component in local and foreign 
currency and a currency hedging mechanism:  
For example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal exploration project, sub- components 
would include civil engineering works, drilling services, drilling equipment and inspection test.  
 
ARAF will invest in about 18-20 enterprises.  Acumen will conduct detailed diligence on all relevant aspects of each 
investment, including the cost structure of each enterprise and the financial viability of each enterprise.  As such, the 
underlying cost components of each investee company will be detailed in specific investment memoranda for those 
investments.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 102 
 
 B 
  
Given the economies in which Acumen’s investments will be operating, and the cost to hedge currencies of those 
economies, Acumen may not be able to secure a hedge for investments.  In order to protect against fluctuations in the value of local currencies, the Fund Manager will make reasonable efforts to deploy capital in hard currency. In addition, 
ARAF will focus investments in agribusinesses operating in global value chains  (e.g., cotton, coffee, rice etc.) as these 
businesses also provide a natural hedge against local currency fluctuations . 
 
Technical Assistance Facility (“TAF”)  
  
To maximize the positive impact of ARAF on agricultural resilience among Africa’s smallholder farmers, Acumen is 
seeking to raise a $6M Technical Assistance Facility (“TAF”) that will be funded by grant capital.  Acumen anticipates that the funders of the TAF will be a mix of private and public institutions.  The purpose of the TAF is to support ARAF’s 
investment strategy of building profitable, scaling, and socially responsible climate adaptive businesses that serve base 
of the pyramid (BoP) markets , support greater gender integration through targeted TA interventions  and provide a 
financial return to ARAF and its investors.  Acumen has more than a decade of experience investing in agribusinesses 
that serve BoP markets and understands the increased level of  social and financial resources required by such 
companies to scale, reach profitability, and track and monitor social impact metrics.  The TAF will identify and address 
the core needs of portfolio companies that will enable their scale, impact  and financi al viability.    
 
It is contemplated that the TAF will be governed by a Technical Assistance Committee (“TAC”).  The structure and governing policies of the TAC are currently under development.  The TAC will seek to engage with relevant stakeholders when m aking decisions related to uses of capital in the TA facility.  During the due diligence process, the 
needs of the business will be identified and this analysis will inform the exact TA amount allocated to the company (if required) as well as the nature of intervention.  
 
The table below summarizes the potential uses of TAF funds and more details around potential uses are included 
below the table.  TAF resources will not be used for capital expenditures.  
 
  Facility 
Allocation  USD  Grant 
Provider  Beneficiaries  
Climate 
adaptation 
interventions 
including gender 
specific initiatives  42% $2,500,000  GCF  Smallholder farmers especially women will be the 
prime target beneficiaries. The support will be 
delivered through the investee company and it’s on 
the field networks.  
Business 
Development 
Services (BDS) 
and Management 
/ Employee 
Training  17% $1,000,000  Other * Direct beneficiary will be the investee company. 
Smallholder farmers will also benefit through the 
sustained and scaled provision of climate resilience 
support through the investee company.  
Lean Data (LD) 
Support to 
understand and 
augment the 
impact of 33% $2,000,000  GCF  + 
 
Other s* Both the investee company and smallholder farmers 
will be direct beneficiaries. LD will allow farmers to 
share feedback on products and services being 
offered and in turn allow the investee company to


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 102 
 
 B 
portfolio 
companies  tailor its services more closely to the needs for the 
farmers and make their interventions more impactful.  
Other (TA Audit 
Fees / Legal 
Fees / ESG 
reporting, etc.)  8% $500,000   
Other * Direct beneficiary will be ARAF and the investee 
company.  
Total  100%  $6,000,000     
 
*these include corporates, corporate foundations, family foundations, development finance institutions, high net worth individuals  
 
More detail below on the potential activities linked to the different uses of TAF funding:  
 
Climate adaptation interventions  including gender specific initiatives  
 
    Funding for climate adaptation will be used to support the business, its suppliers and/or customers in applying 
techniques to respond to climate change.  This generally falls into four broad categories:  
 
• Training and extension services: To support training and extension services to enable small holder farmers to 
adopt climate resilient inputs and practices and be able to access critical weather information to make more 
informed decision about their crops/l ivestock.  
 
• Diversification:  To support diversification of income streams for a business and its smallholder 
suppliers/customers in order to reduce the income shocks associated with a changing climate environment  
 
• Shifting business practices: Capital to shift a business and its smallholder suppliers/customers to value 
chains that are better aligned with a changing climate environment within the desired locations, or to new 
locations that are more viable for the desired value chains .   
 
• Gender Initiatives  
 
o Products & Resources: Work with women -focused MFIs and savings groups to tailor products and 
resources for women agriculture producers  enabling financing of climate resilient inputs  
 
o Training: Provide training to women to become effective agricultural extension agents and increase 
their participation in the extension system with a focus on climate resilience extension . 
 
o Digital Services: Introduce programs that enhance women uptake of digital se rvices that will enhance 
their effectiveness in adapting to climate resilient agriculture methods  and access to digital 
information services that enable climate resilience  
 
Climate adaptation interventions including gender specific initiatives  delivered each year will depend on the number of 
investments made. Consequently, the yearly costs are determined by the deals under management as follows:


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 102 
 
 B 
 
 
 
Business Development Services (BDS) and Management / Employee Training  
 
• Technical assistance: Deliver interventions to address the most common technical  barriers to scale —Sales and 
Marketing , Human  Capital and overall Organizational Capacity . Acumen will work with technical experts and 
corporate partners such as Bain & Co., EY, SAP, Dow Chemical, N et Suite, Shell Foundation, 17 Triggers, IDEO.org 
and local service providers to deliver this high -quality  support. The support could include one or more of the 
initiatives listed below depending on due diligence findings:  
o Support strengthening of climate resilience strategy of the target company  
o Improve financial controls (i.e. upgrade accounting systems)  
o MIS review and upgrades  
o Market studies to better understand supplier behavior  in terms of adopting climate resilient inputs  
o Market Feedback Survey to ass ist with product development  
o Develop plans to transfer proven business models across different markets  
o Conduct feasibility studies to increase market access  to expand scale and enable resilience  
o Implement operational review to improve production process or  reduce costs  
o Improve distribution platforms  
o Build capacity to provide high- quality after sales -support to ensure products function properly and    
customers have a positive experiences  
o Enable access to industry experts across different markets to advise c ompany management  
o Hiring senior executives  
o Expand current management skills for company expansion and growth  
o Improve transparency and corporate governance structures  
o Appoint experienced practitioners/advisers at the board or management level  
 
• Leadership Development: Support companies to bolster leadership effectiveness and management capacity. 
Delivered via Acumen board placements, manager development programs, and mentorship.  
 
o Board : Evaluate Acumen alumni and donor network and  place 5 highly  experienced  individuals on the 
board of select investees  
 
o Manager Development Programs : Host a series of leadership development programs for Acumen 
investee company’s senior and middle managers.  
 
o Mentorship: Through Acumen’s advisory network and partners with firms like RippleWorks we are 
able to deliver mentorship on case -specific challenges.  
 
• Community Engagement: Acumen’s experience hosting CEO summits for our portfolio companies has taught 
us that our entrepreneurs face similar operational challenges, need access to experts, and feel isolated as 
they work to overcome the challenges facing their companies. Given especially that climate resilience is such 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 Total
Deals Under Management 1 4 9 14 17 18 18 18 15 8 5 1 127
Climate adaptation 
interventions - $        78,740$   177,165$   275,591$ 334,646$   354,331$ 354,331$ 354,331$ 295,276$   157,480$ 98,425$   19,685$  2,500,000$


---
*Page 13*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 102 
 
 B 
a new area of focus for agribusinesses, there is a clear opportunity to build and engage the communit y of 
ARAF portfolio company leaders to facilitate knowledge sharing. This will be achieved primarily through 
summit events and the Acumen CEO network.  
 
o CEO Summit Events  
 
 Bring  together technical experts, corporate partners and entrepreneurs to focus on key 
challenges  and develop solutions to mitigate those challenges.  Grant funding will be available 
to support select opportunities that further learning around common barriers to scale.  
 
o Capacity Building Summits  
 
 Focus on building skills of functional le ads on sales & marketing, talent, and finance by 
bringing these functional leads together each year.  The functional  focus of the event will shift 
year over year.  
 
o CEO Network  
 
 Introductions to funders, advisors and technical experts  to facilitate on -going knowledge 
share across key barriers to scale .  
 Tools that facilitate connections between entrepreneurs and increase access to  availab le 
resources and information. This includes toolkits developed across the 3 key barriers to scale: 
Sales/Marketing, Busin ess Process Management and Human Capital.  
 Regional networking events for CEOs, advisors, investors and corporate partners.  
 
These three intervention areas and their associated expected impact are summarized in the chart below.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 102 
 
 B 
Business development services and management / employee training delivered each year will depend on the number of 
investments made. Consequently, the yearly costs are determined by the deals under management as follows.  
 
 
 
 
Lean Data to understand and augment impact of portfolio companies:  
Lean Data is Acumen’s in- house service for understanding the impact of its investee companies. Through a 10- people 
strong global team, we deliver valuable insights to our companies that not only helps them understand their impact, but 
also grow their business  with valuable customer and market insights . More details about Lean Data can be found in 
Section E1.2.   
 
Acumen’s  Lean Data team has developed the impact investing sectors leading capability to undertake social performance 
data collection and analysis. In the past 3 years the team has completed over 15 0 Lean Data projects  with over 80 
Acumen investees and external clients1. Lean Data has been featured prominently in multiple leading publications 
including the Harvard Business Review , Stanford Social Innovation Review , ImpactAlpha, Fortune Magazine , and many 
smaller industry or organizational publications. Lean Data was selected to lead the development of the impact 
measurement conventions for the Impact Management Project  a case study of which can be found at 
http://www.impactmanagementproject.com/wp- content/uploads/2017/10/Acumen- Case- study -for-IMP_final -4.pdf . 
 
We will use Lean Data to continually collect data and insights from farmers being served by ARAF’s investe e companies. 
We will use this data to track each company’s business and social performance, as well as providing recommendations 
for improvement.  We w ill collect data on a combination of standard social metrics such as the Poverty Probability Index  
(PPI) as well as  ask customized questions to understand the individual and household level outcomes that an  investment 
is generating.  Lean Data will be disclose d in the fund prospectus, so that all investors are aware of the relationship before 
committing their capital. Investees within ARAF will be provided with Lean Data for free, with the funds identifi ed here 
used to cover Lean Data staff and direct execution costs.   
 
In addition, w orking with both GCF and ARAF investees provides  a unique opportunity for  Lean Data to develop a climate 
adaptation measurement toolkit  for the impact investment sector  and beyond (akin to the toolkit we have built for off -grid 
energy, featured in our forthcoming Energy Impact Report) . Acumen’s Lean Data Team will work with GCF to develop an 
approach and corresponding survey tools to understand climate adaptability from the farmers’ perspective. The toolkit  
will help us track and compare the performance of different business models focusing on adaptability on a set of 
parameters determined by the lived experience of farmers themselves . Section E1.2 describes the toolkit i n more detail.  
 
                                                             
1 External clients include: DFID, CDC, Omidyar Network, SEDF, The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation’, 
GSMA and others  2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 Total
Deals Under Management 1 4 9 14 17 18 18 18 15 8 5 1 127
Leadership programs 8,189$    18,425$   28,661$    34,803$    36,850$    36,850$    36,850$    30,709$    16,378$  10,236$  2,047$   260,000$     
Sales and Marketing 3,937$    8,858$     13,780$    16,732$    17,717$    17,717$    17,717$    14,764$    7,874$    4,921$    984$      125,000$     
Human Capital & Org capacity building 3,780$    8,504$     13,228$    16,063$    17,008$    17,008$    17,008$    14,173$    7,559$    4,724$    945$      120,000$     
Community engagement 4,409$    9,921$     15,433$    18,740$    19,843$    19,843$    19,843$    16,535$    8,819$    5,512$    1,102$   140,000$     
Delivery and overhead costs 11,181$ 25,157$   39,134$    47,520$    50,315$    50,315$    50,315$    41,929$    22,362$  13,976$  2,795$   355,000$     
Total Business Development -- 31,496$ 70,866$   110,236$  133,858$  141,732$  141,732$  141,732$  118,110$  62,992$  39,370$  7,874$   1,000,000$


---
*Page 15*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 102 
 
 B 
Please note that the TA funding from GCF would be used to pay the service provider (Acumen) for the provision of  the 
service (data collection and evaluation)  to investees. The investees therefore will not be paying for this service.  
 
 
Audit  Fees / Legal Fees / ESG reporting  
Audit Fees / Legal Fees / ESG reporting delivered each year will depend on the number of investments made. Consequently, 
the yearly costs are determined by the deals under management as follows.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  $56 million USD 
($)  2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 Total
Deals Under Management 1 4 9 14 17 18 18 18 15 8 5 1 127
Audit Fees/Legal Fees/ESG - $         $15,748 $35,433 $55,118 $66,929 $70,866 $70,866 $70,866 $59,055 $31,496 $19,685 $3,937 500,000$


---
*Page 16*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 102 
 
 B 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants *  
 …………………  
…………………  
$23 
…………………  
…………………  
 
$3 Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) 
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($)  
 
 
12   years  
 
 
 
12   years   
 
 
 
(Note:  An AE fee of 
4.5% of total GCF 
funding will be 
charged)  
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in 
section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  $26 
(+ 4.5% in AE 
fee) million USD 
($)  
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Equity  
Equity  
Grant  
  
$2 
$25 
$3 
 million USD ($)  
million USD ($) 
million USD ($)       
Acumen 
Other Investors  
Capital 
providers to TA 
Facility  12  
years  
  pari passu  
senior  
      
Lead financing institution: Acumen  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
**This is excluding carry.  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
As per the termsheet, GCF will contribute 4.5% of its total commitment of USD 26 million as an accredited entity fee . 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
 
………………….  Options  (  )  years  (   ) %


---
*Page 17*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 102 
 
 B 
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
Not Applicable  
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non- concessional) determined?  
 
Social impact is built into both the operations and the incentive structure of ARAF.  The ARAF Fund Manager will only 
achieve a share of ARAF’s profits if both a Financial Hurdle Rate and an Impact Hurdle Rate have been achi eved.  The 
Financial Hurdle Rate for ARAF is 3% and Impact Hurdle Rate is 5 million lives impacted. The ARAF Fund Manager will 
receive 2 5% of ARAF’s profits to the extent that the Financial and the Impact Hurdle Rate have been achieved.  If 
ARAF achieves t he Financial Hurdle Rate and only a portion of the Impact Target, then 25% share in profits will be 
adjusted downward in proportion to the percentage of the Impact Target achieved.  
  
Given the relatively early state of the impact investing sector, and mor e specifically venture capital and impact 
investments in agribusinesses in Africa, there are limited relevant and comparable data points from other funds that 
could provide support for this target rate. However, based on Acumen’s 10 years of investing experience in the sector, 
Acumen believes that this target rate is an achievable goal, and potentially could also be exceeded but the key focus 
here  is to have a transformative, scaled impact . ARAF will focus on investing in innovative, high- growth companies that 
have the potential to achieve financial returns at this level. This expected return is developed from Acumen’s 10 year 
history of investing in these markets, and its focus on the agribusiness sector in Africa, and its understanding of the 
business and macroeconomic (i.e. currency) risks of the investments it intends to make from this Fund.  ARAF will 
primarily utilize self -liquidating investment structures with equity kickers, while also making some equity and equity -like 
investments. The primary focus  on self -liquidating instruments is due to the challenges of equity exits in agribusinesses. 
The SME agriculture sector is generally illiquid from an investments standpoint and hence equity exits are often quite 
challenging. ARAF will selectively make equi ty investments where the business model and market dynamics appear 
promising for equity exits. ARAF will seek to exit its investments within a 5- 7 year timeframe.  
 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equ ity capital markets which 
could be tapped to finance the proposed project/programme.  
ARAF will focus on investments in Uganda in East Africa and Ghana and Nigeria in West Africa.  Each country has 
different total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets sizes. Please let us know if you need more 
specific information from us.  
 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1- year T -Bill, 5 -year government bond, 5- year corporate bond (specify 
credit rating) and 5- year syndicate loan.  
 
 
Country  1-year T -Bill 5-year rate  10-year rate


---
*Page 18*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 102 
 
 B 
Uganda2 13.723  15.442  16.025  
Ghana3 16.4694 25.480  26.000  
Nigeria5 23.4111  15.989  16.243  
  
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.   
Due to the nature of private investing vehicles, it is difficult to ascertain the expected and realized returns of other funds 
that are comparable to ARAF. Further, ARAF would be one of the first, if not the first, of its kind in the sense that it is a 
climate change adaptation focused fund that is targeting investments in SMEs that serve smallholder farmers. The 
expected return on this proposed fund is higher than that of Acumen’s pioneer investments in agriculture (which targets 
1x returns) given we believe this Fund will have a more diversified portfolio with a mix of pioneer and early growth stage 
investments and will invest in- line with Acumen’s new Climate Resilient Agriculture Strategy which is based on 10 years 
of learning from investing in the agric ulture sector across 3 continent s (Africa, Asia & Latin America)  in addition to 
specific learning on climate and resilience sourced from Acumen’s network partners and stakeholders . 
 
 
                                                             
2 Bank of Uganda  
3 Central Bank of Ghana  
4 Bank of Ghana, data cited for 182 day T -bill 
5 Central Bank of Nigeria


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 102 
 
 C 
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as t hese requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub- national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.  
 
Background  
 
Climate adaptation will have a significant impact on the GDP output of Sub- Saharan African states, which are highly 
vulnerable and affected by adverse climate events. With one seventh of the world’s population, Africa is set to bear 
nearly 50% of estimated global adaptation costs in health, water supply, and agricul ture and forestry6. The poorest are 
likely to be the most impacted by climate change, particularly those who rely on climate- sensitive livelihoods . 70% of 
global food supply comes from the world’s 500 million smallholder farms7, but smallholder farming households also 
make up more than half of the world’s poor and hungry8. Smallholder farmers in Africa have the lowest yields in the 
world due to limi ted access to affordable credit, quality inputs, reliable extension (knowledge) and decent market 
prices9. To prevent food insecurity, to protect and grow smallholder incomes and the GDPs of African states, and to 
sustainably feed a growing world population into the future, we must increase the climate resilience of African 
smallholders.  
 
 
 
Our Pivot to Agribusinesses that enhance C limate Resilien ce  
 
Acumen has a decade of experience working toward the increasing agricultural productivity and incomes in Sub-
Saharan Africa, South Asia and Latin America through investments in early stage agribusinesses that work closely with 
smallholder farmers as customers or suppliers. Our investment strategy focused on innovative business models that 
provide sustainable market -based poverty alleviation solutions to low -income smallholder farmers.  To date our 
agribusiness in vestments have taken the form of input supply companies, rural finance providers, information/extension 
service providers, off -takers (processors, etc.), or ‘aggregators’, which are typically agro- processing companies that  
provide two or more essential ser vices like access to improved inputs, extension support, guaranteed off -take to their 
supplier farmers.   
 
Acumen is an impact -driven organisation and believes strongly in developing businesses that cater to the true needs of 
smallholder farmers. This means listening and responding to real farmers’ voices on the ground. One of Acumen’s 
unique selling points is our proprietary Lean Data methodology (see Section E), a data collection tool that allow us to 
reach out to farmers -  the customers and/or suppliers of our agribusiness investments -  to find out more about them and 
their families and ask them about the impact of our investee company on their lives, including their levels of poverty and 
wellbeing. This direct feedback has shown us that our agricultural investee companies are reaching some of the 
poorest farmers in the world:  65% of farmers that we surveyed live below the World Bank’s poverty line of $2.5 per 
person per day. In addition, the majority of farmers served by the investee companies we surveyed strongly agreed that 
                                                             
6 Green Climate Fund (GCF) 2015, “GCF Elements 02: Investment Opportunities for the Green Climate 
Fund” [online], accessed from http://www.greenclimate.fund/ -/elements -02 on April 28 2017  
7 FAO 2013, “Coping with the food and agriculture challenge: smallholders’ agenda” [online], accessed 
from 
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/nr/sustainability_pathways/docs/Coping_with_food_and_agricultur
e_challenge__Smallholder_s_agenda_Final.pdf  on April 28 2017  
8 International Assessment of Agricultural Science Technology for Development (IAASTD) 2008, “Global 
Report ‘Agriculture at a Crossroads’”, Island Press, Washington  
9 The World Bank 2013, “The State of the Poor: Where Are The Poor, Where Is Extreme Poverty Harder 
to End, and What Is the Current Profile of the World’s Poor?”, accessed from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTPREMNET/Resources/EP125.pdf
 on April 28 2017


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 102 
 
 C 
the company had led to improvements in their homes and lives. When asked to describe  these changes, farmers most 
frequently mentioned improved monetary well -being resulting from better and more stable incomes, particularly a 
greater ability to manage daily household expenses. However, Lean Data responses from farmers have also 
highlighted how closely the fate of farmers’ harvests and incomes are tied to climatic factors. Weather related 
uncertainties are the largest challenge that farmers talk about in the context of their crop or livestock. When asked to state and rank the challenges that  they are facing with their agricultural livelihoods, farmers have placed climate- related 
challenges top of the list.  
 
In response to this feedback, and in no small part due to increasing awareness of the importance of climate change 
through engagements w ith the Green Climate Fund (see Section D1), we want to redouble our efforts to support 
businesses that help smallholder farmers cope with climate change. This means to support businesses that help 
farmers adapt and build resilience against climate change.   Resilience can be defined as the ability to absorb 
change and to anticipate future perturbations through adaptive capacity.10  
 
Acumen believes that a certain level of climate resilience can be achieved through investment in businesses 
that supply climate resilient inputs direct to farmers, such a s improved seeds, weather information services, 
efficient irrigation , index insurance, etc.  However, in order to secure and accelerate climate resilience to a 
level that is meaningful to smallholder farmer s, we will also require innovative investments in ‘ecosystem’ 
businesses that address the systemic barriers preventing them from accessing and adopting such inputs, 
including access to finance, knowledge and markets.   
Our learning has shown that when farm ers are able to predict and smooth their finances over the year, they are able to 
manage their household expenses better and over time are able to plan better for the future, including building their 
savings and asset base and investing in improved inputs and behaviours that in combination protect them from shocks 
(both climate and non- climate related). However, we recognise that farmers also need encouragement and support to 
build their awareness and understanding around how best to sustainabl y improve their income levels and reduce 
volatility risks in the face of climate change. We hope to achieve this through a combination of our investment strategy (see next heading) and our grant -funded TA Facility.  
 
We recognise that measuring improvements in climate resilience is a relatively new field, particularly within the impact 
investing space. To ensure that ARAF is able to achieve our climate adaptation objectives, we are keen to develop a 
suite of Lean Data tools that can measure improvements in resilience am ong farmers working with our investees, 
including improved income levels, income stability and other adaptation metrics (we would like to work closely with GCF 
and other adaptation thought -leaders to develop these further and test them out with farmers to ensure their validity and 
effectiveness). Given that women are often disproportionately affected by climate change, we also plan to develop 
specific gender -sensitive strategies and disaggregate our Lean Data learning by gender. In addition, in order to ens ure 
that our investments do not further contribute toward the advance of climate change we will strive to reduce and/or 
remove greenhouse gas emissions, where possible. We will do this by ensuring that all our investments are mindful not 
to undermine the natural resource base through one or more of the following:  efficient & sustainable use of natural 
resources; forest conservation and commitment to reduce deforestation; sustainable productivity improvements through 
awareness of environmentally friendly best practices; environment friendly waste disposal; promotion of organic 
alternatives to hazardous agrochemicals (including pesticides & fertilizers).  We hope that the development of this suite 
of tools will also encourage other investors to invest in clim ate adaptation solutions, both inside and outside of ARAF. 
Section E1 analyses in detail the impact potential for an ARAF investee to bring about such changes.  
 
 
 
ARAF Strategy across Africa  
 
                                                             
10 INRA 2015, Stability, robustness, vulnerability and resilience of agricultural systems. A review [online] 
accessed April 28 2017 at 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nicolas_Urruty/publication/295616727_Stability_robustness_vulnera
bility_and_resilience_of_agricultural_systems_A_review/links/56cc0dbc 08ae96cdd07061d9.pdf


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 102 
 
 C 
ARAF is the first, climate adaptation focused investment fund for smallholder farmers in Africa. Acumen has always 
been a first -mover within the impact investing sector and over the years we have developed a strong global brand with 
significant influence and convening power due to our ability to deliver results witho ut compromising on our values. We 
anticipate that ARAF will serve as a role model to the sector on climate adaptation investments, and that the launch and 
success of ARAF will encourage other private sector investors to make climate adaptation investments in Africa and across the world. As outlined above, to further our impact on the sector, we plan to create and share new impact 
measurement tools that track the impact of climate adaptation investments over time.  
 
Within ARAF we aim to prioritise investment in tools and services that focus on climate resilience at its core 
while also investing in enabling livelihoods improvement where there are indirect but important benefits for 
accelerating climate resilience. Importantly, these investments need to be delivered through sustainable 
(profitable) market- based solutions  to be viable and attract private capital.  
 Over our ten years of investment in smallholder agriculture, Acumen has learned a great deal about how to instil 
behaviour  change in smallholder farmers, including the sustainable adoption of improved inputs, farming techniques 
and commercial relationships.  
• We have learned that input provision alone cannot always solve problems of agricultural poverty and 
vulnerability, as farmers are highly risk av erse and often need parallel access to knowledge, finance and off -
take agreements to support and incentivize them to invest in improved inputs and behaviour  change
11.  
• In addition, product adoption of innovative inputs by smallholder farmers is often too slow to enable early stage input supply business models financially viable.  
• We have also learned that access to improved knowledge (extension services) is crucial for both poverty reduction and climate change adaptation. However, direct feedback from farm ers has shown that smallholders 
are not willing to pay to acquire knowledge as a stand- alone service, and that knowledge alone does not 
always convert to behaviour  change and improved livelihoods. Behaviour  change and input adoption often 
need to be incent ivized through platforms that also provide access to what farmers prioritize in the short -term: 
financing solutions and non -exploitative off -take agreements.  
• Access to appropriate finance is an important poverty alleviation and climate change adaptation t ool in its own 
right, as farmers’ cash is invested in their land for much of the year, leaving them with severe cash flow 
constraints and vulnerable to shocks.  
• Finally, access to markets through equitable and sustainable off -take agreements is key to both income 
improvement and resilience, providing farmers with better and less volatile incomes and increased access to inputs, knowledge, and finance.   
 
In light of our decade of learning, we will aim to deliver solutions through ‘bundled’ platform models  that respond to 
more than one access need (inputs, knowledge, finance and/or markets), where relevant, to maximise adoption and long-term impact for farmers.  
 In response to the National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) and/or National Adaptation Plans of Action (NA PAs) of the 
countries we plan to work in, we aim to provide farmers with physical and digital access to the following (non-exhaustive) climate adaptation tools and services, recognizing that some will have direct climate resilience benefits 
while others ac t as important enablers for resilience in general : 
 
• Improved market access  
• Awareness raising and ca pacity building on climate- adaptive  behaviours , including income diversification  
• Improved access to affordable credit and savings facilities  
• Crop/weather/drought/medical insurance  
• Drip irrigation and other irrigation and water management tools  
• Improved seed varieties (early -maturing, drought -tolerant, pest -resistant,etc .) 
• Organic fertilizers  
• Improved soil management practices  
• Strengthened disea se and pest control mechanisms  
                                                             
11 Acumen and Bain & Company 2014, “ Growing Prosperity: Developing Repeatable Models to Scale the 
Adoption of Agricultural Innovations” [online], 
http://acumen.org/content/uploads/2014/11/GrowingProsperity -Agriculture -Report.pdf


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 102 
 
 C 
• Improved livestock and small stock  breeds  
• Improved animal management, breeding and health services  
• Development of climate resilient animal feeds  
• Extreme weather early warning systems  
• Meteorological information for short -term weather and long- term climate forecasting  
• Promotion and dissemination of indigenous knowledge 
• Post-harvest management techniques and technologies to minimise losses  
• Development of alternative energy sources to firewood  
• Flood protection and drainage  
 
Through our investments we will prioritise the tools and services that can be delivered through sustainable (profitable) market -based solutions. As outlined above, in order to maximise adoption and long- term impact for farmers, we will 
deliver solutions through platform models where relevant.  To further maximize the Climate Adaptation impact of our 
investments, we will provide a grant -funded Technical Assistance Facility to our investees that will in part help them and 
the farmers they work with adapt to c limate change and reduce income volatility. This funding will be used to support 
the business and its smallholder supplier/customer base in promoting and applying appropriate inputs and techniques/ behaviours  to respond to climate change.  Potential uses ma y include : 
• Shifting a business and its smallholder suppliers/customers to value chains that are better aligned with a 
changing climate environment within the desired locations;  
• Diversify ing income streams for a business and its smallholder suppliers/customers in order to reduce the 
income shocks associated with a changing climate environment; or,  
• Support ing extension services to enable farmers to adopt climate resilient inputs and practices  and be able to 
access weather information to make more informed decision about their crops/livestock  
 
Acumen will work closely with the National Adaptation Plans and appropriate national and international organizations 
and frameworks to ensure our investm ents meet the adaptation goals of individual nations as well as global adaptation 
goals and best practice standards. We will also work closely with Stanford University and the University of Minnesota 
through their Global Landscapes Initiative (GLI), Natural Resources Project (NRP) and NorthStar Initiative for 
Sustainable Enterprise (NISE), which will provide us access to global datasets on weather patterns and forecasting 
models for the likely impact of changing weather on key value chains (e.g. coffee, tea, beef) in potential investment 
locations within ARAF countries. We plan to use these datasets and related climate change models to inform our 
agricultural investment decisions, ensuring that we invest in the right value chains in the right locations, bear ing in mind 
the forecasted impact of climate change. The value chain models developed by these academic partners are still 
evolving, but we anticipate that the insights they provide will significantly support the adaptation capabilities of our 
private sect or investee companies and the smallholder farmers integrated into their business models.  
 
ARAF Strategy per Country  
 
Country Vulnerability Matrix  
Analysis of the National Adaptation Plans and National Adaptation Action Plans of the three countries that  ARAF 
intends to work in, has identified the following key national climate- related vulnerabilities.  
 
ARAF aims to respond to the above country vulnerabilities through the following potential investing activities.  Resource Mgmt
Key 
VulnerabilitiesPoor quality 
inputsHigh livestock 
mortalityLack of access to 
affordable credit 
for inputsLack of access to 
financing income 
diversificationNo downside 
protecton in case of 
crop failure and 
livestock mortalitiesLack of awareness 
regarding climate 
smart crop 
selectionLack of crop 
diversificationLack of extension 
and training support 
for climate 
adaptationPoor land and 
water usage
Uganda   
Ghana     
Nigeria     ARAF's strategy focus based on country NAPs
Access to inputs Access to Financial Services Access to Extension & Market
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
  Climate Vulnerabilities  ARAF Investin g Activities  
 
 
Access to 
Inputs   
Poor quality inputs providing limited 
resilience against climate changes  • Invest in climate resilient inputs that offer improved 
yields in the face of climate changes e.g., hybrid 
drought resistant seeds  
 
High livestock  mortality due to 
unexpected drought and disease • Invest in provision of improved livestock breeds 
that are both more productive, sturdy against 
climate variations  and disease resistant e.g., 
Poultry breeder producing highly productive , sturdy 
and disease r esistant Day Old Chicks for 
smallholders  
 
 
 
Access to 
Financial 
Services   
Lack of access to affordable credit 
limiting farmers’ adoption of climate 
resilient  inputs . Farmers purchase 
most inputs on credit and access to 
affordable credit is key to unlocking 
accelerated adoption of climate 
resilient inputs.  
 • Invest in the provision of innovative financial 
services leveraging digital platforms including 
payment and credit solutions that allows farmers to 
purchase improved/climate resilient  inputs e.g., a 
digital platform offering access to credit based on 
farmers e -transaction history  
 
Lack of access to financing to 
expand and diversify productive base e.g., diversify into livestock to 
enhance resilience to climate 
change  
 • Invest in provision of asset finance to enable 
farmers to purchase additional productive assets  
 
No downside protection in case of 
crop failure and livestock mortalities  
due to climate change  
  • Investing in insurance provision for smallholder 
farmers to improve r esilience    
 
 
Access to 
Extension & 
Market   
Inappropriate crop selection due to 
lack of knowledge about climate appropriate crops or lack of markets 
for climate appropriate crops  • Investing in agro -processing companies in value 
chains appropriate for specific regions given 
changing climate conditions. e.g., investing in 
pulses processing under dry conditions instead of 
crops like rice or sugarcane which consume a lot 
of water  
 
Lack of crop diversification 
exposing farmers excessively to 
risks of single crop (failure)  • Investing in companies offering alternative 
livelihoods opportunities allowing for diversified 
incomes e.g., a poultry company promoting poultry 
farming in an area dominated by cash crop 
cultivation.  
 
 
Lack of extension and training 
support to farmers for making their  
farming practices climate resilient to mitigate against climate risks e.g., 
laser land levelling to optimize 
water usages  in the context of 
reduced and highly variable rainfall 
patterns  • Invest in companies offering extension support to 
farmers enabling them to improve their farming 
practices and make informed decisions about crop 
selection, land preparation, sowing and harvesting  
in light of changing weather patterns . These 
companies would typically be agro- processing 
enterprises or digital platforms offering bundled 
solutions  
Resource 
Mgmt.   
Ineffective land and water usage  
due to lack of knowledge about 
climate resilient practices or access 
to climate resilience tools  • Invest in the provision of efficient irrigation 
solutions like drip and sprinkler solutions , water 
tanks for storing water in rain fed regions  etc.


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline,  key barriers, challenges and/or  
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario.  
 
The Challenge  
 
The Effect of Climate Change on Global Agricultural  Systems  
 
As a result of climate change, regions the world over are expected to experience higher average temperatures, 
changing precipitation patterns, and more intense weather event s12. While these changes will produce far -reaching 
economic and social consequences in the years to come, individuals who rely upon agriculture for their livelihoods will 
grapple sooner and more directly with the effects of climate change. Furthermore, while a portion of climate change’s 
effects upon agricultural systems will  manifest gradually, cert ain phenomena are already occurring. Specifically, while 
shifting regional climatic profiles in many cases will slowly reduce the suitability of crops that have in some instances 
been cultivated in areas for generations, increasingly intense and erratic weather events such as seasonal droughts 
and periods of excessive precipitation have already caused drastic and immediate agricultural shocks13.  
 
Of all stakeholders within the global agricultural sector, smallholder farmers are most  acutely vulnerable to the adverse 
effects of climate change14. The approximately 500 million smallholder (<1 hectare) farms across the globe provide 
livelihoods to 2.5 billion people15 and account for as much as 80% of the world’s food supply by value16. In addition to 
predominantly inhabiting climatically at -risk areas of Sub- Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Latin America, a majority of 
smallholder farmers’ vulnerability is exacerbated by their inability to adopt appropriate climate change adaptation 
measures .  
 
Adaptive Responses in Sub- Saharan Africa  
 
In Sub- Saharan Africa, where up to 80% of farmland is managed by smallholders, a primary impediment to resilience is 
not just inadequate access to information regarding adaptation methods, but also farmers’ ina bility to implement farm -
scale adaptive responses due to the lack of availability of adaptation solutions or to real or perceived inabilities to affor d 
such solutions17. Smallholder farmers’ limited financial capacity to adopt appropriate agronomic adaptati on measures is 
                                                             
12 United States Environmental Protection Agency, “Climate Change,” 
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/basics/ .  
13 H. Charles J. Godfray et al., “Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 Billion People,” Science 327, no. 5967 
(February 12, 2010): 818; and Alvaro Calzadilla et al., “Climate Change Impacts on Global Agricultu re,” 
Climatic Change 120, no. 1 –2 (September 2013): 374.  
14 J. Morton, “The Impact of Climate Change on Smallholder and Subsistence Agriculture“ , Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 50 (December 11, 2007).  
15 FAO 2012, “ Smallholders and Family Farmers ”, 
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/nr/sustainability_pathways/docs/Factsheet_SMALLHOLDERS.pdf   
16 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, “The State of Food and Agriculture, 2014”  
http://www.fao.org/3/a -i4040e.pdf   
17 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, “Smallholders and Family Farmers”


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 102 
 
 C 
often further eroded by structural socio -economic factors such as income instability and limited access to markets, to 
inputs, and to credit18. This reality, according to the authors of a study of Kenyan smallholder farmer households’ 
climate  change adaptation efforts, “emphasizes the need for greater investments in rural and agricultural development 
to support the ability of households to make strategic, long- term decisions that affect their future well -being”19. 
 
Accordingly, climate change adaptation solutions are direly needed that not only directly facilitate smallholder farmers’ 
access to and adoption of climate- resilient  cultivation practices, but also provide effective and sustainable solutions to 
the ancillary socio- economic challenges  that serve to further reduce their resilience.  
 
Listening to Farmers  
 
These macro trends are borne out by what we are hearing from farmers via our Lean Data work. See Section E  below 
for details on Acumen’s Lean Data methodology for understanding the social performance of our investee companies. 
Using Lean Data to listen to farmers has allowed us to understand first -hand how closely the fate of farmers’ harvests 
and incomes are tied to climatic factors.  
1) When the weather is favorable, the crop does well and farmers’ production and income improve. In a recent 
Lean Data project, we asked cacao farmers how their production this year compared to last and what were the 
main reasons for any changes they observed. Not surprisingly, weather related factors were the main driver for 
improved production and consequently profit. One of the suppliers told us, “ This year the rain has been low, 
which helps to reduce diseases and increase product ion.”  
2) Weather related uncertainties are also the largest challenge that farmers talk about in the context of their crop. 
In our Agriculture LD surveys, we have recently started asking farmers to state and rank the challenges that 
they are facing with thei r crops. From the few LD projects we have done since the inclusion of this question, 
climate -related challenges have topped the list. Here are some key messages that we are hearing:  
a. Climate is the biggest challenge .  
“It rained a lot and flooded my farm. ” Colombian farmer  
"Climate change is a problem: we have not had rain and our cabbages are drying up". Kenyan famer.  
“We experienced a drought that destroyed our farm and so we were unable to sell.” Ghanaian farmer  
“Our low production was due to climate and our inability to handle the diseases caused by the rain.”  
Colombian farmer  
b. Coping is hard and expensive.  
“Climate has affected production, I have had to invest more to maintain my farm.” Colombian farmer  
“Lack of water: we have to go 400meters to get the water for irrigation” Kenyan farmer  
c. Resourceful farmers are adapting. At the same time, they are actively asking for support, monetary and 
otherwise, to cope . 
“I shifted from the cultivation of maize to rice during the last season because the weather was f avorable 
for rice cultivation .” Ghanaian farmer.  
                                                             
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/nr/sustainability_pathways/docs/Factsheet_SMALLHOLDERS.pdf   
and Elizabeth Bryan, Claudia Ringler, Barrack Okoba, Carla Roncoli, Silvia Silvestri, Mario Herrero, Adapting 
agriculture to climate change in Kenya: Household strategies and determinants, Journal of Environmental 
Management, Volume 114, 15 January 2013, Pages 26 -35, ISSN 0301 -4797, 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2012.10.036   
18 Douxchamps, S., Van Wijk, M.T., Silvestri, S. et al. Reg Environ Change (2016) 16: 1305. 
doi:10.1007/s10113 -015 -0838 -6; Morey Burnham & Zhao Ma (2015): Linking smal lholder farmer climate 
change adaptation decisions to development, Climate and Development, DOI: 
10.1080/17565529.2015.1067180 ; and J. Morton, “The Impact of Climate Change on Smallholder and 
Subsistence Agriculture,“ Proceedings of the National Academy o f Sciences 104, no. 50 (December 11, 2007).  
19 Elizabeth Bryan, Claudia Ringler, Barrack Okoba, Carla Roncoli, Silvia Silvestri, Mario Herrero, Adapting 
agriculture to climate change in Kenya: Household strategies and determinants, Journal of Environmental Management, Volume 114, 15 January 2013, Pages 26 -35, ISSN 0301 -4797, 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2012.10.036
.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 102 
 
 C 
“It rained a lot and flooded my farm... the association is helping us implement drainage systems which 
will improve production and profit.” Colombian Farmer  
 
Please describe the main goal and anticipated out comes of the project/programme, with reference to the baseline 
scenario.  
 
The Solution  
 
Acumen Context  
 
Our 10 years of working with agricultural businesses in Africa has provided us with a unique learning opportunity to 
understand the challenges that farmers face and the impact that these businesses have on their behaviors and 
decision -making. As mentioned in the previous section, we have observed through our investments the structural and 
behavioral barriers that put farmers at a much higher risk in the face of an adverse climate situation. However, the ARAF and GCF’s catalytic capital is allowing us to bring climate adaptation center -stage in our investing strategy. Our 
investments from ARAF will address these barriers head- on so that farmers are less vulnerable to poor market 
dynamics and do not make poor decisions due to the adverse impact of unpredictable weather patterns and rising temperatures. We understand that it is imperative to make it simple for farmers to make the choice to adapt. It is 
important to underscore though that we plan to take a holistic approach to solving the challenges in African smallholder agriculture rather than investing in piecemeal solutions. What this means is that while ARAF’s core focus will be 
investing in climate resilience initiatives and enterprises where the direct beneficiaries are smallholder farmers, we also 
anticipate a smaller portion of the fund to be invested in enablers (e.g., access to affordable credit platforms) that will 
help to scale up climate resilience impact for smallholder farmers.  
 
The Role of Pati ent Capital  
 
To address structural socio -economic barriers to climate change adaptation, private sector approaches can yield 
solutions that are more sustainable over the long term. This is in contrast to agronomic interventions, which are often 
better impl emented on a large scale by governments or large private foundations. However, the private sector is 
generally risk averse and requires an enabling environment to invest. Agriculture is seen as a high risk sector in large 
part due to climate related variab ility that can affect the success of early stage business models. Acumen believes, 
engaging the private sector is key to solving the challenges faced by smallholder farmers . It requires building up 
innovative business models that can prove their own viabil ity and also support de- risking of the sector. Hence building 
up businesses that enable  climate resilience for smallholder farmers is  a key objective of ARAF.  
 
Furthermore, it is widely understood that smallholder farmers are conservative and risk averse, and as a result adoption 
of innovative solutions in these markets is slow. We have covered this subject at length in Growing Prosperity
20, the 
report co- authored by Acumen and Bain &Co., wherein based on our sector experience we explain the underlying 
reasons for slow adoption in these markets and the steps private enterprises can take to accelerate adoption.  
 
There are two principal challenges for smallholder farmer when faced with a choice of adopting an innovative solution 
or practice:  
1. Poor incomes and extremely thin asset base means limited appetite to experiment. A failed experiment 
could well mean complete wipe- out of any savings/assets or even perpetual indebtedness  
2. Uncertainty associated with incomes mean conservative expenditure planning which resul ts in limited 
appetite for new and untested solutions  
                                                             
20 Acumen and Bain & Company 2014, Growing Prosperity : Developing Repeatable Models to Scale  the 
Adoption of A gricultural Innovations  [online], accessed April 28 2017 from 
http://acumen.org/content/uploads/2014/11/GrowingProsperity -Agriculture -Report.pdf


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
To address these challenges, the traditional economic relationships between the farmer and the rest of the agricultural 
eco-system needs to be altered. There are 4 Key Farmer Needs that need to be addr essed in a way that improves 
farmer incomes in a sustainable way while reducing income uncertainty. These key farmer needs are:  
1. Access to quality inputs (to improve productivity)  
2. Access to affordable credit (to reduce costs –  farmers make most input purchases on credit)  
3. Access to extension and trainings (to improve yield, reduce waste, improve climate resilience)  
4. Access to off -take markets (to improve profitability)  
In the traditional system, the middlemen offer all these solutions on expensive terms because farmers lack direct 
access to other market stakeholders (e.g., input providers, formal credit providers etc.). Hence it is critical to enable 
farmers’ direct access to markets (credit, input, off -take) to improve their livelihoods in a sustainable way and reduce 
income uncertainty. This will enhance farmers’ appetite to adopt innovative solutions that enhance climate resilience.  
 
While in the previous phase of our agriculture investment work, we have invested in business models that would address the above one of more of farmer challenges, with ARAF, the focus will be to sharply find specific climate 
resilience interventions across these 4 need areas and support the development and growth of these solutions and 
services and their delivery to smallhol der farmers.  
 
 The Promise of Platform Businesses  
 
Acumen, from its decade long investing experience of experimenting with a range of business models, has concluded in 
its new strategy that Platform businesses are one of the most powerful channels for impacting smallholder farmers. 
Platform businesses (or Platforms) are business models that act as a channel through which multiple services can be 
delivered to the farmer. In addition, these businesses are also financially more resilient compared to single 
product/service businesses. An example of a Platform Business would be GADC, a cotton ginnery in Northern Uganda 
that sources organic cotton from 70,000 smallholder farmers and in the process provides access to improved cotton 
seeds, off -take assurance and extension services to farmers. In contrast, an example of a non- platform business would 
be a seed company only selling seeds or a fertilizer company only selling fertilizer to farmers. Non- platform businesses 
pushing single innovative solutions face the cha llenge of slow adoption and significant distribution channel issues that 
affect their economic viability. For example, a seed company will find it difficult to push a new seed, without farmers 
having access to active extension support (on how to use that s eed) and affordable credit. Further, building up its own 
distribution channel might be too expensive and yet existing channels might be too noisy to push an innovative new 
solution. On the other hand, with multiple offerings that complement each other, som e of the adoption and distribution 
risks can be significantly mitigated. Hence multiple interventions bundled together and delivered through a platform 
business can prove to be the most powerful private sector integrated models delivering sustainable impac t in 
agriculture.
 
 
Within Platform Businesses, there are three sub-categories that differ in their nature of service delivery. These are:  
 
•  Aggregator Platforms: agribusinesses that provide bundled solutions to two or more key farmer access needs  
i.e., access to knowledge, inputs, finance and/or markets. These platforms aim to improve smallholder farmers’ 
access to input and/or output markets.  
 
• Digital platforms: Information & Communication Technology (ICT) Agribusinesses, providing bundled digital 
solutions to two or more key farmer access needs: access to knowledge, inputs, finance and/or markets. These 
platforms enhance supply chain visibility and efficiency for farmers.  
 
• Innovative Financial Services: Innovative payment, credit and insurance solution providers to farmers at scale


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
We believe Aggregator , Digital Platform  and Innovative Financial Services  business models are key to effectively 
addressing the structur al socio -economic challenges that are known to inhibit smallholder farmers’ adaptive r esponses 
to climate change:  
1.  “One- Stop” Visibility and Access  
Smallholder farmers are often faced with a splintered network of middlemen who together provide access to 
agronomic information, extension services, credit, inputs, and markets, often at a high cost or in an inefficient 
manner. Innovative Financial Services, Aggregator and Digital Platform businesses provide a “one- stop” 
destination for all or many of these services in a bundled package, improving both the quality and stability of 
farmer incomes and therefore strengthening their ability to adapt to climate change.  
2. Income Stability Is Essential to Building Lasting Resilience 
Stable and predictable cash flows helps farmers to manage daily expenses better, a finding that has resonated 
across countries and agriculture value chains in our Lean Data work to date.  Over time, having predictable 
income helps farmers plan and start building a base of savings and assets that they can use to reduce the 
impact of any kind of shock. Today, many smallholder farmers’ inability to access credit and markets results in 
uncertain income cycles, which serve to prevent farmers from confidently planning for their futures. More 
consistent and often higher incomes as a result of linkage to aggregators and ICT enterprises allow smallholder 
farmers to invest in new equipment or other c limate change adaptation solutions that would otherwise have 
been either unaffordable or too risky to pursue.  
3. Bundling Information and Extension Services  
So much value remains untapped by smallholder farmers because they do not have access to the right 
information, skills, tools and equipment, and inputs. Many organizations have tried providing these services as 
piecemeal offerings, but our experience has shown us that farmers are cautious and slow to adopt new 
innovations and hesitant to pay for isolated interventions. Often rightly so, because we have also learnt that 
these offerings are often inadequate unless provided in combination with one or more of the other component offerings of aggregators and digital platform enterprises.  
 
In conclusion, Acumen invests in companies that offer smallholder farmers the dual and inextricably linked value 
propositions of becoming both financially and environmentally sustainable. These solutions not only account for the 
concrete agronomic challenges facing smallholder farmers, but also the equally significant structural socio- economic 
barriers to climate change adaptation. Therefore ARAF will support climate resilience for African smallholders by 
investing in businesses that deliver climate resilience solutions to smallholders and also by supporting other ecosystem 
businesses that enable improved livelihoods.  See previous section for additional detail.  
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 102 
 
 C 
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its components.   
 
Out of a total fund size of $50M, ARAF will invest approximately $36M in around 18-20 portfolio companies, with an 
investment range of approximately $0. 3M - $3M per portfolio company.  These companies must clearly demonstrate 
how they will help low -income smallholder farmers to improve resilience to climate change.  ARAF intends to 
identify and support market -based solutions that provide smallholders access to one or more of the following:  
1. Climate resilient inputs for resilient productivity;  
2. Affordable credit and insurance to lower cost of production and provide downside protection against 
climate related shocks ; 
3. Climate extension (training and capacity building) to enhance yields and improve resilienc e in the face 
of weather shocks;  
4. Formal off -take markets for better prices;  
 
 In terms of business models to address these 4 key needs, the following is an indicative split of capital to- be deployed:  
 
 
 For an overview of our investment strategy, please see Sections C1 and C2. In accordance with Acumen’s 
accreditation, ARAF will not invest greater than $7.5 million in one portfolio company and will ensure that investments 
fall within ESS Category C of companies that have minimal or no adverse envir onmental and/or social risk and/or 
impacts. ARAF is expected to invest in businesses that have existing solutions to bringing access to smallholder 
farmers as well as  invest to build- out parts of the eco- system that are weak or missing and will help to sig nificantly 
scale -up impact on the climate resilience of smallholder farmers .   
 
To maximize the Climate Adaptation impact of our investments, we will provide a grant -funded Technical Assistance 
Facility (TAF) that will help our investees to build sustainable and scalable businesses, as well as help them and the 
farmers they work with to adapt to climate change and to reduce income volatility. Uses of TAF funding for climate 
change adaptation may include capital to shift a business and its smallholder suppliers/customers to value chains that 
are better aligned with a changing climate en vironment within the desired locations; capital to diversify income streams 
for a business and its smallholder suppliers/customers in order to reduce the income shocks associated with a changing climate; or, capital to support extension services to enable farmers to adopt climate resilient inputs and practices and be able to access weather information to make more informed decision about their crops/livestock


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 102 
 
 C 
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic 
framework in section H.  
 
ARAF will be Africa’s  first climate adaptation fund focused on early -stage smallholder -facing agribusiness es. W ith the 
catalytic capital from the GCF, this Fund as well as its investments will have the potential to uplift agricultural growth 
and resilience in East and West Africa. In particular, the above- mentioned ac tivities will seek to support the following 
GCF objectives at both the fund and project/programme levels:  
 
 Fund Level  
1. Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions  
2. Increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security  
3. Increased generation and use of climate information in decision- making  
 Project/programme Level  
1. Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks  
2. Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk -reduction processes  
 
To ensure that ARAF is able to achieve these climate adaptation objectives, we will work with each investee company 
and our Lean Data team to develop and track a number of proprietary  indicators to measure progress at ARAF and 
Project/Programme levels. W e will initiate various Lean Data projects over the course of fund life to evaluate 
improvements in climate resilience among farmers, including improved income levels, income stability,  access to 
climate information systems and other metrics. We will consolidate data for analyses and form insights at ARAF -level 
on a regular basis, and would like to work closely with GCF and other climate adaptation thought -leaders to develop 
and share insights with the wider impact investment community.  
 
As mentioned above, we may also use a portion of our TAF grant budget to help investees to improve their adaptive 
capacity by transitioning their businesses along the value chain, as opportunities and sec tor risks evolve. We hope to 
leverage our experience and partnerships we have built in the space to support our investees along the entrepreneurial curve to build sustainable and scalable businesses.   
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and f inancial profile of the Sponsor ( Executing Entity )  
 
Since 2001, Acumen has been investing in companies that provide goods and services to low -income customers and 
that help these consumers to transform their lives. Acumen’s first focus was on healthcare start -ups that could provide 
widespread benefits to populations living at the base of the wealth pyramid (BoP), such as (a) a low -cost hearing aids; 
(b) an inexpensive electromagnetic immunosensors for early detection of diseases; and (c) a handheld device for 
gathering and disseminating health information quickly and affordably. As Acumen grew, it searched for a wide range of 
global innovations that could offer a voice to low -income communities and encouraged the market to develop  
businesses offering a broader array of critical goods and services to low -income communities.   
From 2002- 2003, Acumen enhanced several core investment processes, including: (a) formaliz ing a due diligence 
process to vet financial viability and projected social impact; (b) organizing investments into thematic portfolios (e.g., 
healthcare, energy and agriculture); (c) implementing a metrics reporting system to help portfolio companies focus on 
financial and social goals while allowing Acumen to learn from their performance; and (d) shifting away from providing grants toward debt and equity investments. Underlying this final change was a recognition that debt and equity 
investments, combined with hands -on management assistance from Acumen, represented a more effective and 
sustainable use of resources than grant making.  By 2004, Acumen had identified suitable business opportunities in 
India, Pakistan, Tanzania, Kenya, South Africa and Egypt and had completed investments in an organic products


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 102 
 
 C 
company, a telemedicine venture with a renowned eye hospital, a microfinance institution, an anti -malarial bed net 
manufacturer, a network of personal digital assistants (PDAs) for disease monitoring, a l ow-income housing 
development, an HIV/AIDS treatment service and a health care franchise network.  
In 2006, Acumen began preparing for the next five years of growth by deepening and solidifying investment processes 
while expanding local bases of support.  R ecognizing that it needed local knowledge and local experience to build deal 
flow and to best support portfolio companies, Acumen committed to an on- the-ground presence in each of its target 
investment geographies, leading to more decentralized operations and the opening of offices in Karachi, Pakistan and 
Hyderabad, India (subsequently moved to Mumbai).  These new offices introduced increasingly viable investment 
opportunities for Acumen in existing business enterprises serving low -income customers.  In 2007, Acumen followed 
suit in East Africa, launching another regional office in Nairobi, Kenya.  Acumen continued to expand its sector and 
geographic focus in subsequent years, launching an energy portfolio in 2007, an agriculture portfolio in 2008, an 
education portfolio in 2011, and a West Africa office in 2011.   
In 2009, Acumen raised its first for -profit private equity fund, Acumen Capital Markets I LLC (“ACM I”), to invest in 
small - and medium -sized enterprises that have social impact missions consisten t with those of Acumen, but whose 
business models had lower risk of product design and customer adoption (than Acumen’s pioneer investing portfolio) -  
and thus had a greater probability of commercial viability. ACM I’s investment strategy was consistent wi th Acumen’s 
charitable mission, and Acumen served as its Portfolio Manager.  Acumen, as the Portfolio Manager of ACM1, 
leveraged its existing investment process and global team in India, Pakistan and East & West Africa to identify potential investment targets for ACM I, to work with the management of prospective portfolio companies to refine business strategies, to understand the associated risks and to provide guidance on financing, marketing, and operational issues, 
amongst other items.  To pursue its soc ial impact and financial return goals, ACM I adopted the following investment 
criteria:  
o Market -based delivery of a critical good or service (such as healthcare, energy, agriculture, housing, or 
water and sanitation) to a BoP market
 
o Location in Acumen’s target geographical areas  
o Enterprise with an established business model and revenue stream  
o Innovative product or service with high scale and/or replication potential  
o Top-quality leadership and management with a proven track record and demonstrated commitment to 
targeting BoP markets  
o Potential for Acumen to add significant value through its expertise and networks  
o Willingness to work collaboratively and to meet pre- determined milestones  
o Typical investment size of approximately $250,000 t o $2.0 million  
As of December 31, 2014, ACM I had disbursed $11.0 million of capital to 12 companies.  The investment period of 
ACM I ended in 2014, and no more capital investments will be made into new companies.  
Overall, since 2001, Acumen has invested a total of $108 million of capital into 99 companies.  Acumen currently has 
$63 million in investments under management in 71 enterprises.    
In Q3/2016 the Green Climate Fund (GCF) became an anchor investor in Kawisafi Ventures, Acumen’s for -profit 
investment fund focused on creating energy access in East Africa.  The partnership has been a great success to date, 
with Kawisafi deploying $10M into two of the leading off -grid solar energy companies in East Africa; d.light design and 
Bboxx.  Acumen was the first entity to receive disbursed funds from the GCF for an approved funding proposal and the 
Kawisafi fund has been heralded as an innovative and exciting partnership for GCF.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 102 
 
 C 
Social and Financial Impact to Date  
Since 2001, through its investment portfolio, Acumen has impacted 200 million lives, creating access to critical goods 
and services such as clean energy, clean water, improved agricultural inputs and quality healthcare.  Thirteen of 
Acumen’s portfolio companies have impacted at least 1 million people. Acumen has received approximately $25M 
dollars in investment returns from its portfolio from 28 exits.  The majority of these investment returns have come from repayment of debt principal and interest payments.  
Agriculture  
Over the past 10 years, Acumen has invested over $33 million in 23 agriculture companies in Latin America, Africa and South Asia that have collectively impacted approximately 13.9 million lives to date. In Africa specifically, Acumen has invested  over $20 million in 10 companies, which have impacted the lives of approximately 10 million smallholder 
farmers.   
 
Each investment was made after assessment of the opportunity’s potential both for financial sustainability and for social 
impact. Acumen (i n Agriculture) invests in businesses that do not encourage the use of hazardous agrochemicals 
(which include pesticides & fertilizers. As an alternative, we promote the adoption of organic best practices coupled with 
vertical integration.  
Our investments in a gribusinesses  such as Wasi Organics (producer and marketer of organic snack foods with 
ingredients sourced directly from Peruvian smallholders), Under the Mango Tree Naturals and Organics (striving to 
preserve indigenous beekeeping using a commercially  sustainable model for Indian farmers), Farmers Hope (producer 
and distributor of organic fertilizers in Ghana) and Esoko (digital platform delivery critical information services like 
weather forecast to smallholder farmers in Ghana and Kenya) demonstrate Acumen’s commitment towards driving adoption of agricultural best practices that improve resilience of communities.  
By leveraging our strengths in impact measurement, our investees iterate their business models based on continuous user feedback. By aggregating smallholder farmer insights, Acumen is able to understand farmer behavior in unique ways that in turn enable greater impact.  
In 2016, Acumen successfully exited from one of its single largest investment in an agriculture company in Africa. Over 
the last 6 years, Acumen invested approx. $6.9M in Gulu Agricultural Development Company (GADC) based in 
northern Uganda. The finance was provided as a revolving facility which, at its peak, was drawn to the extent of $ 1.8 
M. GADC worked with farmers returning to their lands after 20 years of armed conflict in the area. GADC provided 
active assistance to farmers to redevelop their lands for growing organic cotton for export markets. Acumen together 
with Root Capital provided a working capital loan facility to t he company. This helped the company grow its sourcing 
from smallholder farmers and impact 420,000 lives as a result.  
In 2017, Acumen is in the process of exiting from another of its successful investment in Africa, EthioChicken. This was 
Acumen’s first inv estment in Ethiopia under a public private partnership program. EthioChicken produces highly 
productive disease resistant Day Old Chicks for smallholder farmers allowing them to diversify incomes away from 
crops. Acumen had structured this investment as debt with an EBIT share which allowed Acumen to capture some of 
the financial upside as the company expanded. Acumen is now exiting the investment as the company has now scaled to a point where commercial investors are keen to invest for further scale- up.  
Acumen sees these investment structures as good examples of the kind of investments Acumen anticipates making 
from ARAF. The debt  like structures allowed for smooth exit while in the case of EthioChicken an EBIT share allowed 
Acumen to also capture an upside.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 102 
 
 C 
Management Team  
Acumen’s team is dedicated to changing the way the world tackles poverty.  Profiles of key management team members 
relevant to ARAF are presented below:  
Our CEO,  Jacqueline Novogr atz, is one of the early pioneers of impact investing and our work over the past 15 years 
has pushed the boundaries of the impact investing sector.  Under her leadership, Acumen has invested $106 million in 
96 companies providing critical goods and services  to the poor across Africa, Latin America, South Asia and the United 
States. In 2016, Jacqueline received the Forbes 400 Lifetime Achievement Award for her work in social 
entrepreneurship. Prior to Acumen, Jacqueline founded The Philanthropy Workshop and T he Next Generation 
Leadership programs at the Rockefeller Foundation. She also co- founded Rwanda’s first microfinance institution, 
Duterimbere. Jacqueline sits on the boards of the Aspen Institute and IDEO.org.  Jacqueline has spearheaded another 
successful  engagement with the Green Climate Fund in Energy in Africa Kawisafi Venutres which successfully 
focussing on the provision of clean energy solutions to low income customers in Rwanda and Kenya.  
Sachindra Rudra  has been Acumen’s CIO for the past 3 years and has led an expansion as well as sharper focus of 
our investing activity.   As Country Director of India prior to being CIO, Sachindra oversaw a major investment in a dairy 
aggregator in India, in addition to overseeing one of our largest geographic portfolios.   Prior to Acmen, Sachin spent 15 
years in Private Equity, Consulting and Operations with organizations such as McKinsey & Co, Navis Capital Partners 
and Unilever.  
Noor Ullah  is Acumen’s Global Head of Agriculture and has been with Acumen for the last  10 years. Noor was part of 
the team that spearheaded Acumen’s work in agriculture almost a decade ago. Through the years, Noor has worked 
with teams across our target regions in South Asia, Africa and Latin America to build out Acumen’s agriculture portfolio  
which today is  the biggest sector exposure for the fund (23 investments, $33M invested, 13 million lives impacted). 
Noor also co- authored Growing Prosperity, a published report that captures key learnings from Acumen’s investments 
in the sector. As Pak istan Portfolio Manager, Noor supported the build out of Acumen’s Pakistan Portfolio across 
energy, agriculture and water sectors. Prior to joining Acumen, Noor spent 4 years in Operations Management, 
Business Development and Consulting roles with organizations like the World Bank, Microtech Industries and others.  
 
 
Describe how it (Executing Entity)  will support the project/programme in terms of equity  investment , management, 
operations, production and marketing.  
 
Acumen is developing a new impact fund that intends to be comprised of portfolio companies in the agriculture sector in 
East and West Africa that provide overlapping impact with the objectives of the GCF.  We are requesting $23M of 
investment capital from GCF that will be invested in the CFLC pool of ARAF while Acumen will be contributing $2M 
towards the same. We are targeting a $50M total fund size for the ARAF, of which approximately $36M will be invested 
in around 18 - 20companies.   
 
We are also requesting an additional $ 3M grant capital from the GCF towards a $6M TA Facility.  As highlighted in 
section B1, the TA facility will be used to support ARAF in achieving its goals by funding climate adaptation capacity 
building effort s, business development and employee training services, gender -specific interventions and Lean Data 
impact measurement initiatives (for more details on Lean Data, refer to section E1) for portfolio companies.  
 
Acumen will be supporting ARAF by leading the  fundraise effort. In addition, once the fund is set up, Acumen will be 
able to offer a range of inhouse services at below market prices to ARAF including Acumen’s exclusive Lean Data 
Services, legal and administrative support. In addition, Acumen’s existi ng operations in Africa will  support the setting up 
of ARAF operations and provide running support on pipeline development in the region and access to local networks.  
 
 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 102 
 
 C 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  
Describe the competitive environment including the list of  competitors with market shares and customer base  and key 
differentiating factors  (if applicable).  
Provide pricing structures, price controls, s ubsidies available and government involvement (if any).  
 
ARAF’s market is the millions of low -income smallholder farmers in Africa, who have the lowest yields in the world. In 
Africa and across the world, these farmers make up most of the world’s poor and half of the world’s hungry. Acumen 
has been investing to strengthen smallholder communities since 2008. In the face of climate change and unpredictable 
weather shocks, strengthening these communities means protecting assets, improving incomes and building adaptive 
capacity. In addition to predominantly inhabiting at -risk areas, smallholder farmers’ vulnerability to climate change is 
exacerbated by their inability to adopt appropriate climate change adaptation measures. Smallholder farmers are faced 
with 4 k ey challenges:  
• When farmers are ready to sell their harvest, the middleman is usually the off -taker and would offer prices  
lower by 20- 40% compared to market prices. These price margins are skimmed by the middleman in the name 
of service charges and brokerage fees etc.  This significantly dents farmers’ incomes and reduces their ability to 
save and invest in new and improved c limate resilient inputs and practices.  
• Inputs  provided by these middlemen are often adulterated leading to poor yields for farmers. That said, climate 
resilient inputs are few and there is limited awareness amongst customers about the utility of such input s or 
access to them.  
• Farmers buy most of their inputs on credit . It’s typically the local influential middleman that provides inputs on 
credit to farmers and is also the off -taker for the farmer since farmers do not have direct access to buyers. 
Credit pro vided by these middleman can be priced anywhere from 60% -100% annualized mark -up rates. Such 
high rates leave very little upside for the farmer, if any and risks putting them in a debt trap in case market price at the time of harvest is low or weather shoc ks impacts productivity.  In addition, these credit providers do not 
offer much support to farmers in mitigating the risk of climate shocks through better practices. Climate smart 
lending is an emerging concept and critical for farmers to be linked to climate smart lending which in addition to 
providing affordable credit also enables farmers to mitigate against the risk of climate shocks and prevent them from falling into a debt trap due to a failed harvest.  
• There is virtually no extension or training suppor t available to farmers in large part of Africa. There are 
limited government and NGO run programs where quality is questionable and reach is extremely limited. This exposes farmers to magnified risks specifically given the changing weather patterns. Farmer s are unable to 
plan properly for land preparation, sowing, watering and harvesting. For example, according to FAO
, in a pilot 
study of 22 sub- Saharan African countries, crop yields increased by  40 percent in the first year that agricultural 
extension was offered.  Given the lack of quality extension, climate smart extension is virtually non- existent. To 
fix extension, both knowledge base of extension providers needs to be upgraded to incorporate climate resilience lens while cost effective delivery channels need to be enabled.  
 
To continue supporting smallholder farmers and help them adapt to climate change, ARAF will address:  
 
1. Access to climate adaptation training and best practices by investi ng in extension systems  
2. Climate adaptive inputs which protect yields from disease outbreak and have greater resistance against climate 
variability.  
3. Affordable credit and indexed insurance  
4. Better market prices to improve farmer profitability  
 
To address these 4 key needs, ARAF will invest in platforms that improve access in an increasingly connected world 
and visibility in an increasingly digital world to enhance climate resilience, productivity, and livelihoods. Innovative 
Financial Services, Ag gregator and Digital (Ag- ICT) Platform business models are effective in addressing socio-
economic challenges that are known to inhibit smallholder farmers’ ability to develop adaptive responses to climate change.  
 
Smallholder farmers today are often faced with a splintered network trying to provide access to agronomic information, 
extension services, credit, inputs, and markets, often at a high cost or in an inefficient manner. These are informal


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 102 
 
 C 
markets where credit is expensive, extension is broken or alm ost non -existent, off -take prices are lower for farmers 
compared with market prices, and inputs are adulterated or not available at the time when farmers need them the most.  
 
Innovative Financial Services, Aggregator and Digital Platform businesses provid e a one- stop destination for all or 
many of these services in a bundled package, improving both the quality and stability of farmer incomes and therefore 
strengthening their ability to adapt to climate change. See C.2 for additional details.  
 
In addition,  Acumen will work with governments (both national and local) to scale the impact of successful investments. 
In many countries where ARAF will be active, governments control prices for certain crops, regulate import and export 
or are directly involved in value chains. We have had great success in working with governments and scaling the 
adoption of innovative solutions that enhance climate resilience e.g., i n Ethiopia, we invested in EthioChicken, a 
company that managed government owned poultry breeders under a Public Private Partnership model. The company 
with active support from the Ethiopian government has now scaled to become the largest Day Old Chicks producer in 
Ethiopia that is producing chicks for farmers that are 4 times more productive compared to r egular chicks available in 
the market while also being more disease resistant. This is enabling farmers to increase their incomes manifold while also increasing income protection from outbreak of disease.  
 
Through ARAF we would look to work with active gov ernments as well as progressive corporates to scale such 
livelihoods improvement and climate resilience initiatives.  
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
Provide  details of government licenses  or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue.  
 
The fund will be formed as a limited partnership under the laws of Ontario. It will be a closed end fund and will be 
transparent for tax and legal purposes.  
 
Acumen is not aware of any government licenses or permits required in connection with the formation or operation of 
the ARAF.  Certain registrations may be required in jurisdictions where the ARAF is formed or where the Manager 
solicits additional investment, and will be reviewed and addressed during the ARAF development and fundraising.  
The ARAF will carry out the relevant due diligence on its portfolio companies to understand if they comply with the appropriate regulatory environment and under the applicable licenses.  
 
Acumen assesses regulatory, tax and insurance concerns in the diligence process of each investment opportunity.  
Acumen expects that the social enterprises it invests in operate within the appropriate regulatory environment and 
obtain all the appropriate l icenses within each country.  Through this project, Acumen will monitor its portfolio 
companies and ask for relevant documentation and information proving continued to compliance with relevant laws and 
regulations.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations.  
 The ARAF has selected Ontario, Canada as  its jurisdiction of formation in part based on the tax efficiencies for 
investors and the ARAF with respect to the target geographies for investment.   
 Acumen assesses regulatory, tax and insurance concerns in the diligence process of each investment opportunity.  
Acumen expects that the social enterprises it invests in operate within the appropriate regulatory environment and 
obtain all the appropriate licenses within each country.  Regulatory  compliance will be part of the diligence on 
investments, and ongoing monitoring, and the fund will obtain representations and covenants for investees regarding


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 102 
 
 C 
the status of the same.  Through this project, Acumen will monitor its portfolio companies and ask for relevant 
documentation and information proving continued to compliance with relevant laws and regulations.  
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  
Acumen maintains insurance policies that provide coverage in the amounts  and of the types it deems advisable given 
its activities and the activities of its affiliates.  It is expected that the ARAF will benefit from inclusion in coverage under 
these policies.  
 
Acumen assesses regulatory, tax and insurance concerns in the diligence process of each investment opportunity.  
Acumen expects that the social enterprises it invests in operate within the appropriate regulatory environment and obtain all the appropriate licenses within each country.  Through this project, Acumen wil l monitor its portfolio 
companies and ask for relevant documentation and information proving continued to compliance with relevant laws and 
regulations.  
 
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail the governance structure  of the project/programme, including but not limited to the 
organization structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, 
executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  Also describe which of these structures are 
already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish 
them.  
 
The executing entity for ARAF and TAF will be the Fund i.e. the Acumen Resilient Agriculture F und LP, an Ontario 
limited partnership (to be formed) , which will be the direct investing entity, and will be managed by Acumen Capital 
Partners LLC, a Delaware limited liability company .  
 
Please note that the  Funding Activity Agreement ( FAA)  will be  between the AE and GCF. The AE will enter  into a 
subsidiary agreement with the GP to ensure compliance with the FAA requirement s. The GP and LPs  will enter into an 
LPA with the terms of the fund operations. T he GP or the Fund will then enter into a management agreement with the 
manager to delegate certain GP obligations to the manager as per the LPA.   
. 
 
ACP and the ARAF will adhere to all the relevant policies of Acumen that the GCF reviewed in the accreditation of 
Acumen.  It is possible that there will  be some policies that differ between ACP and Acumen because ACP, unlike 
Acumen, is not a tax exempt entity.  These policies will be relevant for tax purposes and not related to the fiduciary, 
social and environmental, anti -corruption, and investment dilig ence processes upon which Acumen was accredited.  
During the implementation, Acumen will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and funded activity agreement 
(FAA) to be agreed with GCF. A diagram of the anticipated legal organizational structure for Acumen, ACP, the ARAF, 
and Investors is below.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
 
 
The Fund does not intend to hire a trustee or agent for GCF's investment.  However, the Fund does intend to hire a 
related party  manager who will be responsible for managing the fund's investments  and overall operation of  the fund 
(including investor relat ions and risk  management). This manager will be ACP, a wholly owned subsidiary of Acumen, 
which is a typical structure for a sponsored fund.  The manager will be subject to an external financial audit on an 
annual basis.  The Fund also intends to hire a third party  administrator; the administrator will perform asset and 
valuation calculations,  maintain books and records,  support  financial statement  preparation and reporting,  liaise 
with auditors,  pay fund expenses from its bank account, calculate  distributio ns and returns, prepare 
and submit  regulatory filings, monitor and report on compliance an anti -money  laundering and supervise dissolution 
of the fund.  Acumen will select the administrator for the ARAF based on a competitive process that takes into account  
at least three bids, and will be assessed based on pricing, capability, credible reputation and our experience with the 
administrator or its affiliates. The administrator will be a separate and unaffiliated entity, and as such, will not be rolled 
up into Acumen’s financial audit.  
 
All members of the ARAF Investment Team will have multiple years of experience in banking, private equity, emerging 
market investing and/or impact investing. The team will be newly created, dedicated to ARAF , approved by Acumen.  
The proposed structure of the team includes the following six team members:  
 
● 1 Managing Director  
● 1 Climate Adaptation Expert  (CAE)  
● 1 Investment  Principal  
● 3 Investment  Associates  
$23M Catalytic 
First Loss 
Equity  
$25M Senior 
Equity


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 102 
 
 C 
● 1 Office Assistant  
 
  
 
ARAF Team Structure  
 
 
 
 
Investment Committee (IC) The IC is the final decision- making body in the deal review process. IC will assess the business model for its financial 
viability, social impact and  climate resilience contribution and make a final decision to approve or disapprove the deal. 
The primary responsibilities of the IC will be to:  
1. Review/approve/reject deals, at key decision gates in the investment process and at exit  
2. Review current p ipeline, post -investment management activities and deal outcomes  
3. Review investment and portfolio performance against annual goals and recommend potential corrective action, if 
necessary  
4. Review and provide guidance on investment and portfolio management strategy  
 The figure below illustrates the IC structure:  
   
 
    Responsible for overall management of the 
fund, team management, knowledge 
management, key stakeholder 
management including NDAsManaging Director x1
Responsible for managing the investment 
process, relationship management with 
investee companies, identifying pipeline 
opportunities, managing sector networks 
and supporting MD with investor relationsInvestment Principal x1
Responsible for working with the 
investment team and conducting due 
diligence from climate perspective. 
Supporting post investment monitoring and 
evaluation on climate objectivesClimate Adaptation expert x1
Responsible for pipeline development, due 
diligence, post investment management 
and exitsPortfolio Associate* x3
Responsible for providing general 
admin support to the teamOffice Assistant x1
*Team will be based in East Africa with one Associate based in West Africa


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
ARAF IC Structure  
 
 
Following are the profiles of two IC members that have been finalized:  
Sachindra Rudra  has been Acumen’s CIO for the past 3 years and has led an expansion as well as sharper focus of 
our investing activity.   As Country Director of India prior to being CIO, Sachindra oversaw a major investment in a dairy 
aggregator in India, in addition to o verseeing one of our largest geographic portfolios.   Prior to Ac umen, Sachin spent 
15 years in Private Equity, Consulting and Operations with organizations such as McKinsey & Co, Navis Capital 
Partners and Unilever.  
Peter Cain  is a senior public finance ex ecutive and consultant. He has global experience financing municipalities, not -
for-profits, and infrastructure and public -private partnership projects. He has been a strong leader, both in working with 
fiscally stressed municipalities and on closing innovative, pioneering financings .  
Peter has been an Acumen Partner since 2001.   He has served on Acumen's Investment Committee, Advisory Counsel 
and Portfolio Leadership Team for many years.   He has  also represented Acumen on the boards of two portfolio 
companies.  
Peter had a 30 year career in the credit markets.   He worked with Ambac from 1994 to 2015.   Roles there i ncluded co-
leading the opening of the London office, focusing on global project finance and public -private partnerships,  co-leading 
post origination portfolio management on credit portfolios totaling  hundreds of billions, and serving as the head of credit 
risk management.   He also led Ambac's workout  team on several municipal bankruptcies, including Detroit.   
 
 Panel of Climate Experts (PCE)  
The role of PCE will be to provide an independent, third party view on the pipeline  opportunities  in terms of its 
contribution to climate resilience and provide its recommendation to IC.  The PCE will either consist of 2- 3 climate 
experts in individual capacity or an organization with relevant expertise (for example Winrock)  The selection of the PCE 
will be based on the following:  
• Demonstrated expertise in climate resilience  
• Experience in the agriculture sector in Africa  
• Interest and commitment in building out the climate resilience sector  
We are in the process of identifying individuals/organizat ions with the right profile for the PCE.   
 
Impact Review Process  
The impact  review will be a three- step process. The focus of first two steps is entirely to ensure that every investment 
under consideration is thoroughly assessed from a climate lens before it is passed on to the Investment Committee (IC) 
in the thi rd step for the final decision. The figure below illustrates this process.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 102 
 
 C 
 
 
Impact review process  
 
 
1. Use of Agriculture Resilience Investment Screening (ARIS) by ARAF Team  
 
ARIS is a cutting- edge tool in the climate sector that has been built in partnership with Winrock  International. This 
tool has been designed to help us screen pipeline opportunities for ARAF in light of their contribution to climate resilience. The Climate Adaptation Expert (CAE) in the ARAF team will be responsible for deploying ARIS to 
analyse  every investment under consideration and assess its climate potential against the climate resilience 
objective of ARAF. CAE will also engage the portfolio team and obtain their support where required. To populate the tool, the CAE will use the following m ethods:  
 
• Field surveys  
• Customer interviews  
• Business management interviews  
• Online research 
 
Once the ARIS has been fully populated, based on its output the CAE will either recommend that the project has 
‘Insufficient Resilience Benefit ’ or that it has ‘Low/ Medium/High Resilience Benefit’ . 
 
2. Panel of Climate Experts (PCE)  
The recommendation of CAE based on the output from ARIS will be presented to PCE. The PCE will provide an 
independent third- party view on CAE’s recommendation that either validates it or provides an alternative opinion 
that will be moved to the Investment Committee (IC) for final decision.  
3. Investment Committee (IC) 
In light of the input provided by PCE, the Investment Committee (IC) will further assess the business model for 
its financial vi ability, social impact and climate resilience and make a final decision on the deal.  
Deal review process  
Deal review is a three step process:  
1. Identification of pipeline opportunities  
The Managing Director of the Investment Team will review Acumen’s entire pipeline of potential investments to 
ensure that all available investment opportunities consistent with the ARAF’s investment criteria are 
appropriately consider ed for investment from  ARAF .  
 
2. Due diligence of deals  using the Investment Memo (IM)


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 102 
 
 C 
All inves tments that meet the ARAF’s investment criteria will be directed to the Investment Principal on the 
ARAF Team who will lead the diligence process .  
The IM  is the principal document for formal due diligence on the potential investee company . The IM for ARAF 
has been designed to ascertain and ensure that the potential investee company aligns with the climate 
adaptation goals of the fund. The Investment Team will need to present a compelling rationale in the IM based 
on their due diligence findings  captured through ARIS  that the proposed investment falls in line with climate 
adaptation objectives of ARAF. Further, the IM asks for clear plan for tracking impact targets for each 
investment at the core of which will be metrics identified to measure climate resilience in target rural 
communities.  
 
Following are the key sections added to the IM template to incorporate the core focus on climate resilience for 
ARAF investments:  
 
• What is the climate adaptation challenge this company will be addressing? (section 1.2 of IM)  
• Why enterprise’s approach will build resilience to climate change? (section 1.3, 5.4 of IM)  
• Summary Results from ARIS  (Section 5.4 of IM)  
o Score, recommendation and rationale from CAE  
o Score, recommendation and rationale from PCE  
 
3. Final decision by IC  
The IM produced by the ARAF portfolio team will presented to the IC. IC will use the information provided in the 
IM to further assess the business model for its financial  viability, social impact  and contribution to climate 
resilience and make a final decision to approve or disapprove the deal.  
 
ARAF will have an Advisory Committee (AC) of up to six members selected by the Fund Manager, whose primary 
purpose will be to opine on conflict of interest situations related the  ARAF. In add ition, the AC may hold certain 
standard powers under the limited partnership agreement of the ARAF.  Generally, the roles of the AC do not rise to 
fiduciary duties.  The AC will meet as needed, and no less than annually.  Acumen as the GP for ARAF will be 
responsible for the governance of, and be the fiduciary for, the ARAF.   
 
In addition, the ARAF anticipates forming an Agriculture Expert Committee (AEC) comprised of experts in the 
agriculture sector, to provide sector guidance and consultation on investment strategy in the interest of optimizing 
impact.  The role of the AEC does not rise to the fiduciary duties.   
 
Overview of the legal/contractual structure and funds flow  
 
• The funds with respect to the equity investment will flow from the GCF to the Accredited Entity, for the Accredited 
Entity to transfer them to the Executing Entity . 
• GCF and Accredited Entity will sign a funded activity agreement.  GCF will complete and sign a subscription 
agreement for its interests in the fund. GP, on behalf of GCF  as proxy, will sign the limited partnership agreement 
that will govern the operations of the fund.  Accredited Entity and Executing Entity will enter into a subsidiary 
agreement.  The GP will have an operating agreement entered into by the Executing Entit y.  The TAF will have a 
manual for its grant making operations, to be circulated to GCF as a member of the TAF.  The FAA for the TAF 
award from GCF will essentially be a grant agreement.  The GP will also engage an auditor and an administrator for 
the fund.   
• Subscription agreement and limited partnership agreement will be the main governing documents of the fund.  The 
AMA will lay out the obligations of the Accredited Entity vis a vis GCF.  The FAA will provide for modifications to the AMA and subscription documents with GCF, much like a side letter in typical fund documents.  The TAF award will 
be governed by a FAA/grant agreement, and there will be a manual laying out processes and decision making for 
the TA .


---
*Page 42*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 102 
 
 C 
• The limited partnership agreement will be the document that governs the distribution priority.  Junior Interest 
Investors will have all the same rights as Senior Interest Investors except for with respect to the distribution 
waterfall, where they will follow the Senior Interest Investors.   
• Generally,  an investor will not have liability in excess of commitment, nor be asked to return more than contributions 
plus earnings distributed.  The fund will be tax transparent and there will be no tax liability in Canada solely by virtue 
of investing in the fund.  Representations of GCF will be contained in the subscription agreement; the agreement 
entered into for KawiSafi Ventures should be a good guide for the provisions that will be requested.  
• The GP is the fiduciary for the fund and the investors.  It engag es the manager (Executing Entity) to operate the 
day to day management of the fund.  The GP is wholly owned by the manager, which in turn is wholly owned by the Accredited Entity.  The key persons generally will sit at the Manager if they are the executing team. If Jacqueline 
and Sachin are key persons, they sit at the Accredited  Entity.   
• As the fiduciary, the GP has the control over fund management, and delegates the day to day of that role to the manager.  The GP and manager are indirectly or directly wholly owned by the Accredited Entity/the sponsor.  As such, we do not expect the need to enumerate any special rights of the sponsor.  Generally, the rights of the GP 
under the limited partnership agreement are as follows:  
-        Admit LPs  
-        Retain  a consultant to review the annual impact report if dispute  
-        Manage, control, operate fund and delegate rights and duties to Manager  
-        Make investment and disposition decisions, and appoint IC  
-        Cause fund to incur debt, pledge/transf er assets, and determine what LP financial info is needed in 
support thereof  
-        Create feeder, parallel and alternative investment vehicles and permit withdraw and admittance into such 
vehicles by LPs  
-        Determine which pools of capital to pay fund expenses  
-        Achieve investment strategy  
-        Make drawdowns on commitments  
-        Return unused funds  
-        Excuse LPs from drawdowns where adverse effects, reduce unfunded commitment obligations, and 
obtain funding for shortfalls  
-        Make distributions to LPs  
-        Restore clawback funds (with manager guarantee)  
-        Liquidate in kind distributions for LPs  
-        Keep books, select auditor, reporting to LPs  
-        Call meetings  
-        Excuse tax indemnities of LPs  
-        Extend term  
-        Early termination of investment period  
-        Dissolve fund  
-        Permit LP withdrawal  
-        Amend LPA (with LPs)  
-        Amend LPA (without LPs) to:  
o   Add duties or forego rights to LPs  
o   Make changes non- adverse to LPs in subsequent closings  
o   Correct provisions  
o   Satisfy legal directives (SEC, tax, other)  
-        POA for LPs re garding fund matters  
 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with k ey contractual agreements.  
Not Applicable


---
*Page 43*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 102 
 
 C 
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction.  If 
applicable, provide the credit analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural mitigants to 
cover the counterparty risks.  
Not Applicable


---
*Page 44*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 102 
 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project /Programme Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable  in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below  is used, please refer to the act ivities as numbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed.  
Actual capital disbursements and returns will vary depending on market factors such as availability of investment opportuniti es and performance of those 
investments once capital is disbursed. However, ARAF will adhere to specific investment criteria and terms relating to such things as the Investment 
Period, the Management Fee, Life of ARAF and other relevant terms that bind the overall amounts of expenses and investment capital that can be 
incurred/deployed by ARAF. For example, all primary investments wil l be made within the first 5- 6 years of ARAF (with follow -on investments occurring 
with a lag of 1- 2 years from the primary investment), and ARAF will seek to exit all investments and return capital to investors before the l ife of ARAF 
expires. ARAF expect s to start deploying TAF starting 1st January , 2019 and fully exhaust TAF by 3 1st December  2029.  
 
Below is the implementation plan for ARAF illustrating the split for Equity and TAF activities:  
 
Activities 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 Output
Equity Activities
Pipeline development and Investing
Post Investment Management
Exit
TAF Activities
Increase in access to financial 
services for women
Increase in mobile adoption and use 
of digital services by women25% more women adopt mobile phones and 
use digital services in the target population 
than the assessed national/regional average
Increase in participation by women 
in agricultural extension programs20% more women participating in agricultural 
extension programs in the target population 
than the Increase in climate resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of smallholder farmers in ARAF 
countries
25% more women reached with formal 
financial services in the target population than 
the assessed national/regional average


---
*Page 45*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 102 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme , in consideration of  other alternatives . 
 
Funding from the GCF will enable Acumen to create ARAF, a new climate- resilient  agriculture fund focused on 
smallholder farmers in Africa that seeks to generate a triple bottom line of social, environmental and financial returns. 
An anchor investment of $23M from GCF into ARAF’s first loss pool will be catalytic, as it will de- risk t he investment for 
more risk -averse private sector investors and provide a strong incentive for such investors to partner with Acumen and 
GCF in this new investment fund. The market research that we have undertaken to date has shown that with first loss 
funding in place from GCF, a number of investors have expressed potential interest in investing into the ARAF senior 
equity pool. However, given the high risks associated with investing in the early -stage agribusiness that serve low -
income smallholders, the s ame investors have made it clear that they would not be able to participate without the 
downside protection offered by the first loss pool. It is therefore unlikely that ARAF would be able to attract other 
investors to the desired level of $25M without GCF ’s involvement, which would mean creating a much smaller fund and 
working with far fewer smallholders. Without GCF’s strong influence around the importance of climate adaptation, we 
might also be forced by other investors to dilute or eliminate ARAF’s clim ate adaptation focus. We believe, the success 
of ARAF will create a whole investment sector focused on climate resilient agriculture with much greater leverage of 
GCF’s capital and lower requirements for any first loss support. At this stage however, given the unproven nature of 
the sector, a significant contribution of GCF’s capital in the first loss pool is critical to the viability of ARAF.  
 
The ARAF will be one of the first climate- resilient agriculture investment funds in the world, and to our knowledge the 
very first with a focus on early stage SMEs that aim to make smallholders more resilient to climate change through 
access to better inputs, appropriate finance, secure off -take agreements and better information and training. 
Involvement from the GCF will be crucial to enable us to fully leverage ARAF as a tool to not only drive increased 
climate resilience within and around our direct investments, but also to help influence the wider impact investment 
sector, advocating for increased prioritization of  climate adaptation concerns within agribusiness investments in Africa 
and other geographies vulnerable to climate change. Acumen has a strong and well -respected global brand with 
impressive convening power. Although we are most widely known and respected for our work in poverty -alleviation 
rather than in climate change mitigation or adaptation, this is slowly changing through our existing partnership with GCF on the KawiSafi fund and our increasing investments in early -stage energy companies through our Pi oneer 
Energy Investment Initiative (PEII). ARAF support by the GCF would greatly strengthen our brand as an organization 
that is willing and able to simultaneously embrace both developmental and sustainability concerns, and we could much 
better serve the i mpact investment sector as a true role model for sustainable development.    
 
Inside Acumen we have also already been greatly influenced and inspired by our relationship with the GCF to date and 
the amplified attention it has brought to the dangers of clim ate change, particularly on our target BoP populations.  
Prior to our GCF investment into KawiSafi, we largely saw our clean energy investments through a poverty -alleviation 
lens: off -grid solutions were cheaper for our BoP customers. Since partnering with  GCF, we now equally value and 
measure the climate change mitigation impacts of our energy investments and are making investment decisions based on a blend of climate and poverty concerns –  a truly sustainable development approach. This change has transfor med 
the way we consider our energy investment work internally and is having a ripple effect across the organization. 
Although our strategy pivot towards climate resilient  agriculture was driven by feedback from farmers on the ground, 
awareness of the climate adaptation implications of this feedback was largely recognized by our team due to our heightened climate awareness through existing involvement with GCF. Partnering further with GCF to move our 
agriculture portfolio from a poverty -alleviation focus to a climate adaptation focus would be the catalyst for Acumen 
staff to consider themselves joint poverty and climate ambassadors, with significant implications for the strategies of 
our other investment sectors and for our ability to influence others in the sector.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 102 
 
 
 
 D 
We are keen to go on this important climate adaptation learning journey together with GCF and hope that we can build 
on our existing relationship to build an even deeper partnership. We have a lot to learn and we are excited to get 
started and help to magnify the impact of our partnership by bringing as many people as possible along the journey 
with us.     
D.2. Exit Strategy   
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability  will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support  from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long- term financial viability 
demonstrated in E .6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable) . 
 
 
Preparing for successful exits is a core element of Acumen’s investment strategy.  Acumen’s investment professionals 
expend significant effort understanding the strategies and operational components of each portfolio company that can create a financially sustainable enterprise and help attract a later -stage purchaser.   
 
Overall, Acumen seeks to create investment structures that will allow for a clear path to exit, create liquidity in the 
medium term, and compensate for the risk of the investment.  The ARAF we will focus primarily on self -liquidating 
investments, with only a small number of equity investments. As a result, ARAF is expected to invest primarily in 
convertible debt, debt with warrants, and debt with a share of  revenue or EBITDA.  Potential exit opportunities for 
equity investments are expected to include sales to a later -stage growth investors, a strategic buyer or a management 
buyout.  Initial public offerings are not seen as practical exit opportunities, and,  in lieu of identifiable exit opportunities 
at the time of investment, Acumen may structure ARAF’s investments using self -liquidating, quasi -equity instruments.  
 
The Investment Team of ARAF will have ongoing relationships with potential strategic acquirers  of portfolio 
companies, growth stage investment firms and commercial lenders to help improve exit opportunities for the Fund’s 
investments.  We have seen larger investment firms start to make small investments in companies that are developing sustainable food supply chains to learn about the economic viability of these markets.  Examples of these investment 
firms include J.P.Morgan, IFAD, CDC, Proparco etc. Even Food corporates like Unilever, Nestle, Nespresso, Sainsbury’s and others present compelling exi t opportunities for Acumen’s investments given these corporates are 
looking to acquire businesses that make their supply chains sustainable.  
 ARAF’s catalytic investment in early stage SMEs in inclusive agribusinesses will enable them to reach economies of scales, which will reduce the cost and improve reliability of sourcing from smallholder farmers.  Successful companies 
will serve as proof points for later stage investors and corporations that inclusive businesses can be economically 
viable and can be built into profitable business models.  
 The Investment Principal  will prepare an exit memorandum (the “Exit Memo”) at the completion of each investment, 
which occurs when ARAF is no longer a stakeholder in the portfolio company.  The purpose of the Exit Memo is to summarize the key takeaways from the entire investment process in order to improve Acumen’s understanding of 
effective strategies for marketing critical goods and services to the poor, and assessing performance against intended 
impact and financial return goals.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criter ia and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub- criteria and assessment 
factors in the Fund’s investment framework .  
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock -in of long- lived, high emission or cl imate -
vulnerable infrastructure.  
 
 
Catalysing improvements in agricultural productivity and incomes  
Acumen has a decade of experience investing into early -stage business across Sub- Saharan Africa, South Asia and Latin 
America  that help smallholder farmers to improve their productivity and incomes. Through our in- house, proprietary approach to 
social performance measurement, Lean DataSM (see section E.1.2) we have directly communicated with and measured the 
impact on thousands of smallholders. We have gained significant insight into the challenges facing, and needs of these farmers. 
Unsurprisingly the significance of earning a decent living from farming is a repeated concern of smallholders. Farmers 
repeatedly describe to us the challenges of rising input costs, falling off -take prices and increased challenges with climate. To 
address this our investing has focused on agribusinesses able to provide access to high quality inputs to improve quantity an d 
quality of production alongside higher and more reliable prices , compared to status -quo alternatives (e.g. market middle- men) . 
 
Based on our past experience of investing in companies  that offer fairer prices , and support greater and higher -value farm 
outputs , we anti cipate that  approximately  10 million  farmers will:  
+ Improve their farm productivity  
+ Increase their net farm incomes  
+ Improve their overall wellbeing and quality of life.  
 Adapt and build resilience to climate change  
In addition to the issue of increased productivity and incomes, we have learnt firsthand of the significance of limiting agricultural 
risk through crop/livestock  diversification as well as reducing the variability of incomes through more certain off-take. This, need 
for addressing risk, speaks directly to the importance of Climate Resilience to ensure farmers are able to build their resilience, 
and avoid the worst effects associated with ever increasing climate variability.  Over time, having predictable inc ome helps 
farmers plan and start building a base of savings and assets that they can use to reduce the impact of sudden shocks like 
climate related hazards. We are repeatedly told by farmers who have successfully diversified and have less dependency on 
mono -crops , that they feel more security sin ce if one crop fails they can fall back on the earnings from another. We have also 
heard farmers actively choosing to reinvest funds in other livelihoods to diversify their incomes, especially once they can ensure 
that they have enough resources to put food on the table.  To that end we have focused much of our investing on 
agribusinesses that are able to offer farmers greater access to new agricultural markets.  
 
Significant value remains trapped in smallholders’ far ms because they don’t have access to the right skills, tools and equipment, 
seeds and fertilizers etc. W e will work with companies that can provide inputs and advice to farmers that help them to directly 
manage the impacts of changing weather. The agribusi nesses to which we invest have clearly aligned incentives to do so: their 
own sustainability is inextricably linked to the productivity of their suppliers. We have seen a range of approaches adopted by


---
*Page 48*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
our investees, from direct provision of inputs (such a s drought resistant seeds, and irrigation kits) to leveraging expertise and 
support of NGOs (such as Technoserve, Farm Africa etc). And whilst we have also seen that farmers are often hesitant –  with 
good reason –  to adopt new approaches and inputs w e expect that the agribusinesses into which we invest will continue to play 
a critical role in enabling smallholders to gain access to training and inputs that allow them to better adapt to climate changes.  
For a detailed investigation into the drivers of adopti on of agricultural innovation please see Growing Prosperity  co-published by 
Acumen and Bain & Co.  
 
Lastly our work, especially with agricultural finance companies, has shown us the importance of both being able to provide 
liquidity in times of need as well as capital to acquire assets. The incremental accumulation of assets is a key pathway out of 
pover ty as well as providing insurance in times of need. Access to additional liquidity can also help farmers cope with times of 
stress.  
 
By investing in companies able to diversify risk, open up new markets and provide access to technical assistance we expect to:  
+ Reduce the year -on-year (climate change induced) variability of net -farm incomes  
+ Reduce the use of coping strategies and farmer financial stress.  
 Reduce and/or remove greenhouse gas emissions, where possible  
With regard specifically to agricultural investments this area is newer to us. We have naturally focused much of our work on 
mitigation through our energy investing portfolio. However ARAF opens up an opportunity to explore this area in more detail. 
Through our investing we have already been involved in investments that have made contributions through mitigation via various channels. For example promotion of smallstock over livestock, creating value in naturally growing fruits thereby reducing 
deforestation, and consumption of biomass for fuel rather than burning or natural decomposition. We have also, and will 
continue to explore opportunities in sustainable logging to promote greater climate sequestration and innovations such as sol ar-
powered drip irrigati on. 
  
Whilst to date we have focused greater attention on the impact of our investing on sustainable and more reliable incomes, our  
investing through ARAF will more explicitly look at the mitigation effects and opportunities.  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential  indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 
eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  N/A 
Lifetime  N/A 
• Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries , disaggregated by gender  
(reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  2.1M  Direct Beneficiaries  (farmers directly 
engaged with target companies)  
7.9M21 Indirect Beneficiaries  
50% of the total beneficiaries will be women  
 
Percentage 
(%)  
3.9% 
                                                             
21 Based on weighted average family size of 4.8 people in ARAF countries


---
*Page 49*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Other 
relevant 
indicators   
• 25-50% of farmers being served by ARAF’s investments who are living below the World Bank’s $3.1 per 
person per day poverty line.   
• An appropriate measure of increase in adaptive capacity developed with GCF and collected using Lean 
Data. This could be a composite Climate Adaptability Index or tracking independent aspects of wellbeing 
that constitute adaptability like 1) increased access to markets inputs training and credit; 2) changes in 
agricultural income stability, including changes to adoption of coping mechanisms ; 3) reported 
improvements in production or diversification of livelihoods, among others.  
Outcome indicators disaggregated by gender:  
a) 50% of women or FHH reporting a positive change in quality of life due to ARAF company  
b) 50% of women or FHH reporting improved incomes due to ARAF company  
c) 50% of women or FHH reporting increased resilience to climate changes due to ARAF company  
d) 50% of women or FHH reporting Net Promoter Score of Y or higher  
e) In 50% of the HHs, women did most of the work related to crops/pr oducts/services  
f) In 50% of the HHs, women make most of the decisions related to crops/products/services  
g) In 50% of the HHs, women make most of the money -related decisions about crops/products/services  
Key targets for TA gender support are as follows:  
• 25% more women reached with formal financial services in the target population than the assessed 
national/regional average  
• 25% more women adopt mobile phones and use digital services in the target population than the assessed 
national/regional average  
• 20% more women participating in agricultural extension programs in the target population than the assessed  
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
 
Pre-Investment Impact Data 
We have built an  Agriculture Resilience Investment Screen (ARIS) in partnership with Winrock. It is a cutting- edge tool in the 
climate sector that will make an important contribution to the wider sector with regards to assessing investments focused on 
climate resilience. We will use this tool to conduct an in -depth assessment of potential investees and capture the following pre-
investment impact data:  
 
1. Climate change and weather risks to the business model in its target location and how the business activity addresses these risks  
2. Climate vulnerability of the target population and how the business model addresses those vulnerabilities by building the 
climate resilience of the community  
3. Any potential negative impacts of the business under consideration that would exacerbate climate risks and therefore 
may outweigh any benefits identified in the previous  two section s 
 
Post Investment Impact Data  
Acumen uses our internally developed Lean Data
SM to understand and augment the impact of our portfolio companies. Lean 
Data is an approach to impact measurement that has been developed for the specific needs and constraints of social 
businesses. Lean Data gathers information on customer feedback and behavior, as well as social performance in a cost -


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
effective manner, largely using remote survey tools (Phone calls, SMS, IVR and online surveys). See 
https://ssir.org/articles/entry/the_power_of_lean_data for details. . 
 
Lean DataSM is a shift away from data c ollection as a task for reporting and instead focuses on giving entrepreneurs the data 
they need to measure and manage their impact . And as investors , Acumen is able to  make significantly more informed 
investment decisions , by receiving data directly from farmers at scale. In the past three years of executing Lean Data we have 
worked with over 90 leading funds, firms, development agencies and foundations, surveying over 35,000 low income consumers 
or suppliers. We have built a range of technology partnershi ps to complement our own in house, local research teams.  
 
To date Lean Data has been at the cutting edge of measuring climate mitigation changes in our energy portfolio. We have 
estimated CO2 savings resulting from our investments with data direct from users of energy products, recording customer energy type and usage behavior. Our approach has either met or exceeded the requirements for Certificates of Climate 
Reduction (NB: to date we have not actually sought to record and earn CERs using our data). Addit ionally our approach to 
measurement of the impact of off -grid energy was adopted wholesale by the Global Off -Grid Lighting Association (GOGLA). Kat 
Harrison, Associate Director of Lean Data, established and chaired the GOGLA metrics working group. We therefore have a 
track record of establishing and implementing measurement approaches to capture our mitigation affects. We will apply this same rigour to ARAF.  
 
Lean Data
SM in agriculture  
In addition to us e of mobile for data collection and provision a blend of social and business performance insights , one of Lean 
Data’s key unique selling points (USPs) is the developed a suite of ready -to-go, tried and tested survey tools  (“products”). These 
products  can be deployed quickly to collect standardized data openin g up opportunities for aggregation of data and 
benchmarking.  We also complement provision of standard tools with bespoke data collection projects.  
 
Established Lean DataSM products: We have designed and deployed a range of products for use in our agriculture investments . 
These include:  
1. Farmer  profile s: Acumen is committed to reaching the most vulnerable communities. We seek to understand who we are 
serving by gender, poverty profile and degree of food security. We adapt and deploy established, best in class  tools such 
as the  Grameen Foundation’s Progress out of Poverty Index (PPI) , The World Food Program’s reduced Coping Strategies 
Index and FANTA’s Household Hunger Scale.  
2. Agriculture Deep Dive surveys  that help us understand income stability, income improvements, reliability of market access, 
demand for and access to inputs like training inputs and credit, and farmers’ view on how important the crop is likely to be 
in the future.  
3. Core Lean Data metric s on social performance and farmer feedback:  self-perceived changes in quality of life, Net 
Promoter Score, competitor and market landscape analysis , among others.  
4. Gender deep dive that help us compare the burden and benefits of an intervention by gender.  
 
Future Lean Data development as part of ARAF: We have an established track record of developing new surveys and 
measurement standards (for example the metric sets  used by the Global Off Grid Lighting Association, GOGLA). With respect to 
measuring changes in climate adaptability and climate resilience we do not yet have an established approach. However, based 
on our proven track record as a leader in social performance measurement and in collaboration with both the GCF and the ARAF investees we commit to developing a new toolkit to measure and manage our impact on climate adaptability. Acumen’s 
Lean Data Team will work  with GCF to develop an approach and corresponding tools to understand climate adaptability from the 
farmers’ perspective. This  will be  made available as  an important  public good . The toolkit will place the farmers’ voice at the 
heart of the conversation a bout the effectiveness of climate adaptability interventions. It will allow us to listen to farmers and their


---
*Page 51*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
views on how climate change is affecting them and what will help them adapt better to it. Preliminary ideas for focus  include, but 
not be limited to:  
 
1. The extent to which company facilitated access to markets, inputs, training and credit.  
2. Significance of climate as a challenge for farmers and their crop compared to others faced by farmers, and how this 
changes over time.  
3. Farmers’ perception on changes in ability to cope  with climate related challenges augmented by measuring means and 
behaviors that help with coping  
a. Income stability and the company’s impact on improving this over time  
b. Knowledge : access to and adoption of training and skills needed to cope and how this has changed over time 
c. Performance of crop: production, productivity and changes in that over time  
d. Extent of diversification of livelihoods  as a way of understanding diversification of risks  
e. Changes in asset ownership or savings as these are the buffers against shocks.  
4. Coping mechanisms adopted by farmers in the face of climate hazards and how these differ by business models  
 
Our ambition is that this toolkit will not only  help us understand and compare the performance of the compani es in this fund and 
in GCF’s adaptability portfolio more broadly , but also help to develop sector -level insights about challenges faced and adaptive 
approaches adopted by farmers in different geographies . This will help  future capital in the space to be de ployed in order to 
directly address farmers’ concerns  and challenges with respect to climate.  
 We will start by taking inspiration from the existing adaptation promotion and assessment frameworks in the space such as the 
FAO’s Climate -Smart Agriculture (C SA) approach, CCAFS/CIAT’s CSA Prioritization Framework and those put forward by the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. To build the actual tool, we will partner with organizations that are 
experts in climate change resilience like Stanford University and the University of Minnesota (Global Landscapes Initiative, Natural Capital Project, and NorthStar Initiative for Sustainable Enterprise), adept at listening to farmers like WeFarm and Esoko, and/or understand agriculture value chains li ke Global Landscaping Initiative (Stanford University and University of 
Minnesota) . We will work closely with GCF to identify the most suited partners for this project.  
 
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator values for a 
similar project/programme in a comparable context).  
 
Based on the average impact of each sub- sector relevant to ARAF (aggregators, digital platforms and innovative financial 
services) derived from the impact data of existing portfolio as specified below and applying proposed ARAF focus: 50- 60% of 
total transactions being aggregators, 20- 30% financial services and 20- 30% digital platforms, ARAF is expected to reach over 
10 million lives with improved climate resilience and livelihoods. The impact projection also factors in additional risks associated 
with ARAF’s climate -smart investing strategy.  
 
Estimated breakdown of ARAF Beneficiaries by subsector  
The following table illustrates the average estimated number of direct  and indirect beneficiaries by sub sectors in ARAF:


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
  
 
*these estimates are based on Acumen’s own portfolio and experience in these sub sectors  
 
 *Exited portfolio companies  
** The World Bank recently updated its poverty lines to from $1.25 to $1.9 per person per day for the extreme poverty line and 
$2 to $3.1 for median poverty line. Lean Data is fully transition to using the new lines in all future data collection. Unfor tunately, 
there is no simple way of accurately adjusting results from the old lines  to new ones. This table contains poverty head count 
ratios i.e. percentage of people living below a particular poverty line based on the line that we had used for th at particular Lean 
Data survey.  
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s  expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate- resilient 
development pathways could be scaled- up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish it.  
 
ARAF will be the world’s first climate change fund that is focused on agribusiness SMEs that serve BoP populations in 
developing countries.  With partnership from the GCF, this Fund will demonstrate that agricultural value chains can be made climate resili ent by investing in smallholder farming, catalyzing millions of dollars in private capital in climate resilient agriculture. 
This influx of private capital has the potential to support businesses that build climate resilience for smallholders while a lso 
supporting overall growth of the agriculture sector with positive livelihoods implications for smallholder farmers . This will allow 
Acumen to develop a strong track record in climate resilient agriculture and will enable Acumen to raise future, larger funds  to 
invest in more companies that are aligned with the GCF’s impact goals.  
  
By investing in for -profit companies, Acumen, GCF and other investors in ARAF will be creating financially sustainable 
enterprises that continue to operate through internal profits  and follow -on investment capital even after ARAF has made its 
investments.  By investing in these companies and creating a track record of success, Acumen plans to raise a second fund in year 5 or 6 of ARAF to invest in more companies that are aligned wit h the impact objectives of the GCF.  Given the high 
perceived risk  in the agriculture sector, the leverage ratio on GCF capital  for ARAF stands at 1. 2 times . However, it is 
anticipated that the success of ARAF will catalyze investor confidence in this sector and thereby ensure that this leverage ratio is significantly higher for the second fund. This will also enable Acumen to build further expertise and a deep track -record in the 
climate resilient agriculture investment space, which will enable Acumen to raise more money in the future and make more 
investments.  
  
ARAF’s investments will develop, prove and scale innovative inclusive agribusinesses, reduce the impact of climate shocks on 
the incomes and livelihoods of smallholder farmers while also mitigating to an extent the volatility in global food and commodity 
supplies resulting from changing weather patterns.  Success stories from such investments should attract further private sect or 
capital into those same companies and similar companies that arise to compete, which ultimately will serve to increase the scale 
and impact of climate resilient agribusinesses operating locally within countries.  ARAFAverage no. of lives 
impacted per 
company*Maximum no. of 
lives impacted by 
a company % of companies per 
subsectorCompanies per 
subsectorEstimated no. of 
total beneficiaries
Financial services 500,000 2,676,102 20-30% 4 -6 2 - 3 m
Digitisation 700,000 1,500,000 20-30% 4 -6 3 -4 m
Aggregator 300,000 6,317,563 50-60% 10 - 12 3 - 4m


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
All of ARAF’s investments will have significant, if not all, operations within the specific countries of foc us.  Such investments 
serve to create employment opportunities, local institutional knowledge that can be shared within public and private sectors,  
strengthen local supply and distribution channels required for scaling sustainable businesses.  
In order to c ontribute to the long- term sustainability of the impact on smallholder farmers, ARAF will dedicate a portion of its 
Technical Assistance Facility to specific initiatives that contribute to long- term impact.  Examples of these initiatives include a 
reserve fund to help provide train company extension workers on climate resilient agriculture and leverage the direct relationship 
between the company and the smallholder farmers to transmit this knowledge to influence smallholder farmers’ decision like 
which crops to grow when, how to diversify into new crops/livestock to improve climate resilience.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning processes, or 
institutions.  
 
We believe that no organization can achieve the scale of change that we seek alone, and we invest in the spread of ideas and 
what we have learned t hrough our work. In From Blueprint to Scale: The Case for Philanthropy in Impact Investing, Acumen and 
Monitor Inclusive Markets demonstrated how grants are needed to bridge the gap when developing new business models that 
serve low -income customers. More recently, in Growing Prosperity: Developing Repeatable Business Models to Scale the 
Adoption of Agricultural Innovation,  Acumen, in collaboration with Bain & Company, drew upon multiple examples from northern 
Uganda to southwest India to provide practition ers with key insights on how to spur greater adoption of agricultural innovations 
by smallholder farmers, including two new frameworks: the Four A’s of adoption and Repeatable Models.   
As a pioneer in impact investing, we played a key role in shaping the impact investing sector’s approach to measurement. We 
co-developed the Impact Reporting & Investing Standards (IRIS) and helped to found both the Aspen Network for 
Development Entrepreneurs (ANDE) and the Global Impact Investment Network (GIIN).  Our voice  on social performance measurement have remained in high demand. We were recruited to lead the development of 
measurement “Conventions” in the Impact Management Programme
. Led by Acumen alumna Clar a Barby, the Impact 
Management Programme is showing promise in developing a unified approach to discussing impact goals and results, a 
framework that could be equally well -applied to Blackrock, PPGM, and Acumen.   We have also been asked to provide input to  
G8 Global Social Impact Investing Steering Group  specifically on measurement and to take part in the WEF 2017 Action Agenda  
for Accelerating Impact Measurement and Management. We have also just completed a new Harvard Business School case on 
Lean Data, the first new case about Acumen by HBS since the 2009 case, “Acumen Fund: Measurement in Impact Investing.”  
We plan to contribute to strengthening the agriculture ecosystem for smallholder farmers. In addition to sharing information on 
what we learn from our customers, business models, and proactively engaging with others, we could also leverage +Acumen, 
our online platform to help move ideas into action that has seen 500,000 sign- ups across 25 free and low - cost online courses 
and 190 countries.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 54*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Describe how proposed measures will  create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of private and 
public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program.  
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 12- year fund.  This vehicle, and GCF’s anchoring investment, will 
enable Acumen to draw -in risk averse capital from like -minded investors that want to achieve the same goals of the GCF and 
Acumen but have a low risk appetite.  GCF and Acumen’s investment in the CF LC will de -risk investments from the private 
sector and crowd- in private capital for this climate resilience fund.  We believe the tiered capital structure of this Fund which in 
itself in an innovative capital structure is key to unlocking private capital i nto investing climate resilient agribusinesses focused 
on smallholder farmers. Agriculture is generally considered very high risk by private investors compared to other sectors lik e 
energy, hence capital available for high risks innovative agribusinesses i s even scarcer. The Catalytic First Loss Capital funded 
by GCF and Acumen will be key in catalyzing private capital into this Fund since it will provide downside protection to private 
capital. We believe, if successful in generating desired impact and fina ncial return targets, ARAF will catalyze large amounts of 
capital into this high potential sector without requiring as much downside protection as being offered to private capital in this 
fund.  
 
Given the high perceived risk of the sector, we believe we can leverage GCF’s capital by 1.2 times . Furthermore, based on 
Acumen’s experience investing in the sector to date, the organization is confident we can achieve a follow -on leverage ratio 
between 2.0x – 3.0x for ARAF investments.  Acumen will use ARAF’s capit al to make convertible debt, equity and equity -like 
investments in SMEs that are serving smallholder farmers and achieving the desired environmental impacts.  The 12- year time 
horizon of ARAF will enable the companies Acumen invests in several years to scale their businesses and impact.  Further, 
ARAF will enable Acumen to invest both long term equity and debt like quasi -equity capital, both of which are needed by the 
targeted investment.  By organizing ARAF as a for -profit fund, Acumen and GCF can crowd- in private sector capital that is 
looking for a financial return on its investment.  
 
Additionally, not only will Acumen be attracting capital from outside investors, but Acumen’s investment in companies will help 
bring in other capital into those companies, or will help fill out a round if other investors are there first, thus enabling the 
company’s intended impact t o be achieved.  
  
Further, many of the companies that ARAF will target often utilize grant capital from foundations or public subsidies from 
governments to test -out innovation and jump- start markets.  Thus, SMEs play a critical role in demonstrating how par tnerships 
with civil organizations and government can be effective, especially when targeting low -income populations.  Over time, insights 
from these partnerships and from operating experience in the market can prove out successful business models and attr act 
larger sums of investment capital and enterprises that are striving for social and environmental impact.  
 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include:  
• Introducing and demonstrating a new  market or a new technology in a country or a region  
• Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme  
 
ARAF intends to target investments in SMEs whose business models employ innovation at the product, service and/or operating 
level that enables the SME to affordably and profitably serve its intended population.   Such innovations require highly risk -
tolerant capital to allow the models to iterate and learn from market and customer feedback.   The inv estment capital from GCF 
through this Fund will enable these companies to achieve their intended impact.   Further, once new technologies and business 
models are proven, these innovations can be replicated by other actors in the economy.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
For example, ARAF could be investing in business models such as follows:  
 
• An online market place that connects farmers with input providers. The digital platform could also be offering extension 
support like training videos, weather forecast information, market prices information etc. to improve farmer productivity 
and mitigate weather impact.  
• An agriculture processing company processing premium produce for export markets sourcing raw materials directly from 
smallholder farmer under long term procurement contracts. The processing company given its need for premium 
produce would be offering extension support and access to quality inputs to supplier farmers. Also, the long term 
procurement contract will provide much needed income stability to farmers enabl ing them to plan expenditures and 
invest in productive capacities of their farms.  
• An innovative financial services company offering affordable credit with indexed insurance to smallholder farmers. 
Access to affordable credit will not only reduce the cost of production for the farmer but also allow them to purchase 
inputs of their own choice rather than being limited by the adulterated inputs being offered by middlemen.  
• These are only examples of the kind of investments ARAF will be making to improve resilie nce of smallholder farmers.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically drive 
investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, and/or improve 
climate -responsive planning and development.  
 
ARAF will be one of only a handful of investment funds globally that focuses specifically upon agricultural SMEs that build 
smallholder farmers’ resilience to climate change via enhanced access to markets, credit, information, and extension services . 
As su ch, ARAF will serve as a much- needed vehicle for the deployment of climate -focused impact capital into ARAF’s target 
countries. ARAF will operate with the approval of local NDAs, and, as Section C.1 addressed in much greater depth, will 
integrate with each respective target country’s NAP.  
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Acumen invests in companies that offer smallholder farmers the linked value propositions of economic, 
social and environmental benefits and sustainability. Hence, any company that passes through Acumen’s 
selection criteria touches upon one of more of these impact  area. Here are some examples of benefits we 
hope Acumen’s investments under ARAF will have.  
● Economic co -benefits  
- Improvement in income and the household’s monetary wellbeing.  
Acumen’s strong focus on low income populations in developing countries steers us towards investments 
that provide means to improving livelihoods, incomes and general monetary wellbeing. This lens will apply 
to all the agri -businesses supported by the ARAF . Income improvements resulting from adoption of a new 
livelihood or improved returns from an existing one could manifest in a number of ways to improve the 
wellbeing of farmer households: 1) in the short term, the regular and timely cash infusion could help 
stabilize incomes and provide farmer households with some much needed disposable cash at hand to 
manage daily household expenses better. 2) in the medium term, this additional income often accumulates 
and help farmers reinvest in their farms, build an asset -base and monetary savings, and 3) in the long term, 
we hope that the overall contribution or importance of the new/augmented livelihood would solidify and lead to improvements in household income.  
 
● Social co -benefits  
- Time savings  
Families report a variety of monetary and non- monetary improvements in their quality of life from selling to 
an aggregators or receiving information from an agri. platform. One of the biggest non- monetary ones is 
time savings in processing, transport or just accessing infor mation. This relatively under -recognized aspect 
of impact, which could be bucketed as increased convenience, has come up frequently in our Lean Data 
surveys with farmers associated with our Agricultural portfolio. From farmers selling milk to one of our dairy 
investees in India, we heard through our Lean Data work that one of the big value propositions of selling to 
this company was the reduced time spent in transporting milk. They could walk a few meters instead of 
riding to the closest city. In another LD  conducted half -way across the world, we spoke to a cacao farmer in 
Colombia who expressed a similar sentiment. One farmer told us that being able to sell to our investee meant he was saving time and effort in drying and transporting cacao, and was able to spend more time in 
the field (consequently hire less labour) and get more time together as a family .


---
*Page 57*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
- Knowledge and skill development  
Learning a new skill or crop management technique has also often come up as a benefit that farmer’s 
report from being involved with agri businesses. Since Lean Data is fairly young, we don’t yet have panel data that helps us see the benefits of these knowl edge gains pan out over time, but we have heard farmers 
appreciate the knowledge they are receiving and realizing benefits from putting it to immediate use. One 
farmer told us: “This was the first time I pruned, these trees in 30 years! My cacoa trees were planted by my 
father.” And we heard multiple farmers rave about the benefits of adopting pruning and crops management 
practices on their production. ‘ We have received technical assistance visits, we are more united as 
community’, Colombian  farmer.   
 
● Environmental co -benefits  
- Reduced Farm -Scale Emissions and Runoff  
By encouraging climate- smart agricultural practices such as drip irrigation and the efficient and responsible 
use of fertilizers, ARAF will in turn reduce the amount of nitrogen runoff from smallholder farms. Excess 
nitrogen in riparian and aquatic ecosystems due to agriculture leads to eutrophication, or the over -
enrichment of water with plant nutrients. Increased algal growth and subsequent decomposition leads to 
oxygen- depleted “dead zones,” in which native fauna cannot survive. For this reason, nitrogen runoff from 
farms has the potential to reduce biodiversity well outside of the immediate farming vicinity.  
- Reduced Depletion of Scare Water Resources  
By encouraging climate- smart agric ultural practices such as drip irrigation and other water -management 
approaches, ARAF will in turn reduce the amount stress put upon local hydrological systems due to 
agricultural processes.  
 
● Gender -sensitive development impact  
- Burden and benefits by g ender. Even though agriculture -related activities require participation 
and impact every single member of the household, we know there are nuances among how 
these dynamics play out at the intra- household level. We can use Lean Data to do a gender 
deep dive  to understand how the burden and benefits of the intervention in question vary by 
gender. For the burden, we will look at which members of the household do most of the work related to the intervention and for the benefit and compare that with who makes most of the 
decisions about the crop and/or about the income coming from the crop. We would also like to 
get and compare the male and female perspectives on whether and how the intervention 
affected the quality of life of the women in the house.  
 
Acumen has also undertaken some sector level work from a gender perspective. From 2014 - 2015, 
Acumen teamed up with the International Center for Research on Women to look at our portfolio and how 
our companies engage women as customers and employees. We p ublished Women and Social 
Enterprises: How Gender Integration Can Boost Entrepreneurial Solutions to Poverty  and launched the 
report during the Women’s World Forum in Deauville in October 2015 and at an event with Acumen’s 
community in New York. The qualit ative research and report provide a glimpse into how Acumen’s portfolio 
companies are currently thinking about gender and a framework with which to deepen how we integrate 
gender considerations into the work that we do.  
We learned that women are a signifi cant proportion of our investee’s customer base and about how our 
companies are already benefitting women. We also discovered a need to better understand the role that 
women play throughout our business models –  as low -income customers, employees, managers , etc. In 
addition to the LD component mentioned above, we know that two of the biggest challenges facing our companies today are in talent development and sales and marketing, both areas that we identified in


---
*Page 58*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Women and Social Enterprises as having signifi cant potential for gender integration to boost social and 
business performance.  
In the report, we provide a diagnostic tool to help social enterprises assess where they are effectively 
integrating gender into their business models, and where there are opportunities to further integrate gender to achieve increased business and social impact. We understand, however, that rapidly growing early stage companies with limited resources are likely to consider investing in gender integration risky because they 
are unsure how it will benefit company performance and productivity, if at all.   
To try to overcome this challenge, we are identifying companies in our portfolio with an interest in gender 
integration, companies that have identified a gender -related business challenge, and companies where our 
gender Lean Data projects identify a gender -related gap in performance. We currently have funding from a 
donor that would enable us to provide grants to support technical assistance projects to respond to this 
need, and w e are now working with a select number of companies to co- develop these projects. These 
grants will support companies in identifying experts to design and help implement the gender -lens 
interventions.  
We plan to measure the effectiveness of these interventions. If they are successful, Acumen will be able to use what we have learned to improve how we invest in and support our companies, which will be directly applicable to the project proposed herein. This also has a strong potential for scaling with other likeminded impact investors and intermediaries interested in gender and also supporting social enterprises grow and 
scale.   
Acumen has also finalized a formal Gender Policy, which we have shared with GCF. With respect to 
Acumen’s investment program, our gender reporting has focused on KawiSafi Ventures Limited and the 
clean energy sector, as well as our work in Latin America.   
 
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the l evel of exposure to climate risks for be neficiary country and 
groups , overall income level, etc ). 
 
The El Nino and La Nina weather phenomenon that causes climate fluctuations ranging from drought to severe 
flooding has had a devastating effect on East and West Africa. The UN’s early warning syst em has classified Kenya 
and Uganda as being a “crisis” level, the point at which families begin skipping meals, seeking off -farm labor 
opportunities, and selling household assets for food consumption22.  More severely, South Sudan and Ethiopia are 
considere d to be at “emergency” level where critical food assistance is needed in order to prevent widespread 
mortality and suffering23. According to the UN, the region’s three consecutive years of diminished food production 
has exhausted people’s capacity to cope w ith another shock, while access constraints, rising refugee numbers and 
outbreaks of communicable diseases in the greater region add to the pressures24. Conflict has been another key 
                                                             
22 East Africa Drought Situation Report No. 1 | February 21, 2017, Lutheran World Relief  (online) Accessed April 29, 2017 
at http://reliefweb.int/report/kenya/east- africa -drought -situation -report -no-1-february -21-2017  
23 Famine Early Warning System Network: E ast Africa -  Message Update http://www.fews.net/east- a.frica/south- sudan .  
24 Anyadike, Obi. IRIS Report: Feature: Drought in Africa 2017. https:// www.irinnews.org/feature/2017/03/17/drought -
africa -2017


---
*Page 59*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
factor as both a driver and result of the climate change. Conflict has led  to millions of displacements, made it harder 
to cultivate land and has hampered humanitarian. Flooding and droughts are no stranger to West Africa, but the 
intensity and erratic weather patterns are more concentrated and or dire consequences in East Afric a. 
 
Uganda  
Of Uganda’s 39M people, more than 10 million Ugandans are estimated to be struggling with hunger caused by 
prolonged droughts and out of this number 1.6 million people are in serious urgent need of food to escape death25. 
Over 86% of Uganda’s population has been depending on subsistence agriculture for their livelihoods in the previous 
years. In the past, Uganda’s natural resource base has been considered one of the richest and most diverse in Africa 
because of its ample rainfall and fertile soils Today, farmers are struggling to feed themselves and their livestock and 
biodiversity degradation has been so severe that the country is no longer expected to have forests or wetlands in the 
next forty years26. Even more urgently, drought and conflict i n neighboring South Sudan has resulted in 1,495,000 
South Sudanese refugees residing in Uganda, with over 25,000 who arrived in the first half of March 2017. Newly 
arrived refugees are currently receiving a full ration through World Food Program27. Although due to funding 
shortfalls, it is estimated that this migrant population increase will exacerbate Uganda’s existing food security concerns.  
 
Acumen’s previous investment in the Gulu Agricultural Development Company (GADC), is a testament to the 
organizati on’s commitment to helping adapt to climatic changes, particular in post -conflict and conflict -sensitive 
areas.  GADC empowers small holder cotton farmers in Northern Uganda, most of whom are ex -combatants, by 
providing training, agricultural inputs, and m arket access.  GADC has also taught over 55,000 smallholder farmers 
how to diversify their crops (moving from cotton to sesame seeds) in order to manage soil degradation and mitigate 
the risk of being too heavily invested in cash crops. These are thy types  of investments that ARAF will continue to 
make throughout Uganda and East Africa.  
 
Ghana  
As with most African countries, Ghana’s largest sector is agriculture.  The country is most susceptible to drought, 
flood, and sea erosion. Agriculture is predominant ly rain -fed, so any changes to rainfall patterns seriously impact 
productivity. Current projections on climate indicate that that rising temperatures will increase the incidence of 
bushfires and environmental degradation. Changes will have in the past deep ened rural vulnerability to poverty. For 
these reasons, investments in agriculture in Ghana are increasingly risky and expensive. To date, the impact of changes in climate have been less severe than in East Africa, but the data shows the next 10 - 20 years will show a 
rapid increase in the impact of increased temperatures, erratic rainfall, and flooding
28.  
                                                             
28 National Climate Change Adaption Strategy: Ghana (online) Accessed April 26, 2017 from 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/ndpc -
static/CACHES/PUBLICATIONS/2016/04/16/Ghana_national_climate_change_adaptation_strategy_nccas.pdf  
28 National Climate Change Adaption Strategy: Ghana (online) Accessed April 26, 2017 from 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/ndpc -
static/CACHES/PUBLICATIONS/2016/04/16/Ghana_national_climate_change_adaptation_strategy_nccas.pdf  
28 National Climate Change Adaption Strategy: Ghana (online) Accessed April 26, 2017 from 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/ndpc -
static/CACHES/PUBLICATIONS/2016/04/16/Ghana_national_climate_change_adaptation_strategy_nccas.pdf  
28 National Climate Change Adaption Strategy: Ghana (online) Accessed April 26, 2017 from 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/ndpc -
static/CACHES/PUBLICATIONS/2016/04/16/Ghana_national_climate_change_adaptation_strategy_nccas.pdf


---
*Page 60*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Acumen has boldly invested in climate adaptive innovations for smallholder farmers in Ghana. Acumen’s investment 
in Farmers Hope in Ghana uses local mater ials to manufacture organic fertilizer, which we expect will increase 
incomes and crop performance. Additionally, Acumen’s investment in GADCO is transforming smallholder lives 
through leveraging the hub- farm model to provide Ghanaian smallholder farmers w ith technical assistance, high yield 
seeds and other inputs, with assess to the end consumer market.  Insights generated from both Acumen investees 
will help ARAF position smallholder farmers to adapt to the changing climates in which they have inevitably found 
themselves.  
 
Nigeria  
Nigeria is the second largest country in Africa and 78% of its land is arable land29. According to Nigerian 
Meteorological Agency, a combination of late onset and early cessation has shortened the length of the rainy season for the last sixty years. Annual rainfall has also decreased by 2- 4 mm in most parts of the country
30. The northeast 
region of Nigeria has been repeatedly noticed because of its increasingly high temperatures. The country is no stranger to droughts, flooding, rapid deforestation, and water and air pollution. The negative impacts of climate 
change such as temperature rise, erratic rainfall, sand storms, desertification, low agricultural yield, drying up of 
water bodies and flooding are real in the desert prone 11 front states of Nigeria. This is now leading to increasing 
population pressure, intensive agricultural land use, overgrazing, bush burning, and extraction of fuel wood
31. 
ARAF will leverage its farmer insights and funding mandate to support smallholder farm ers in Nigeria. The lessons 
we have learned around climate adaptive inputs, effective crop management, drip irrigation, intercropping, financing 
and insurance will help to slow down the speed at which climate change is affecting vulnerable populations and will 
introduce effective climate adaptive strategies for long term mitigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
• Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
 
Acumen was founded to invest in early stage impact businesses, often before traditional investors were willing to 
provide such early stage capital. Acumen’s position i n the market is to provide such early stage capital to innovative 
social enterprises.  As note d earlier, we have invested across numerous sectors, but have developed the most in-
depth insights in the agriculture sectors in East and West Africa. Below , we fo cus on the target countries for ARAF  
and how ARAF  will address the social development and economic needs of each country, the lack of alternative 
financing, and need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
 
                                                             
29 CIA Factbook Nigeria 2017. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world -factbook/geos/ni.html  
30 National Adaptation Strategy: Nigeria  (online) Accessed April 27, 2017 from  http://csdevnet.org/wp-
content/uploads/NATIONAL-ADAPTATION -STRATEGY -AND -PLAN -OF-ACTION.pdf  
31 National Adaptation Strategy: Nigeria  (online) Accessed April 27, 2017 fro m http://csdevnet.org/wp-
content/uploads/NATIONAL-ADAPTATION -STRATEGY -AND -PLAN -OF-ACTION.pdf


---
*Page 61*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
Uganda (CIA Factbook Uganda)  
Approximately 38M people live in Uganda, and 86% live in rural areas (estimate 2015).  Under the leadership of the 
country’s current president, Yoweri Museveni, the c ountry has steadily improved literacy levels, has improved water 
and sanitation services to rural population, and has created an environment of a relatively low unemployment rate of 
9.4% (2013 estimate). The country’s poverty level stands just below 20%.  Unfortunately, Uganda has one of the 
highest infant mortality and lowest life expectancy rates in the world, ranked 21st and 212nd, respectively.   
Approximately 14% of GDP is generated from tax revenue, but that pales in comparison to the fact that public  debt 
makes up 34% of GDP, its current account balance is USD $ - 2.2B, and the country’s budget deficit is - 6.5% of GDP.  
Given the country’s high debt levels, all funding for climate adaptation initiatives will need to come from external sources.  ARAF wi ll be well -positioned to invest in Uganda given its ambitious climate change activities and priorities 
for improved crop management, water resource management, and microfinance.  
 
Since 1986, the government, with support from foreign countries and internat ional agencies, has worked to 
rehabilitate and stabilize the economy through currency reform, raising prices on export crops, improving civil servant 
wages, and increasing the prices of its petroleum products. But the global economic downturn of 2008 has l eft 
Uganda with a number of challenges, including a depreciated shilling against the dollar, an inflation rise from 3% to 
9% , and a subsequent interest rate hike from 11% to 17%.  Most of Uganda’s budget is dominated by energy and 
infrastructure spending while it relies on donor funding for agriculture, health and education.  Most infrastructure 
projects are externally financed through low -interest loans. As a result, debt servicing costs are expected to rise by 
22% in 2016- 17, and consume 15% of the domes tic budget.  
 
Given the ambitious nature of its National Adaption Plan, the Government of Uganda identified several barriers to 
implementation including, inadequate understanding of climate change and its impacts, inadequate technical 
capacity; inadequate financial resources; and weak institutional and coordinating mechanisms.  ARAF will certainly 
support the funding gap by encouraging co- investment and follow -on funding, and will also, through its technical 
assistance resource allocation, support technical  capacity building for investees and government officials and will 
share learnings and impact with the relevant coordinating bodies within the government.  
 
Ghana ( CIA Factbook Ghana
) 
Ghana’s 26M people have seen improvements in drinking water, education, health care, but sanitation services are 
currently available to less than 10% of the rural population. Approximately 24.2% of the population lives below the 
poverty line, while unemployment is at 5.2%. The disparity in the poverty rate and employment rate indicate a wide 
income equality gap. Internally poverty and other developmental disparities continue to drive Ghanaians from the 
north to the south, particularly to its  urban areas. Acumen’s ARAF investment in Ghana will continue to support 
smallholder farmers and the value chains in which they engage, helping to reduce the number living below the 
poverty line while reducing income disparities and increasing employment o pportunities.  
 
Ghana’s economy was strengthened by a quarter of a century of sound management, a competitive business 
environment, and sustained reductions in poverty levels. But, in recent years the economy has suffered due to loose 
fiscal policy, high budget and current account deficits, and depreciating currency. As of 2015, Ghana’s biggest 
economic issue was the lack of consistent electricity. The government is currently partnering with the IMF and 
various private sector stakeholders in order to increas e the supply of electricity to the country.  This aggressive


---
*Page 62*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
investment in energy has resulted in a public debt of 73.7% of GDP, leaving little government revenue for agriculture 
investment or climate change mitigation and adaptation. Inflation stands at 1 7.8%, and its commercial lending rate is 
31.8%, the sixth highest in the world.  Ghana carries a negative current account balance of USD $- 2.693B, and has 
USD $21.7B in external debt.  
 
In Ghana, the Ministry of the Environment, Science and Technology is responsible for the coordinating of 
stakeholders, ensuring strategy/activity alignment and strategy monitoring. The country’s National Climate Change 
Committee provides project evaluation and support for local institutional and capacity building. ARAF will w ork with 
each coordinating body to ensure that its investments are well -aligned with the strategy and will invest technical 
assistance funding for local capacity building.  
 
Nigeria ( CIA Factbook Nigeria ) 
Nigeria, Africa’s largest country, is home to more than 186M people and is expected to see a population increase of 
up to 392 million by 2050. As of 2015, approximately 50% of the population lived in rural areas. Like Uganda, Nigeria 
has one of the highest infant mortality and lowest life expectancy rates in the world, ranking 10th and 214th 
respectively.  Water and sanitation facilities remain poor in rural areas and are only marginally better in urban areas.  
The country’s unemployment rate stands at 23.9% and 70% of the population falls below the poverty line.  
 
Despite strong fundamentals, oil -rich Nigeria has been hampered by inadequate power supply, lack of infrastructure, 
delays in the passage of legislative refor m, insecurity and pervasive corruption. Because of lower oil prices, GDP 
growth fell to 3% in 2015 and government revenues declined sharply, especially given OPEC’s unwillingness of 
reduce the supply of oil  (and in turn increase prices) available on the g lobal market.  The government is working to 
develop stronger public -private partnerships and has announced plans for increased transparency, diversification 
away from oil, and improved fiscal management.  Acumen’s investment in climate resistant crops and breeds, 
technical assistance, and commitment to connect farmers to high value value chains, will help to diversify Nigeria’s 
agriculture base and economic base while smoothing incomes and providing a sustainable livelihood opportunities.  
 
Only 2.7% of the country’s GDP comes from taxes, while its public debt is equivalent to 13.2% of GDP. In 2015, the 
inflation rate skyrocketed from 9% to 15.3%, while the lending rate increased from 16.5% to 18%. Nigeria’s current 
account balance USD $ - 2.8M and public debt  stands at USD$ 39.1B. Like many other countries in West Africa, 
there is little to no internal funding available for climate change policy implementation.  
 
The government of Nigeria has identified the integration of climate change adaptation into national, sectoral, State 
and Local  Government planning as being its biggest barrier to implementation. The government would also like to 
integrate climate change plans into the plans of universities, research and educational organizations, civil society 
organizations, the private sector and the media. ARAF can support the government in this endeavor by bringing 
together all of the relevant stakeholders for workshops , sharing insights, and capacity building.  ARAF will widely 
disseminate its learnings to NGOs, universities, the media and other members of the private sector with the intention 
of helping these stakeholders develop ways in which the learnings can be apar t of the future program design and 
implementation.  
 
 
E.5.  Country O wnership


---
*Page 63*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country ’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
 
Acumen is committed to local country operations and expertise.  Acumen has local offices in each of the regions it 
invests in (East Africa, West Africa, India, Pa kistan and Latin America) with local employees that understand 
consumer needs and cultural context  and extensive local networks .  Acumen’s teams across the world works with 
relevant local government, NGOs and private sector partners to execute on its inves tment and impact goals, and 
ensure alignment with local policies.  
 
ARAF aims to invest in three countries in Sub- Saharan Africa: Uganda, Ghana and Nigeria. Where available, 
supporting institutions are also mentioned. All of ARAF proposed activities were a function of Acumen’s current 
portfolio and the learnings that have been generated the last fifteen years of the organization’s investment track 
record.  All activities are supported by each country’s National Adaptation Plan.  
 
  
Government Engagement & Ow nership  
 
Country ownership of ARAF will be ensured through regular dialogue and long- term relationship building with 
national governments and the national stakeholders  that are important to them . Acumen already holds good 
relationships  with the governments of each of the three  ARAF countries and these have been further strengthened by 
recent dialogue with NDAs and designated national stakeholders ( including Ministries of Agriculture, Ministries of 
Environment, Ministries of Finance, par astatals, NGOs and consultancy groups ) to ensure their full understanding of 
proposed ARAF goals and activities, our alignment with national adaptation goals and priorities, co- development of 
stakeholder engagement plans , and government acceptance and appr oval of ARAF strategies .   
 Across 2017 Acumen has undertaken desk -based research and in- person consultations to fully understand the 
national adaptation goals and activities of each ARAF country and ensure strategic alignment with ARAF goals and 
activitie s at the national level. The findings from this research formed the basis of the national strategies that we 
presented to each NDA and corresponding government -convened stakeholder group. These strategies have since 
been modified and improved in collaborat ion with stakeholders.  
 
From May to August 2017 Acumen has engaged NDAs and other national stakeholders bot h in person at various 
meetings and also in writing to gain their  understanding of and feedback on proposed ARAF goals and activities. We 
supplied each country with the ARAF Overview Deck , an individualized National ARAF Concept Note per country 
and the full GCF Proposal as a springboard for discussion. We responded to a wide range of questions and concerns 
from NDAs and other national stakeholders, both in person and in writing, and facilitated open dialogue on priorities , 
processes , risks and challenges.  
 NDAs and government -designated national stakeholders engaged and consulted to date are outlined below:


---
*Page 64*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Ghana  
NDA - Mr Mensah  
Ministry of Finance  
Ministry of Agriculture  
USAID – Food for the Future Programme (FINGAP), ACDI -VOCA  
Ghana Poultry Farmers Association  
Ghana Peasant Farmers Association  
Ghana Agriculture Insurance Pool  
 
Nigeria  
NDA - Dr Tarfa  
Ministry of Environment  
Federal Ministry of Agri culture and Rural Development  
Access Development Assistance Africa –  an NGO related to NEST  
Nigeria Agricultural Insurance Corporation -  NAIC  
Nigerian Incentive Based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending –  NIRSAL (Central Bank of Nigeria)  
 
Uganda  
NDA - Mr. Keith Muhakaniz  
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  
Commission for Economc Development Policy and Research Minister of Agriculture  
Ministry of Environment  
 
A summary of agreed ARAF strategic areas of focus and national adaptati on plan alignments are outlined below.   
 
Ghana  
1. Improve livelihoods output and income of vulnerable groups; Build and strengthen capacity of local farmers 
to increase agricultural productivity and awareness of climate issues; Promote farming technologies that 
enhances productivity of agricultural lands.  
 
2. Create awareness on climate change and its adaptation strategies;  Sensitize beneficiaries on the need to adopt new and appropriate technologies on economic and non- economic livelihoods  
 
3. Improve access to credit facilities for the poor and vulnerable  
 
4. Promote cultivation of crops and rearing of animals adapted to harsh climatic condition  
 
5. Early Warning: Promote the development of modern information management system including E -
Governance process; Develop s ystems for data collection, processing and dissemination of information; 
Intensify government’s commitment to enhance access to public information and enabling environment for 
media 
 
6. Increase availability of water for agriculture, domestic, energy and indu strial purposes


---
*Page 65*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
7. Promote evidence- based decision making 
 
8. Fisheries Management: Promote fish farming 
 
9. Improve livelihoods and living conditions  
 
10. Alternative livelihoods for women  
 
11. Increase in job creation/job diversification  
 
Nigeria  
1. Implement strategies for improved resource management, including irrigation rainwater harvesting, 
introduction, supply and training of new products better adapted to a changing climate  
 
2. Increase access to drought resistant crops and livestock feeds; intens ify crop and livestock production in 
place of slash and burn, and ensure that vulnerable communities and groups alter their agricultural practices 
to adapt to the changing climate  
  
3. Provide climate -adaptive financial products, including micro- credit and mi cro-insurance.  
 
Uganda   
1. Promotion of multimedia approach to dissemination of weather and climate information  
   
2. Develop and promote drought -tolerant and early maturing plant varieties and animal breeds  
 
3. Strengthen community sensitization and advocacy on climate -change related issues; Promote community 
best practices of collaborative natural resource management; Promote community best practices of 
collaborative water resource management; Promote tree growing in farmland; Promote use of indigenous 
knowledge  (IK) as a coping mechanism; Study and promote traditional food preservation technologies  
 
4. Promote appropriate and sustainable water harvesting, storage and utilization technologies  
 
5. Expansion of weather observing infrastructure  
6. Help Uganda address barriers to NAPA implementation 
 
 
Given that ARAF is a private sector investment opportunity, we are keen to strike a balance between aligning and 
collaborating closely with government and maintaining the autonomy required by the private sector in order to  able to 
make commercial market -based decisions. We are therefore not able to include government stakeholders within our 
internal governance structures. However, we have expressed our strong desire to work closely with each national 
government and other national stakeholders to collaborate on strategy development, identify a robust pipeline of appropriate private sector investments and explore potential investment in public -private partnership businesses, 
where appropriate. We have also pledged to facilitat e iterative feedback loops with government to ensure ongoing


---
*Page 66*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
collaboration and alignment. In all cases the governments were receptive to engaging and collaborating regularly 
with ARAF and understood the need for formal fund governance structures to be led by the private sector.  
 
We have outlined the following stakeholder engagement plan for national governments and designated national 
stakeholder groups:  
 
- Annual Report on ARAF activities, finances and impact  
- In-person meetings, as required to deepen relati onship and clarify questions   
- Regular ad hoc emails and phone calls with investment and impact updates  
 
Wider Stakeholder Engagement:  
 We firmly believe in an inclusive approach to agriculture where longer term commitments by value chain 
stakeholders are sustained through alignment with shared value and interests.  We are regular speakers and 
attendees at impact investing and agribusiness  conferences and events   
 
Within ARAF we will work with a range of stakeholders while leveraging our experience and partner networks to 
share knowledge from our investing work, co- invest to create greater impact at scale and ultimately influence policy 
to become more focused on meeting climate adaptation objectives.  
 
Please see Section E.5.3 for a comprehensive overview of our wide multi -stakeholder network.  
 
 
 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities  with respect to the 
activities that  they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
Please refer to Section C.4 for a broader discussion of Acumen’s organizational history and investment track record 
outside of the agriculture sector.  
 
Since inception, Acumen has invested over $33 million of investment capital in 23 agriculture companies  in Latin 
America, Africa and South Asia that have collectively impacted approximately 13.9 million lives to date. In Africa 
specifically, Acumen has invested over $20 million in 10 companies, which have impacted approximately 10 million 
lives .  Please ref er to Section E1.2 for estimates of Acumen’s agriculture portfolio’s impact to- date by investments.   
 
 
Acumen strongly believes that being able to utilize our organization’s local presence in the markets in which we 
invest is critical to the success of AR AF.  This presence will allow the Investment Team to continue developing a


---
*Page 67*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
deep understanding of the local market dynamics of the regions in which Acumen’s portfolio companies already 
operate, and to continue building strong relationships with the local advisors and networks that already support 
Acumen’s work.  
 
Through its local presence, Acumen has attracted experienced in- country senior leadership and has built a strong 
network of well -respected local advisors who are influential members of their respecti ve business communities.  Due 
in part to this network, Acumen has built a powerful brand and is recognized as a leader amongst investing peers 
and entrepreneurs operating in the social impact sector.  Acumen and the Investment Team will have access to in-
country senior leadership and local advisors, and will leverage Acumen’s prominent brand recognition to source and 
facilitate investment opportunities.  
 
Acumen’s Ghana and Kenya offices serve as regional hubs for the organization’s investment efforts in West Africa 
and East Africa, respectively.  The New York office makes investments in companies that are global in nature and 
also exists to help source and develop potential investments in all regions.  Companies deemed to be “global” are 
those that domici led outside of East Africa, West Africa, South Asia or Latin America but have significant operations 
in those geographies. Accordingly, while a majority of investment sourcing, diligence, and post -investment 
management for ARAF will be undertaken by teams in the Ghana and Kenya offices, New York will also play a role in 
supporting ARAF’s operations.  
 
All of these factors provide Acumen with a competitive advantage in sourcing deal flow, allowing the organization 
surface deals which are not seen by other investors who lack the same local presence.  Acumen also maintains 
close relationships with many of the incubators and accelerators in the social impact sector, which serve as additional resources for potential Fund investments.   
 
 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with 
NDAs on the funding proposal and the no- objection letter.  
Please also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this 
proposal was developed.   
 
 Securing Country Ownership  
We firmly believe in an inclusive approach to agriculture where longer term commitments by value chain 
stakeholders are sustained through alignment with shared value and interests. In the process of setting up ARAF and 
building its investment strategy, Acumen has gone  through extensive internal and external consultations on the 
framework for ARAF. These consultations have included the key stakeholder groups outlined below.  
 
1. Government Engagement  
 
In order to ensure smooth functioning of ARAF’s activities in each of the countries of focus, we are wor king according 
to the following government engagement process:


---
*Page 68*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
- National Strategy Development: Based on Acumen’s decade long learning in agriculture investing in Africa 
and carefully analyzing the National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) as well as National Adaptation Program of 
Action (NAPA) of respective focus countries, we developed country -specific ARAF Strategy Papers.  
- Strategy Alignment with NDAs: The ex act nature of reaching ‘alignment’ varies by country but involved a 
series of email communications and calls with GCF’s Nationally Designated Authority (NDA) in each focus 
country sharing strategy resources including but not limited to concept notes, strat egy papers, country -
specific funding proposal and pitch decks. This was followed by discussion meetings with the NDAs and relevant government officials to reach alignment with national priorities.  
- Securing NOLs:  Alignment with NDAs was then translated into a written approval or an No Objection Letter 
(NOL) from the highest authorities within the NDA as well as the respective government minister.  
- Maintaining communication with NDAs: A relationship manager is assigned to ensure regular updates to 
the NDA and participation in developing a conducive environment for achievement of mutually agreed 
national adaptation goals.  
To date we have secured NOLs from three national governments: Ghana, Nigeria and Uganda. We hope to secure 
NOLs from the governments of Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania over the coming weeks.  
Please see the below table for a summary of ARAF engagement with government representatives in the seven 
proposed ARAF countries across East and West Africa.  
 
Country  Contact  Department  Discussions  NOL status  
Ghana  Mr. Robert Mensah 
– MOFEP (NDA)  Ministry of 
Finance  Initially approached by Acumen West 
Africa (AWA) team in April 2017 to 
introduce and discuss ARAF. NDA 
informed AWA that first need approval 
by Ministry of Agriculture before NOL 
can be issued. July 2017 -  Ministry of 
Agriculture approval shared with NDA. September 2017 -  ARAF presented at 
NDA Technical Committee Meeting 
and clarification on specific elements 
requested by NDA. November 2017 -  
ARAF presented at second NDA 
Technical Committee Meeting and 
approved by all stakeholders.  NOL issued 
November 2017  
Ms. Zalia Zempare 
- Advisor to the 
Minister of State, Agriculture  Ministry of 
Agriculture  Met by AWA team in May 2017 to 
introduce and discuss ARAF. Ministry 
of Agriculture then held a 
management consultation meeting to discuss ARAF and met again with 
AWA in July 2017 to confirm their 
approval.  
Nigeria  Dr. Yerima Peter 
Tarfa - Department 
for Climate Change (NDA)  Federal Ministry 
of Environment  Our primary contact on ARAF 
proposal. Acumen contacted Dr Tarfa 
by email in April 2017 to introduce 
ARAF. July 2017 -  in person visit 
made to meet Dr Tarfa and wider stakeholder representatives by AWA 
and Acumen Business Development NOL issued 
August 2017


---
*Page 69*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
representative to get feedback on 
ARAF proposal. Aug 2017 AWA 
invited to Technical Com mittee 
Meeting to allow NDA and 
stakeholders to ask final questions, 
resulting in ARAF approval.   
Various  Federal Ministry 
of Agriculture 
and Rural 
Development;  
Nigerian 
Environmental 
Study Action 
Team – NEST  
Nigeria 
Agricultural 
Insurance 
Corporation - 
NAIC  
NIRSAL - 
Central Bank of 
Nigeria  Additional contacts on ARAF. Invited 
to discuss ARAF at NDA’s Technical 
Committee Meetings in Jul 2017 and 
Aug 2017. Positive approval of ARAF 
in Aug.  
Uganda  Mr. Keith 
Muhakanizi  - 
Permanent 
Secretary/Secretary 
to the Treasury 
(NDA)  Ministry of 
Finance, 
Planning and 
Economic 
Development  Uganda -focused GCF Proposal 
submitted to NDA in May 2017. NDA met with Acumen’s Associate Director 
of Portfolio, East Africa (Patrick Oketa) 
later in May 2017, discussed ARAF at 
length and oversaw NOL signature.  
NOL issued May 
2017  
Matia Kasaija – 
Minister  Ministry of 
Finance, 
Planning and 
Economic 
Development  Minister met with Acumen’s Associate 
Director of Portfolio, East Africa 
(Patrick Oketa) in May 2017, 
discussed ARAF at length and 
authorized the NOL signature.  
 
In addition to the NDA -focused government stakeholder engagement outlined above, Acumen has rich experiences 
with governments especially in public -private partnership models. Eth ioChicken is a relevant example where, under a 
partnership with the Ethiopian Government (ATA) , they are operating state- owned poultry breeding farms at greater 
efficiency and profitability. We also have close relationships with government organizations  such as IFAD, the FAO, 
World Bank and a range of government -funded Development Finance Institutions such as CDC Group and FMO.  
Acumen is keen to build upon the close relationships developed with government to date and ensure continued 
collaboration with the public sector on ARAF.  
Annual government consultation meetings will be scheduled once funding is received, the ARAF team is in post  and 
the launch date formalized. A nnual consultation me eting s will be arranged  with each national government and other


---
*Page 70*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
key national stakeholders to entrench a collaborative approach to ARAF activity and investment planning. We will 
also provide a written annual update on ARAF activities to each national government.  
We will work closely with each government to provide regular updates on investments made by ARAF in all the 
ARAF countries through in- person meetings, stakeholder forums & annual reports. As often as necessary and 
feasible, we will also organize trips to visit ARAF investee companies for government, partners and investors.  
In addition ARAF will work with governments and other public and private sector partners to create the right market 
ecosystems to support rapid growth for climate -resilient  agricult ural products, services , best practices  and business 
models .   
 
2. Smallholder Farmers  
Acumen strongly believes in developing strategies in response to direct feedback from the low -income communities 
our investee businesses exist to serve . In the case of ARAF these are the smallholder farmer s who are the 
customers or suppliers of African agribusinesses . 
Since 2014, through Acumen’s  industry -leading ‘Lean Data’ impact measurement tool , we have been consistently 
surveying smallholder farmers  across East and West Africa and tracking their direct feedback on their key pain -points 
and suggestions on the best business solutions  to address these.  
Please see below for a summary of the number of farmer surveys we have undertaken across East and West Africa.  
Survey Year  African Countries  Agri-Businesses  Smallholder Farmers  
2014  2 2 745 
2015  3 3 1283  
2016  4 5 2894  
2017  7 10 4720  
 
These surveys have captured feedback from African smallholders  on increasingly unpredictable weather patterns 
(climate change)  and their impact on farming livelihoods, which has significantly influenced ARAF ’s core focus on 
climate resilience. The surveys have also uncovered a number of other key lessons , which have been  incorporated in 
our strateg ic focus on aggregators, digital platforms and financial services.  
Please find a summary of Acumen’s key lessons through engagement with smallholder farmers below.


---
*Page 71*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
 
 
ARAF will leverage Acumen’s Lean Data expertise through the ARAF Technical Assistance Facility (TAF), which will 
harness grant funding to develop specific survey tools that measure the climate resilience impacts of agriculture 
investments. Lean Data surveys will be carried out on all prospective and live ARAF inv estments as an integral part 
of ARAF’s due diligence and ongoing assessment processes. This will ensure that the voices of smallholder farmers 
form an integral part of stakeholder consultation, investment selection and strategic learning.  
 
3. Private Sector Engagement 
Acumen engages closely with African businesses on two different levels:  
a. Acumen investee companies. Since 2008,  Acumen has invest ed $33M directly into 23 different 
agribusinesses across  Africa, Asia and Latin America, which has provided  us with a  deep understanding of 
key challenges to building more inclusive business models involving smallholder farmers.  A close and long-
term working relationship with these businesses -  including seats on their executive boards, detailed analysis 
of operational c hallenges and barriers to success, the co- delivery of capacity building programs, and the co-
delivery and analysis of Lean Data impact m easurement reports -  has provided rich learning for the Acumen 
team around what works and what does not  in the delivery of both financial sustainability and social impact in 
early stage agribusinesses both of which are required in parallel if these investee businesses are to have a 
positive long- term impact on farmers. This deep learning has fed directly into the ARAF strat egy.  
 
In addition, given the sharp focus on climate resilience within ARAF, over the past year Acumen has met with 
a range of potential new investee businesses that focus specifically on improving climate resilience for 
farmers. These have included businesses from all three core ARAF pillars: Aggregator Platforms, Digital 
Platforms and Innovative Financial Services. Engagement with these organizations has greatly contributed to 
our understanding of resilience challenges.


---
*Page 72*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Finally, to ensure that we incor porate learning into ARAF from a wide range of stakeholders, including 
current and potential future investees from different sectors, Acumen convened a Corporate Collaboration 
Summit specifically focused on Agriculture and ARAF in Nairobi Kenya in January 2018 – please see the 
section headed Multi -Stakeholder Engagement below.     
 
b. Multi national Co rporations : Acumen has a strong focus on fostering value through corporate partnerships.  
We actively partner with corporations that respond to new business and sustainability challenges  in the 
countries we work in.  We engage with corporations that  align with our impact goals  and that have an explicit 
commitment to sustainable and inclusive business practices. In addition to funding, we work with corporate  
partner s to secure in- kind and pro- bono support that can dramatically expand the capacity of our investee  
companies , including opening up formal supply chains to smallholder farmers .  
 
A relevant example is our partnership with Unilever as part of the Enhanced Li velihoods Investment Initiative 
and our investment in BURN under this initiative which is improving access to clean and affordable cook 
stoves for Unilever tea farmers. We also have shared- learning partnerships with organiz ation such as 
Syngenta, who have interesting R&D investments in areas of interest such as hybrid seeds and crop 
insurance. Acumen has a strong partnership with Bain on strategy development and the collation and 
dissemination of strategic learning, which has been instrumental to our strategic learning in the Agriculture 
space over the last three years. These lessons were distilled into a published study named ‘ Growing 
Prosperity: Developing Repeatable Models® to Scale the Adoption of Agricultural Innovations ’. To view 
please visit http://www.bain.com/publications/articles/growing- prosperity -executive -summary.aspx .   
 Other corporations such as Dow, General Electric (GE), Ernst and Young (EY) a nd Sainsbury’s partner with 
Acumen to support shared learning and collaboration events such as the Collaboration Summit outlined in 
the section headed Multi -Stakeholder Engagement below.    
 
 
 
. 
4. Academia & Research Organizations 
 
Acumen has active relationships with several leading universities for agriculture, these include UC Davis and 
Wageningen University and Kenya -based Tegemeo Institute of agricultural policy & development.  
 
We are also in the ear ly stages of a partnership with Stanford University and the University of Minnesota on 
climate change mapping and value chain landscaping. We aim to expand these linkages to develop 
knowledge pieces and influence sector development towards climate adaptation based on learnings from 
relevant investments.   
 
 
5. Climate Resilience Experts 
 
Given ARAF’s focus on climate resilience, Acumen has consulted with a range of climate expert 
organizations to understand the issues better and then to develop a tool to screen investments on climate 
resilience. These consultations have included a mix of in- person meetings, calls, visits etc. Organizations 
consulted included World Resources Institute, The Nature Conservancy  (TNC) , Winrock, Dalberg, 
Conservation International, CGIAR/CCAFS and others.   
 
Acumen has developed the Climate Resilience assessment tool to be used by ARAF at the investment due 
diligence stage (ARIS) in partnership with Winrock, which has significant experience in this space.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
6. Potential ARAF Funders  
 
Acumen is currently in conversation with multiple funding prospects that have shown a potential interest in 
investing in ARAF, including a range of high -net-worth individuals , trusts and foundations, multinational 
corporations (see Collaboration Summit par ticipant list in line item 8. below) and impact investors.  
 
Acumen’s strong preference is to source senior equity funding from private sector sources, but for our own 
learning we have also consulted wi th Development Finance Institutions (“DFIs”) to better understand the 
current offerings, gaps, expectations and tools available in the market and the network of potential funders 
available to support ARAF.  
 
These consultations have shown that ARAF is seen to offer significant value in the market as there are v ery 
few Climate -Adaptation focused funds available to fund, particularly coupled with the depth of early stage 
African smallholder agribusiness investment experience linked to Acumen and the Acumen network.   
 
7. Multi -Stakeholder Engagement – Acumen Collabor ation Summit, Nairobi  
Every year Acumen hosts a summit in Nairobi Kenya to engage with a wider range of stakeholders from a 
wide range of sectors (agriculture, energy, finance, consultancy, crop sciences, technology), to gather their 
feedback and learning to inform Acumen strat egies and also to identify types of partnerships that can be 
fostered between different stakeholder types to accelerate positive impact on the low -income consumers that 
Acumen exists to serve.  
In January 2018 Acumen hosted their first sector -specific Coll aboration Summit on Agriculture in Nairobi 
Kenya to facilitate collaboration between a wide range of stakeholders to improve the lives of smallholders 
farmers. During this convening Acumen took the opportunity to consult with stakeholders on ARAF and 
agric ultural resilience as a whole. Please see below for the list of summit attendees.  
 
Organisation Type  Participating Organisation Region(s)  
Advisory  Adaptive Change Advisors  Global  
Advisory  MPA Global Advisors  Global  
Advisory  Winrock  Global  
Development Agency  IFAD  Global  
Development Agency  The Nature Conservancy (TNC)  Global  
Development Agency  World Bank  Global  
Foundation  Expo2020 Dubai  Global  
Foundation  Grameen Foundation  Global  
Foundation  Rockefeller Foundation  Global  
Foundation  Small Foundation  Africa  
Government  Taita -Taveta County, Kenya (Deputy 
Governor)  East Africa  
Multinational Corporation  Bayer  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Cargill  Global


---
*Page 74*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Multinational Corporation  Coca -Cola  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Dow  Global  
Multinational Corporation  EY (Ernst & Young)  Global  
Multinational Corporation  GE (General Electric)  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Grow Partners  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Hersheys  Global  
Multinational Corporation  IDH Trade  Global  
Multinational Corporation  IKEA  Global  
Multinational Corporation  MasterCard  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Microsoft  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Nespresso  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Partners in Food Solutions  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Sainsbury's  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Syngenta  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Unilever  Global  
Multinational Corporation  Vitol  Global  
SME – Agribusiness  EA Fruits Farm & Co  East Africa  
SME – Agribusiness  EthioChicken  East Africa  
SME – Agribusiness  Frank About Tea East Africa  
SME – Agribusiness  Hello Tractor  West Africa  
SME – Agribusiness  InspiraFarms  East Africa, Latin America  
SME – Agribusiness  VegPro Group  East Africa, West Africa  
SME – Agribusiness  Wanda Organics  East Africa  
SME – Agribusiness  Wasi Organics  Latin America  
SME - Agribusiness, Energy  Sanergy  East Africa  
SME – Climate Advisory  Connective Impact  Global  
SME - Digital Services  Viamo  Global  
SME - Digital Services (Agri ) Virtual City  East Africa  
SME - Digital Services (Agri ) Esoko  East Africa  
SME - Digital Services (Agri ) Tulaa  East Africa  
SME - Financial Services  FirstAccess  East Africa  
SME - Financial Services (Agri ) F3 Life  East Africa  
SME - Financial Services (Agri ) Juhudi Kilimo  East Africa  
SME - Land Conservation  Virunga Group  West Africa  
SME - Land Restoration (Agri ) LandLife Company  Global  
SME - Renewable Energy  Azimuth Easy Solar  West Africa  
SME - Renewable Energy  Biolite  East Africa, India, USA


---
*Page 75*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
SME - Renewable Energy  Burn Manufacturing  East Africa  
SME - Renewable Energy  Devergy  West Africa  
SME - Renewable Energy  Ecofuels Kenya  East Africa  
SME - Renewable Energy  Green Energy BioFuels  West Africa  
SME - Renewable Energy  SolarNow  East Africa  
SME - Renewable Energy  Sun Culture  East Africa  
 
 
Learning highlights from the Collaboration Summit include:  
 
- Consultation with a number of early stage businesses focused on climate resilience in East and West Africa 
which could be considered as ARAF investee pipeline   
- A number of large multinational corporations, including many of those listed above, have pledged to support early -stage businesses tackling agricultural resilience in Africa (including Acumen and ARAF investees). This 
could be in the form of financial funding, market provision or pro bono support.   
- Microfinance Ins titutions  (MFIs) confirmed that it  would make good business sense for them to incorpor ate 
climate resilience trainin g to farmers into their existing business operations as this would help to mini mize 
loan non- repayments by (a) decreasing the risk of poor harvests due to unpredictable weather and (b) 
building trust and goodwill with the farmers. This has confirmed finance providers as a good source of 
climate adaptation service provision.  
- Both smal l start -up tech companies and large tech corporations (Microsoft, Syngenta, etc) confirmed that 
there are exciting new technologies in the market that can support the development and delivery of business models focused on climate adaptation, including sate llite imagery and drones.  
- Close partnerships need to be developed between agribusinesses and renewable energy suppliers to ensure that smallholder farming value chains are addressing both climate resilience and mitigation issues. These 
partnerships could be between early -stage companies from each sector or with larger corporations.   
- There is a need for ongoing consultations with and collaborations between small and large corporations 
working in East and West Africa in the resilient agriculture space –  Acumen and/or ARAF to convene 
stakeholders in a collaborative manner annually to strengthen partnerships and learning.    
 
Once ARAF becomes operational, the following process describes the stakeholder engagement framework:  
- Investee companies: In addition to regular engagement at the Relationship Manager level, formal annual 
meetings with the senior management and boards of investee companies, focused on their business strategy 
and impact to ensure alignment of the overall objectives of the company with that of ARAF. Any course 
correction and realignment will be enabled through this engagement.  
- Governments: We aim to have regular engagement with Country NDAs with a minimum annual meeting,, 
updating them on our experience and learnings from ARAF, getting updates  on the evolution of each 
country’s climate adaptation strategies and its alignment with ARAF’s objectives, providing input as may be 
necessary on government policy based on our learnings and sharing impact results from ARAF investments.  
- Academia, Research Organizations and Corporates: The experts from Academia and Corporates will 
periodically be invited to the sessions of Agriculture Expert Committee (AEC) to opine on issues related to 
ARAF strategy and climate adaptation focus. AEC is expected to meet at  least once a year. We have active 
relationships with several leading universities for agriculture, these include UC Davis and Wageningen 
University while we have collaborated on Impact Measurement with Kenya- based Tegemeo Institute of 
agricultural policy & development. We have also just launched a partnership with Stanford University and the 
University of Minnesota on climate change mapping and value chain landscaping. We aim to expand these


---
*Page 76*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
linkages to develop knowledge pieces and influence sector develop ment towards climate adaptation based 
on learnings from relevant investments.  
- Smallholder farmers:  At the time of making the investment, we will work with our investee companies to 
identify impact metrics to be tracked and and develop a lean data and metri cs collection plan. Metrics 
collection plan. This plan will be presented in the IM. We will periodically undertake lean data surveys to 
capture farmer insights and feedback to be incorporated into company’s strategy. We would aim to 
undertake these surveys  several times over the life each investment.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private and other public  investment.  
 
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 12- year fund.  This vehicle, and GCF’s anchoring 
investment in the Catalytic First Loss Capital (CFLC) tier, will enable Acumen to raise additional capital from like-
minded invest ors that want to achieve the same goals of the GCF and Acumen but have a lower risk appetite.  We 
believe we can leverage GCF’s investment capital in ARAF by 1.2 times to raise a $50M fund.  We are also targeting 
a $6M Technical Assistance Facility, so GCF’s grant capital of $3 M will be leveraged to raise another $3M in TA 
grants.  
Acumen will use ARAF’s capital to make equity  and quasi -equity investments in SMEs that are serving low -income 
populations and enhancing their resilience against climate change . The early stage nature of these enterprises, 
unproven environment that they operate in and the associated risks involved in scaling these enterprises, generally 
tends to stall investor confidence and deter  private sector investments in this space. To address this concern, ARAF 
is structured as a blended capital fund that not only offers a single digit  IRR to investors but also provides them with 
downside protection to the extent of $25m. This risk / reward profile of the fund will attract  private investors that are 
okay with limited  financial return on their  investment  provided sufficient capital protection and high  social impact. 
Over the 12- year period of the fund, ARAF will establish the commercial viability of the sector by investing in, 
developing and scaling agribusinesses  that make agricultural value chains more climate resilient. Together through 
this fund, Acumen, GCF and other investors will be creating financially sustainable enterprises that continue to operate through internal profits and follow -on investment capital even after ARAF has made its investments.  This 
success of ARAF is anticipat ed to catalyze  investor confidence and attract further private sector capital into those 
same companies and similar companies that arise to compete, which ultimately will serve to increase the scale and impact of climate resilient agribusinesses operating locally within countries.  Thus, the GCF’s involvement will in no 
way be crowing out private capital, but on the contrary, will be key to crowd- in private capital that requires downside 
capital protection to invest in such high risk impact driven investment vehicles.   
Lastly, Acumen has a strong track record of deploying and returning capital.  Acumen has appropriate internal 
controls to monitor its investments and report to investors.  ARAF will seek to generate a positive financial return to 
investors.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 ( core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
Not Applicable  
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co- financing ratio (total amount of co- financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long- term low emission investment.  
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
 
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 12- year fund.  This vehicle, and GCF’s anchoring 
investment  in the FLP , will enable Acumen to raise more risk averse capital from like -minded inves tors that want to 
achieve the same impact goals of the GCF and Acumen but have a higher risk threshold.  We believe  we can 
leverage GCF’s capital by 1.2 times .  
  
ARAF is intended to create a blueprint to climate resilient agriculture in developing markets  that can be followed by 
other nations and that will attract millions of dollars in private capital.  
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F .1. 
 
Without the anchoring investment of the GCF in the Catalytic First Loss Capital pool, Acumen believes it would be 
extremely difficult to raise such a Fund, if even possible at all.   
 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
By creating this new Fund, the GCF is enabling a new and unique investing vehicle to target climate resilient 
agriculture interventions that improve farmer livelihoods while reducing income volatility from climate shocks.  If this new Fund can prove that t here are viable investment opportunities in this target sector over the next couple years, 
Acumen and other investors could raise multiple funds on the back of this success, which will serve to scale GCF’s 
adaptation goals.  Thus, the GCF’s investment in t his first Fund could catalyze multiple follow -
on investment vehicles.  
Further, because this Fund is focused on for -profit enterprises, these companies should be able to continue to scale 
and remain financially viable once the investment capital from ARAF has been returned.   
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy  in case of private sector operations  (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
 
Overall, Acumen seeks to create investment structures that will allow for exits, either through 1) sales to a later-stage 
growth investor, a strategic buyer or a management buyout or 2) self -liquidating instruments such as convertible debt 
and quasi -equity investment structures (i.e. instruments with shares of revenue or EBITDA).  Initial public offerings 
are not seen as practical exit opportunities given the relatively immature capital markets in the economies in which ARAF will invest.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
As an investor in Acumen’s proposed Fund, the GCF will receive its share of financial distributions from ARAF when 
any liquidit y events occur from the underlying portfolio companies.  Such liquidity events could include a sale of 
ARAF’s shares of the company or payment of principal, interest and/or dividend payments from a portfolio company 
to ARAF.  The specific timing and manner  of financial distributions from ARAF to the GCF will be agreed upon in a 
Shareholder’s agreement between the GCF, ARAF, and other investors in ARAF.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
Acumen invests in companies that are bringing innovative solutions to vulnerable populations. In the context of 
agricu lture, these solutions consist of both product innovations and access innovations that enable farmers to 
increase incomes and improve resilience e.g., access to disease resistant highly productive chickens. There are a 
range of effective solutions to farmers’ problems available in the world e.g., affordable credit through Micro Finance Institutions, hybrid disease resistant seeds, drip irrigation solutions etc however, the real challenge for farmers in 
Africa is the lack of access to these solutions due to poor infrastructure and businesses which are unable to serve 
disbursed smallholder farmers due to high cost of access and servicing, lack of adequate capital or due to high 
perceived risks of the sector. The focus of this Fund will be to provide long term patient capital to enable these 
businesses to serve smallholder farmers giving them access to affordable solutions around inputs, extension, credit 
and off -take. The focus hence will be on business model innovations more than product innovations. However, the 
Fund will strategically invest in digital platforms that can enable efficient and cost effective access for smallholder farmers.  
 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
Not Applicable  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 12- year fund.  This vehicle, and GCF’s 
anchoring investment, will enable Acumen to raise additional capital from like- minded investors that want 
to achieve the same goals of the GCF and Acumen.   We believe we can leverage GCF’s capital by 1.2 
times .   
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
By anchoring ARAF with a $23M investment in the Catalytic First Loss Capital (CFLC) tier, we believe 
Acumen can raise an additional $27M from other investors, including up to $2M from Acumen.  Further, 
the creation of this new investment vehicle, and the resulting investments from this Fund, will attract


---
*Page 79*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
capital from co -investors into the underlying portfolio companies as  Acumen has a strong reputation and 
multiple value -add resources it can offer the portfolio company.  It is harder to estimate an exact amount 
of how much capital will be invested in these companies as a result of Acumen investing in them with 
this Fund, h owever it is reasonable to expect that GCF’s creation of Acumen’s Fund will catalyze further 
capital from co- investors in the underlying portfolio companies of ARAF.    
 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks establi shed in a 
comparable context.   
We think a $23M anchor investment from the GCF is not only catalytic but also crucial to Acumen’s 
ability to raise this Fund.  Furthermore, we believe being able to raise a $50M fund and leveraging GCF’s 
capital by 1.2 times  to raise more risk averse capital, is a strong use of GCF’s capital.  
A $23M investment from GCF will enable Acumen to create the world’s first climate change fund focused 
on BoP  populations in developing countries. This anchor investment will be not only catalytic but also 
crucial to enable Acumen to create the first climate adaptation fund to utilize SMEs to affect the lives of 
low-income populations in developing countries.  We believe being able to raise a $50M fund and 
leverage GCF’s capital by 1.2 times  is a strong use of GCF’s capital.   
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)   
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the  detailed economic and financial analysis  (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
The forecasted financial return for  this Fund accounts for, amongst other factors, Acumen’s expectations of the ability 
of its underlying investments to scale and reach profitability, the size of the impact capital and commercial capital 
markets that are willing to take the risks stated abo ve and invest in companies, and potential movements in foreign 
currency relationships over the life of ARAF. The economics of ARAF also account for the expenses that will be incurred in managing a portfolio of companies that operate in these challenging op erating environments.   
 
Based on the above  analysis, please provide economic and financial justification  (both qualitative and quantitative)  for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2.  
ARAF expects to make investments in illiquid markets, which have disproportionate risk relative to financial returns 
given the Acumen’s significant social objectives.  As such traditional commercial capital, and even segments of 
“impact investors” that are  still focused on achieving “market rate returns” are not interested in taking the risk of 
investing in the types of investment opportunities that Acumen’s Fund will be targeting.  Specific risk factors and 
reasons that justify the concessionality of the G FC funding include 1) Liquidity Event/Exit, 2) Inflation and Interest 
Rate Risk, 3) Foreign Currency, Exchange Rate and Market Risks, and 4) Accounting Standards, Limited Availability of Information, and Due Diligence.   
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please  provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.


---
*Page 80*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
Acumen invests in innovative companies that are bringing essential goods and services to vulnerable populations. 
Acumen through this Fund will be primarily focused on investing in platform businesses that enable farmers access to 
innovative and climate resilient inputs (like seeds, fertilizers etc.), affordable financial services i ncluding access to 
credit and insurance solutions, reliable and climate smart extension and training services and access to off -take 
markets. ARAF will focus on investing in digital platforms , innovative financial services  as well as aggregator 
businesses that enable integration of smallholders into global supply chains.  
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and Action Plan.  
Acumen has formalized robust ESG diligence, monitoring and reporting processes, which are based on industry 
standards, as well as guidelines outlined by several prospec tive Investors for its global portfolio (elaborate by stating 
the checklists that will be used) from leading organizations like the IFC and FMO.  The ESG diligence process and 
reports include assessment of the 8 IFC Performance Standards and an overall rat ing on Environmental, Social, 
Business Integrity, and Corporate Governance risks of the enterprise   Acumen will include a formal ESG process for conduct a formal ESG process for all investments of ARAF.  Acumen will designate a person in charge of all ESG  
matters related to ARAF and its investments, and will also ensure all members of the Investment Team have been 
adequately trained with respect to appropriate ESG processes.  As per its accreditation by the GCF, and with 
respect to ESS risks, ARAF will onl y target Category C projects for investment.    
In Initial Due Diligence, the Portfolio Manager will analyze potential ESG risks and financial management and 
governance risks, based in part on the company’s sector, sub- sector and geography, as well as on an initial 
understanding of the company’s operations.  Based on these factors, the deal team will rate potential ESG risks as Low, Medium or High.  These risks ratings will be presented as part of the Preliminary Investment Memo (“PIM”), and 
will ultimately  serve to guide the team as it prepares its formal diligence plan.  
During Formal Due Diligence, the Portfolio Manager will conduct extensive ESG diligence, focusing on areas 
highlighted from the initial ESG risk evaluation.  The ESG diligence is meant to uncover ESG risks, identify potential risk mitigants and/or the lack thereof, as well as evaluate areas for potential ESG improvements.  Upon completion of formal ESG diligence, the Portfolio Manager will rate each of the ESG risks as Low, Medium or High and come to a 
conclusion on whether the investment remains appropriate given this assessment.  The Portfolio Manager will also 
complete an ESG Action Plan, which outlines steps that the company will take going forward to remedy or mitigate 
any ESG issues or risks deemed unacceptable.  These elements will be presented to the IC in the Investment Memo 
(“IM”).  
In areas where the Portfolio Manager identifies high ESG risks, and which require specific and deep domain expertise (e.g., supply chain audit), Acumen wi ll typically engage external experts as consultants to aid in diligence and 
verification.  Acumen will, to the extent available, attempt to cover the costs of these external consultants from the Technical Assistance (“TA”) Facility raised in conjunction wi th ARAF, but such costs will otherwise be borne by ARAF.  
In the operational stage (post investment) we will work with the investee company to gauge their capacity to monitor and report on the environment and social safeguards. Together with this, the ARAF portfolio manager will also 
actively monitor and report, on an annual basis, on the environmental and social safeguards in place, their


---
*Page 81*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
implementation, changes in the environmental and social risks , updates on  the status of grievance s 
redressed/outstandin g (if any) and ESG action plan updates.  
ARAF will focus on investing in early stage small & medium enterprises (with revenues in the $0.5M to $10M range) 
that benefit smallholder farmers living on less than $4 a day. The average investment from ARAF is exp ected to be in 
the $2- 4M range but in no case shall it exceed $7.5M . The use of technologies in projects funded by ARAF will 
include software for digital platforms and basic food processing technologies. We will ensure as part of our ESG diligence that the use of these technologies is in line with local environmental regulations and standards. The scope 
of the projects will initially be local (limited to a sub- region within a country) and we would like to support scale -up of 
these projects into multiple sub- regions and multiple countries to impact more smallholder farmers.  
 
ARAF will not invest in companies that use or permit the use of hazardous agrochemicals and/or participate in 
activities that lead to deforestation or negatively impact the environment. ARAF will invest only in companies that 
comply with international and local regulations and standards regarding environmental best practices as well as 
working conditions.  
In addition, ARAF will leverage Acumen’s Lean Data capabilities to actively track the impact its investments is having 
on smallholder farmers and also le verage this farmer feedback to help refine the strategy and execution of service 
delivery to smallholder farmers.  
A proper grievance redressal mechanism will also be designed in line with the framework to ensure transparency and 
alignment between all stak eholders.  
Therefore, given the small scale nature of projects being funded through ARAF, the focus on improving wellbeing and 
climate resilience of smallholder farmers, the use of basic software and agro processing technologies, ARAF’s 
investing work will  fall under GCF’s Category C classification . 
The table below gives a further breakdown of the kinds of business models Acumen will be investing in through 
ARAF. The key elements of these business model types have been identified and based on these, the environment 
and impact risk allocated to each business model type. As you can see, all these business models would be classified 
as low risk from an ESS standpoint.  
 Types of companies  Key Business Model 
Elements  Environment & Impact Risks  
 
 
Access to 
Inputs   
Companies providing:  
- climate resilient inputs  that offer 
improved yields in the face of 
climate changes e.g., hybrid 
drought resistant seeds  
- improved livestock breeds  that 
are both more productive and 
disease resistant e.g., Poultry 
breeder producing highly 
productive disease resistant Day 
Old Chicks for smallholders   
Scale: Sub -regional 
with scale -up likely to 
be focused in several 
regions within the same 
country impacting up to 5M lives.  
 Technology : Basic 
agro- processing and 
breeding technology usage complying with local environment 
protection regulations 
and standards.  
 
Type of beneficiary : 
Smallholder farmers   
 
 
- Low


---
*Page 82*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
 
Access to 
Financial 
Services   
Companies providing:  
- innovative financial services   
while leveraging digital platforms 
including payment and credit 
solutions that allows farmers to 
purchase improved inputs e.g.,    
a digital platform offering access 
to credit based on farmers          
e-transactio n history  
- asset finance to enable farmers   
to purchase additional productive assets  
- insurance services  for  
smallholder farmers to improve 
resilience   
 
Scale: Sub -regional 
and national. Financial 
services leveraging 
digital payment platforms are expected 
to reach much greater 
scale with potential 
impact up to 10M lives.  
 Technology : 
Leveraging software 
solutions and/or mobile 
money (digital) 
platforms. Such technological use will 
comply with local 
environment protection regulations and 
standards.  
 
Type of beneficiary: 
Smallholder farmers   
 
- Low 
 
 
 
Access to 
Market   
- Agro -processing companies in 
value chains appropriate for 
specific regions given changing 
climate conditions. e.g., investing 
in pulses processing under dry 
conditions instead of crops like 
rice or sugarcane which consume 
a lot of water  
- Companies offering alternative 
livelihoods opportunities allowing 
for diversified incomes e.g., a 
poultry company promoting 
poultry farming in an area dominated by cash crop 
cultivation.   
 
Scale: Sub -regional 
and national with scale-
up likely to be focused 
in several regions within the same country 
impacting up to 10M 
lives.  
 
Technology : Basic 
agro- processing 
technology, software 
solutions and/or mobile 
money (digital) 
platforms. Such technological use will 
comply with local 
environment protection 
regulations and 
standards.  
 
Type of beneficiary : 
Smallholder farmers   
- Low


---
*Page 83*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
 
 
Access to 
Extension   
- Companies offering extension 
support to farmers enabling them 
to improve their farming practices 
and make informed decisions  
about crop selection, land preparation, sowing and 
harvesting. These companies would typically be agro-
processing enterprises or digital 
platforms offering bundled 
solutions   
Scale: National with 
scale -up likely to be 
focused in clusters 
across the country 
impacting up to 20M 
lives.  
 
Technology : Software 
solutions and Mobile 
Information Dissemination 
platforms. Such 
technological use will comply with local 
environment protection 
regulations and 
standards.  
  
Type of beneficiary : 
Smallholder farmers   
- Low 
 
Resource 
Mgmt.   
- Companies providing efficient irrigation solutions like drip and 
sprinkler solutions etc.  
  
Scale: Sub -regional 
and national impacting up to 5M lives  
 
Technology : Basic 
irrigation technology 
complying with local 
environment protection 
regulations and 
standards.  
 Type of beneficiary : 
Smallholder farmers  
  
- Low 
 
Exclusion List:  
ARAF will not invest in companies involved in:  
- Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws or regulations or 
international conventions and agreements, or subject to international bans, such as pharmaceuticals, 
pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting substances, PCB's, wildlife or products regulated under CITES.  
- Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding  beer and wine).1 
- Production or trade in tobacco.1 
- Production or trade in un- bonded asbestos fibers  
- Drift net fishing in the marine environment using nets in excess of 2.5 km. in length.  
- Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of f orced labor2/harmful child labor.3 
- Commercial logging operations for use in primary tropical moist forest.  
- Production, trade, storage, or transport of significant volumes of hazardous chemicals, or commercial scale 
usage of hazardous chemicals. Hazardous chemicals include gasoline, kerosene, and other petroleum 
products.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
- Production or activities that impinge on the lands owned, or claimed under adjudication, by Indigenous 
Peoples, without full documented consent of such peoples.  
- Operations leading to deforestation and/or deliberate wastage or contamination of natural resources (like land 
and water)  
- GMOs  
- Activities that may lead to physical and economic displacement of people  
- Violation of International Labor Standards as specified by ILO or FAO’s Climat e Smart Agriculture 
Framework.  
Footnotes  
 
1 This does not apply to project sponsors who are not substantially involved in these activities. "Not substantially involved" means that the 
activity concerned is ancillary to a project sponsor's primary operations.  
2 Forced labor means all work or service, not voluntarily performed, that is extracted from an individual under threat of force or penalty.  
3 Harmful child labor means the employment of children that is economically exploitive, or is likely to be hazardous to, or to interfere with, the 
child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health, or physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or social development.  
 
Gender Considerations  
Acumen will closely evaluate investment opportunities from a gender lens during due diligence. As part of investment 
management, our Portfolio managers will work with investees to further strengthen gender impact from the investment through targeted support in the area and utilizing TAF for specific gender enabling interventions. Some possible examples of expected gender interventions are provided as follows:  
Insurance  
For instance, Acumen intends to provide crop/drought insurance for underserved smallholder farmers, many of whom 
will be women, to help them mitigate the impact of climate change. However, the penetration of agricultural insurance 
is very low in Africa primarily due to lack of availability of such services and also the information asymmetries 
between the insurer and the insured. To ensure that these smallholders, particularly women, get adequate access to 
agricultural insurance, ARAF will employ its TAF to support investees in designing differential and gender -friendly 
insurance packages and premiums taking into consideration the financial capacity and risk appetite of different 
farmers while also providing support in awareness campaigns to mitigate information asymmetries and encourage greater uptake by women.  
Water Management  
ARAF, as part of our strategy, also intends to improve water management for agricultural p urposes through promoting 
efficient irrigation systems. These irrigations systems are often used by women farmers for livestock as well household 
needs, however, in their design little thought is given to who will be using them. ARAF through its investment s and use 
of TAF will aim to promote a ‘design for management’ approach, that is, the adaptation of irrigation technologies to 
match the preferences of users, including adaptation measures that enable women and girls in project areas to benefit 
fully from them. Such adaptation measures could include localized water harvesting structures, putting steps in irrigation 
structures and consideration of factors such as irrigation schedules (e.g. to align with time available for access for 
livestock or household needs, or avoiding night irrigation schedules because of women’s increased risk of harassment 
after dark). This would enable greater and more productive participation of women in agriculture.  
Extension Services  
Access to improved knowledge (extension services) is crucial for both poverty reduction and climate change 
adaptation. ARAF through its investments in digital platforms and aggregators that provide extension services, will


---
*Page 85*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
support implement of agricultural extension services that is expected to benefit  male and female farmers. However, 
as studies have shown that gathering knowledge on agriculture –  based methodologies does not always translate to 
behaviour change and improved livelihoods. What is required over and above this are incentives through platf orms 
that provide farmers financing solutions and a more participatory way of learning through, say, farmer field schools 
(FFS’). ARAF, therefore, would encourage the use of FFS’ by investees as learning & demonstration centers of 
excellence to further doc ument and scale up successful agricultural practices. ARAF will support investees through 
TAF to encourage an increasing number of women farmers’  enrollment in these FFS’ and provided training on 
sustainable agriculture practices. Further, that capacities of FFS’ are strengthened in a manner that they can work at multiple scales to build social capital, for example by helping strengthen producer organizations and by contributing to 
greater organizational capacity along the entire value chain – from financin g, post – harvest processing and 
marketing etc.  
Others  
The vulnerability of any society to climate disasters depends on several factors such as population, technology, policy, social behavior, land use patterns, water use, economic development, and divers ity of economic base and 
cultural composition. Decline in, say, food availability because of climatic conditions should not necessarily lead to famines and loss of livelihoods. Whether decline in food availability would lead to disaster will depend on capability 
failures which, in turn, is inextricably linked to diversification of livelihoods, market access, and peoples’ social, 
economic and political entitlements. ARAF will therefore invest in aggregators or agriculture processing companies 
that while stre ngthening supply chains also provide alternative livelihoods to rural communities diversifying their 
income sources away from farming to jobs and support services (e.g., logistics, warehousing etc.). This will enable 
resilience of smallholder/women farmers  that would allow for more liquid asset build –  up and precautionary 
savings.     
These are some examples to illustrate the kind of gender design considerations that will be applied when investing in 
businesses that enable climate resilience for smallholder s. 
See Section E.3 for additional discussion on gender  considerations . 
 
 
  
 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s  financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.  
Acumen has appropriate internal policies and procedures in place with regards to financial accounting, disbursement, 
wiring and receipt of funds, and audits of financials.  Acumen undergoes and the ARAF will undergo a financial audit 
every year and can share audited financial statements and/or auditor engagement letters upon request.  The financial 
statements will be audited by an independent external auditor in accordance with internationally recognized financial reporting and auditing standards . Acumen can also share any requested details on internal controls related to 
disbursement and wiring procedures and policies regarding Acumen’s Finance and Audit Committee.


---
*Page 86*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
In the process of due diligence on co -investors, ARAF’s subscription documentation  for the fund will  require diligence 
on the ultimate beneficial holders and representations around source of  funds for  the commitment.  Those names will 
be run through sanctions and terrorism  search databases (Acumen uses a composite database called Bridger) and 
any hits  will be discussed  with the counsel. Acumen would  not accept funds form a 'true hit'.  Generally, funders are 
expected to be known to Acumen, and in the event that they are not already known, Acumen would engage 
in research to understand the source of funds and nature of  the prospective investor before accepting a subscription.   
In its due diligence of investment opportunities, Acumen conducts, and the ARAF will conduct, in- depth analysis and 
diligence of the financial and procurement operati ons of potential portfolio companies.  Amongst many other items, 
diligence includes assessment of internal financial controls, relationships with suppliers and relevant procurement 
policies, and accounting systems and reports.  Acumen requires that its por tfolio companies have financial 
statements audited by an independent external auditor in accordance with internationally recognized financial 
reporting and auditing standards , once the company receives investment from Acumen. Acumen also endeavors to 
ensure that its portfolio companies , are in compliance with its anti -money laundering and anti -corruption policies.   
The Manager plans to utilize investment capital from ARAF for pioneer and early stage growth- oriented investments 
in portfolio companies that are more developed than start -up enterprises, but are still relatively early -stage, high- risk 
companies in the context of traditional investing.  The Manager intends to target portfolio companies that have shown 
proof of concept, have established business models and that have a clear path towards profitability.  The Manager 
will also prioritize a strong management team with a track record of execution and operational experience.  
ARAF will seek to make minority (i.e., less than 50% ownership) equity and equity -linked debt investments totaling 
from $0.5 million to $3.0 million per portfolio company.  Detailed investment  criteria of ARAF with respect to target 
portfolio companies and investment structures are described in the table below.  
 
ARAF Target Investment Criteria  
Company Leadership  ● Experienced entrepreneur with proven ability to execute  
● Complete or plan for compl eting management team  
Idea ● Proof of concept around business and revenue model  
● No ambiguity around proving product or market  
● Clear fit with ARAF’s  climate resilience  objective  
Execution*  ● Clear and quantifiable path to scaling operations and impact  
● Historical operations showing ability to execute; at least 1 year of 
operations  
Financials*  ● Revenue generating  
● Positive gross margins  
Organization  ● Basic structure and systems in place  
Market & Consumer  ● Proof of customer adoption and market receptivity  
● Proof of smallholder farmers engagement either as supplier or 
customer  
Competition/Substitution  ● Identified as a potential leader in the defined market  
Regulatory & Legal  ● Defined and established legal and regulatory environment


---
*Page 87*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 102 
 
 
 F 
ESG status  ● Satisfactory results from environmental, social, and corporate 
governance assessment  
Integrity standards  ● Satisfactory result from Patriot Act/Anti -Money Laundering checks on 
entrepreneurs, senior management, board members, and existing 
investors  
Company Leadership  ● Experienced entrepreneur with proven ability to execute  
● Complete or plan for completing management team  
 
*Up to 30 -35% of the portfolio companies in which the Program invests may be in an earlier stage; in such cases, the 
investment committee should approve that a company warrants early -stage investments for clear reasons, which 
must be elaborated in the investment memo for the company.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 84 OF 102 
 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
 
Execution Challenges & Risks  
● The ARAF will invest in a mix of pioneer and 
early growth stage, innovative companies.  By 
definition, these enterprises operate with a lot 
of unknowns around business model, 
company operations, and market dynamics.  
These enterprises may fail or may take longer 
than anticipated to achieve financially viable business models  
● The ARAF generally will seek significant minority stakes with stro ng contractual rights, 
though it sometimes may have a majority position in consortium with other co- investors.  
As such, the ARAF does not expect to control 
the activities of its portfolio companies.  
● Many of the ARAF’s investments will involve 
working wit h farmer cooperatives, public and 
private partnerships and individual small holder farmers. There is inherent risk in the 
relationships and their depth of knowledge and 
experience   
● The ARAF will invest in small holder farmers that produce yields that are susceptible to global pricing fluctuations and climate patterns 
 Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G .2. 
As an investment fund focusing on innovative businesses in developing markets, ARAF and the portfolio companies 
in which it plans to invest may face a host of challenges.  Acumen believes that these challenges can be 
summarized in three categories, across 1) Execution Challenges and Risks, 2) Financial Risks, and 3) Legal and 
Regulatory Risks.  Acumen’s general strategies for risk management in each of these risk categories are outlined in the sections below.   
The Managing Director plans to regularly evaluate the overall risk of ARAF and its investments.  S/he will also 
prepare a periodic report for the IC, which identifies risks from the previous report and includes recommendations for 
procedures to mitigate and address such risks.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 85 OF 102 
 
 G 
● Digital platform investments bear the risk of 
adoption and strong business model proof 
points  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed.  Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk oc curring? If so, to what level?  
 
The ARAF has rigorous due diligence processes which include analysis of financial, operational, market and ESS 
issues. The due diligence process provides the ARAF with the ability to assess high quality investment opportunities 
and select enterprises with strong management teams, high quality products, and strong brand names and 
reputati on.  The ARAF will not only provide investment capital, but expects to provide strategic advice and additional 
resources through such actions as sitting on the Board of companies, identifying and working with co- investors, 
providing access to local network s of experts and value- add partners, and offering specific technical assistance 
programs.  Example of technical assistance programs could include conducting a study to help the aggregator better 
understand and serve multiple customer segments (farmers and the end customer), developing training for direct 
sales approach to customers, implementation of MIS and ESM systems, market research and impact measurement.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Legal Challenges & Risks  
● Countries in which the ARAF seeks to invest lack fully developed legal systems, and many of the countries in which the ARAF seeks to invest control the repatriation of investment income, and capital and profit that result from 
foreign investment. Some of the ARAF’s 
investments may work in partnership with 
local, regional and/or national governments.  
Risks for corruption and bribery could be 
heightened within these partnerships  
● Understanding of local legal frameworks in 
multiple  countries in West and East Africa 
could be difficult  
 
 Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
In order to mitigate legal risks, Acumen will rely on its experienced, local, in- house legal team as well as outside 
counsel. Acumen’s General Counsel has over 20 years of corporate law experience.  Acumen has developed strong 
relationships with global law firms and local law firms in the countries in which Acumen invests who provide guidance and support on deal execution and other legal matters.  The in- house legal team also is involved in deal


---
*Page 90*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 86 OF 102 
 
 G 
research, diligence, structuring, closing and, as needed, post -investment monitoring.  The team develops strategies 
and processes for navigating regulations pertinent to specific geographies, industries and situations.  Additionally, 
the legal team wor ks to recommend deal structures that minimize legal challenges and risks.  With regard to issues 
of repatriation of investment income and other capital, the risk exposure of ARAF of such capital controls seems to 
be relatively lower in the target countries  of Ghana and Uganda compared to other countries in the region.  The US 
Department of State Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs issued a 2016 Investment Climate Statements 
Report on July 5, 2016 regarding the overall investment climate working with dev eloping countries.  Excerpts are 
provided below, as well as links to the full reports, which outline openness to and restriction on foreign investment, 
conversion and transfer policies, expropriation and compensation, dispute settlement, performance requir ements 
and investment incentives, protection of property rights, transparency of the regulatory system, efficient capital 
markets and portfolio investment, competition from state owned enterprises, responsible business conduct, political violence, corrupti on, bilateral investment agreements, OPIC and other investment insurance programs, labor, foreign 
trade zones/free ports/trade facilitation, and foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment statistics.   
 
  
Ghana: See the following link for detailed information from the US Dept of State; excerpt from executive summary
32 
is below  
Until recently one of the fastest growing economies in the world, Ghana’s GDP growth rate slowed in 2015 to 3.9 
percent. The country’s economy is highly dependent on the export of primary commodities such as gold, cocoa, and 
oil, and consequently remains vulnerable to potential slowdowns in the global economy and commodity price 
shocks. Attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) continues to be a stated priority for the Government of Ghana 
(GOG), given the urgent need to restore the country’s economic momentum and overcome an annual infrastructure funding gap of at least USD 1.5 billion.  
Increased inflation and devaluation of the Ghanaian cedi since late 2013 has dampened the earlier macroeconomic success story –  inflation hit 19.2 percent in March 2016 – the highest since early 2010. In April 2015, the GOG 
signed a three- year $918 million extended credit facility agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in an 
effort to stabilize Ghana’s struggling economy. In September 2015, Ghana’s debt to GDP ratio rose above 70 percent. The Ghanaian currency, the cedi, lost almost 32 percent of its value in 2014 and slid another 15 percent in 
2015 . The nation suffered severe power outages in 2015, negatively affecting business and industry. Under the 
ongoing IMF program, Ghana’s inflation, currency, and debt are beginning to stabilize but it will be critical that 
Ghana adheres to program guidelines  to ensure long- term economic success. New power plants are coming online 
in 2016 that will help meet consumer and business demand and ameliorate the power outage issue. The nation is 
preparing for national presidential elections in November 2016.  
Despite the current macro- economic challenges, Ghana’s abundant raw materials (gold, cocoa, and oil/gas), good 
governance, political stability, and policy reforms makes it stand out as one of the better locations for investment in sub-Saharan Africa. Among the promising sectors are agribusiness, food processing, downstream oil, gas, and 
minerals processing, as well as the energy and mining -related services subsectors.  
The current government administration acknowledges that foreign investment requires an enabling environment and 
is open to discussing issues that hinder foreign investment. However, implementation and enforcement of the laws, policies, and actions needed to attract FDI continue to lag. The burdensome bureaucracy, weak productivity, costly 
and difficult  financial services, under -developed infrastructure, ambiguous property laws, frequent power and water 
cuts, and an unskilled labor force are the main factors that hinder FDI in Ghana.  
                                                             
32 US Dept of State 2016, Investment Climate Statements f or 2016,  
https://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/othr/ics/investmentclimatestatements/index.htm?year=2016&dlid=254203#wra
pper


---
*Page 91*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 87 OF 102 
 
 G 
Overall, while the investment climate in Ghana is relatively welcoming to foreign investment, especially compared to 
other countries in the sub- region, there are also troubling trends in investment policy. The passage of stringent local 
content regulations in the petroleum sector and public discussion of expanding local content provisions to other 
sectors are signals of future efforts to legislate restrictions on how international capital can be used within Ghana.  
In sum, Ghana offers investors a business environment with features such as:  
● A stable and predictable political en vironment  
● No discrimination against foreign- owned businesses  
● A free -floating exchange rate regime and guarantees that investors can transfer profits out of Ghana  
● Investment laws that protect investors against expropriation and nationalization  
● A lower degre e of corruption than that of some regional counterparts.  
Current market challenges:  
● Although the existing legal framework recognizes and provides ways to enforce property rights, the 
procedure to obtain a clear title over land is often difficult, complicat ed, and lengthy.  
● Lack of sufficient protection of intellectual property rights, including computer software and pharmaceuticals.  
● A lengthy and complex process to establish a business, involving at least five government agencies.  
● Local content regulations i n the oil and gas sector that entered into force in November 2013.  
 
Nigeria:  See the footnoted link for detailed information from the US Dept of State33; excerpt from executive summary 
is below.    
With over 177 million citizens, a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) over USD 568 billion, and oil production over 2 million barrels per day, Nigeria has Africa's largest population, economy, and oil production (and export). Consistently strong 
GDP growth over the past decade has developed a growing consumer class and attracted considerable investor 
interest. Nigeria offers abundant natural resources and a low -cost labor pool, and enjoys mostly duty -free trade with 
other member countries of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). However, much of Nigeri a’s 
market potential remains unrealized because of significant impediments such as pervasive corruption, inadequate 
power and transportation infrastructure, high energy costs, an inconsistent regulatory and legal environment, insecurity, a slow and ineffec tive judicial system, inadequate intellectual property rights protections and enforcement, 
and an inefficient property registration system. Major developments affecting investors’ attitudes toward Nigeria have included the following factors:  
 
• Declining Nai ra: The drop in the value of the Naira against the dollar to an official exchange rate of approximately 
200 in 2015 squeezes margins for traders and manufacturers, who pay for imports in dollars but earn revenue 
in Naira (most manufacturers in Nigeria rely  heavily on imported inputs). In order to preserve foreign exchange 
reserves and promote import substitution, in mid- 2015 the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) published a list of 
41 items for which official foreign exchange would not be provided. As oil prices continued to fall, the gap 
between the official exchange rate and an unofficial parallel exchange rate widened. Many companies and economists believe the official exchange rate overvalues the Naira and that the CBN’s policy to defend this rate in the fac e of market forces for a lower rate, as reflected in the parallel rate, is unsustainable. Concerns 
about whether and how the CBN will adapt exchange rate policy have contributed to economic uncertainty in 
2015 and early 2016.  
                                                             
33US Dept of State  2016, Investment Climate Statements for 2016,  
http://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/othr/ics/investmentclimatestatements/index.htm?yea r=2016&dlid=254231


---
*Page 92*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 88 OF 102 
 
 G 
• Foreign exchange and fiscal ch allenges: Nigeria depends on exports of crude oil for approximately 70 percent of 
government revenue and 90 percent of foreign exchange earnings. Continuing decline in the price of crude 
oil throughout 2015 has posed foreign exchange challenges for the CBN  and a fiscal challenge for the 
government. The loss of revenue derived from the sale of crude oil increased the budget deficit. The 
government is addressing the fiscal challenge with a combination of spending cuts, improved tax collection, and domestic and international borrowing. Reduced oil revenue has also strained state governments and many are struggling to pay civil servant salaries. Reduced government spending, greater tax collection, and 
low oil prices were factors contributing to the slowdown in economic growth in 2015, with GDP growth falling 
to 2.79 percent, according to Nigeria’s National Statistics Bureau and with inflation reaching 9.6 percent in 
December 2015, largely a consequence of the depreciation of the parallel exchange rate.  
• Elections:  Following presidential elections on March 28, 2015, deemed largely peaceful and orderly by international 
observers, the May 2015 inauguration of President Muhammadu Buhari marked the first peaceful transfer of power to an opposition party since Nigeria's independence in 1960. Consistent with his campaign pledges, 
President Buhari has focused on security matters, particularly the Boko Haram insurgency in Nigeria's 
northeast. Nonetheless, continuing terrorist attacks by Boko Haram in 2015 contributed to investor uncertainty 
over security in the country.  
 Nigeria’s recent economic growth has been concentrated primarily in trade, agriculture, manufacturing, and 
telecommunications. While the agriculture sector sustains over 80 percent of rural households, the Ni gerian economy 
remains heavily dependent on its oil and gas sector which accounts for 12 percent of GDP but, as noted above, over 
90 percent of export earnings and over 70 percent of government revenues. Nigeria is the world’s thirteenth largest 
oil produc er and sixth largest oil exporter. However, investment in Nigeria’s oil sector slowed in 2015 due to regulatory 
uncertainties, security risks, and low oil prices.  
 Nigeria’s underdeveloped power sector remains a significant bottleneck to broad- based econom ic development. 
Current production is around 4,000 megawatts of power, forcing the vast majority of businesses to generate most of their own electricity. The World Bank currently ranks Nigeria 182th out of 189 countries for ease of obtaining electricity for business. Reform of Nigeria’s power sector is ongoing, but investor confidence has been shaken by tariff and 
regulatory uncertainty. The Nigerian Electricity Regulatory Commission’s surprise announcement of the removal of collection losses in the electri city tariff in March 2015 reversed a phased increase policy upon which newly privatized 
electricity generation and distribution companies had been relying to support profitable operation and investment in 
infrastructure. Many challenges remain before Niger ia will see a significant, sustainable improvement in power delivery 
to industrial and consumer end- users.  
 
Nigeria’s trade regime remains protectionist, with high tariffs and prohibitions on many import items with the aim of 
spurring domestic agricultural  and manufacturing sector growth. U.S. goods exports to Nigeria in 2015 were USD 3.4 
billion, down 42.9 percent from the previous year, while U.S. imports from Nigeria were USD 1.9 billion, down 50 
percent. U.S. exports to Nigeria are primarily refined pet roleum products, used vehicles, cereals, and machinery. 
Crude oil and petroleum products continued to account for over 95 percent of Nigerian exports to the United States in 
2015. The stock of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in Nigeria was USD 5.2 bil lion in 2014 (latest data available), 
down from USD 8.1 billion in 2013. U.S. FDI in Nigeria continues to be led by the oil and gas sector. There is also investment from the United States and other countries in Nigeria’s power, telecommunications, real est ate (commercial 
and residential), and agricultural sectors.  
 
Given the corruption risk associated with the Nigerian business environment, potential investors often develop anti -
bribery compliance programs. The United States and other parties to the OECD Anti -Bribery Convention aggressively 
enforce anti -bribery laws, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA). A high- profile FCPA case in 
Nigeria’s oil and gas sector resulted in 2010 U.S. Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) and U.S. Department of 
Justice rulings that included record fines for a U.S. multinational and its subsidiaries that had paid bribes to Nigerian 
officials. Since then, the SEC has charged an additional four international companies with bribing Nigerian government 
officials to obtain contracts, permits, and resolve customs disputes. See SEC enforcement actions at 
https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/fcpa/fcpa -cases.shtml . 
 
Security remains a concern to investors in Nigeria due to high rates of violent crime, kidnappings for ransom, and


---
*Page 93*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 89 OF 102 
 
 G 
terrorism. Seven bombings of high -profile targets with multiple deaths have occurred in the federal capital Abuja since 
October 2010, two of which – one at a bus station and one in a market – happened in 2014. Other bombings and 
assassinations have occurred in the cities of Kaduna, Maiduguri, Damaturu, Bauchi, Jos, Kano, and Suleja, the 
majority linked to Boko Haram. An amnesty program for mili tants in the Niger Delta region and rehabilitation and re-
integration training for ex -militants have led to a significant decline in militant violence and limited restoration of shut -
in oil and gas production. The longer -term impact of the government’s Del ta peace efforts, however, remains unclear 
and criminal activity in the Delta –  in particular, rampant oil theft -  remains a serious concern. Maritime criminality in 
Nigerian waters, including incidents of piracy and crew kidnap for ransom, has increased i n recent years and law 
enforcement efforts have been limited or ineffectual. Onshore, international inspectors have voiced concerns over the adequacy of security measures at some Nigerian port facilities.  
 
Freedom of expression and of the press remains bro adly observed, with the media often engaging in open, lively 
discussions of challenges facing Nigeria. Some journalists, however, occasionally practice self -censorship on sensitive 
issues.  
 
Uganda: See the following link for detailed information from the US Dept of State; excerpt from executive 
summary34 is below.  
Uganda offers investors numerous opportunities, given its youthful, English- speaking population, open markets, and 
abundant resources, Ugan da’s economy expanded six percent per year over the past decade, due to rapid growth in 
the energy, construction, infrastructure, telecommunications and financial services sectors. While Uganda maintains 
a liberal trade and foreign exchange regime, and lar gely adheres to IMF/World Bank programs to fight poverty, 
continuing reports of endemic corruption, financial mismanagement, and increasing political repression raise 
questions about the government ’s commitment to fostering an investor -friendly environment . National elections held 
on February 18, 2016 fell short of international standards, according to most international and domestic election observer missions. Projects managed by the Government of Uganda are hampered by a sluggish bureaucracy with 
a non- transparent decision- making process.  
 
Poor infrastructure, high energy and production costs, and a number of macro- economic challenges, most notably a 
large trade deficit, inflation, and high interest rates, dampened growth in 2015, but growth is expected to rebound to 
five percent in 2016, and 5.5 percent in 2017. With a trade deficit exceeding $2 billion, the Ugandan shilling remains 
under pressure. Uganda’ s Central Bank, the Bank of Uganda (BOU), is widely credited with pursuing sound 
monetary policy that helped arrest the shilling ’s rapid depreciation which totaled 30 percent in the first three quarters 
of 2015. The BOU targeted inflation, raising the central bank rate (CBR) to 17 percent in September 2015. The BOU 
recently dropped the CBR to 16 percent in  a sign that it believes inflation is under control at 6.2 percent, just above 
the BOU ’s target of five percent.  
 
Agriculture plays a dominant role in Uganda’ s economy, employing 72 percent of Uganda’ s workforce. In 2014 
agriculture contributed 24.7 percent of GDP. Uganda’ s top agriculture exports include: coffee, tea, tobacco and 
cotton. Uganda is Africa’ s largest exporter of coffee, producing about 3.8 million bags of coffee in 2014. Other 
significant agricultural exports include fish, flowers and horticu ltural produce. Agricultural inputs such as seeds, 
fertilizers, herbicides, and agricultural processing equipment remain in short supply for Ugandan farmers, impeding 
growth in the sector.  
 
Uganda’ s natural resources are plentiful, including significant oi l reserves -  an estimated 6.5 billion barrels, including 
1.4 billion which are recoverable. With only 40 percent of the oil -rich areas explored, additional discoveries could 
boost Uganda’ s oil reserves and the Ministry of Energy plans to award additional exploration licenses in 2016. In 
February 2015, the Ministry of Energy also provisionally awarded a multi -billion dollar contract to construct a refinery 
to Russian firm RT Global, subject to final negotiations. In spite of these developments, two of the three oil 
companies active in Uganda are downsizing their operations as delays in issuing production licenses mount. 
Moreover, details of an export pipeline from western Uganda to the Indian Ocean through Kenya or Tanzania are 
                                                             
34 US Dept of State 2016, Investment Climate Statements for 2016,  
https://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/othr/ics/investmentclimatestatements/index.htm#wrapper


---
*Page 94*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 90 OF 102 
 
 G 
still being negotiated. Based o n current projections, it is unlikely that any production could realistically begin before 
2020 at the earliest.  
 
Inadequate and unreliable power supply remains one of the largest obstacles to private sector investment, and 
Uganda’ s electricity network urgently needs renovation and expansion. Access to electricity countrywide is a meager 
20 percent and falls to 10 percent in rural areas. The Government formally broke ground on the 600- megawatt 
Karuma hydropower project in 2013, but the project continues to be dogged by delays, and the first 100 megawatt 
turbine is not expected to be operational until 2018 at the earliest. In the meantime, Uganda is working to expand its 
power supply by constructing a number of micro- hydro projects along the Nile River and is  promoting the 
development of other sources of renewable energy, such as off -grid solar power systems. The government 
continues to explore options to develop its geothermal reserves in western Uganda.  
 
High transportation costs are another constraint on Ug anda's economy. Uganda’ s dilapidated road and bridge 
infrastructure needs considerable investment, its railway system is in disrepair, and air freight charges are among 
the highest in the region A two- lane highway from Kenya remains the primary route for 80 percent of Uganda's 
imports, making transportation slow, costly and susceptible to disruption. Another problem is Uganda’ s reliance on 
imports from Kenya ’s Mombasa seaport. While Uganda and Kenya have worked to remove non- tariff barriers, 
resulting in quicker transit times, chronic congestion at Mombasa results in costly delays. Uganda also hopes to shift 
more cargo transit from trucking to rail but extensive and expensive rehabilitation of existing rail lines is required 
before freight trains can servi ce Uganda. In March 2015, the government signed a contract with China Harbor 
Engineering Company Ltd to build a USD 3.2 billion standard gauge railway project to improve rail infrastructure 
through the east -African region; it is projected for completion in December 2017. Passenger traffic through Uganda's 
Entebbe International Airport grew 7 percent in 2015. The government pulled privately -owned Air Uganda ’s license 
in 2014; however, the government is looking to revive another carrier as a public -private partnership.  
 
At 3.0 percent per year, Uganda's population growth rate is one of the fastest in the world, and its current total 
population of 34.9 million is expected to rise to 54 million by 2025. While creating potential markets for products, the 
country' s population growth is also increasing the strain on social services, underfunded schools and hospitals, 
infrastructure, forests, water, and land resources. The high level of HIV/AIDS infection in the country is also taxing 
social services. Uganda developed a model program to combat HIV/AIDS, and prevalence rates decreased from close to 20 percent in the 1990s to 6.4 percent in 2006. However, the current published national HIV/AIDS 
prevalence rate is 7.3 percent according to the 2011 AIDS Indicator Survey.  
 
The ARAF is expected to be formed in Ontario, Canada as the country has a well -developed regulatory framework 
and understanding of investment fund operations due the many funds that are already registered in the country.  
Canada also has tax treaties with several countries, which is beneficial to the ARAF and in turn investors in the 
ARAF, and a reasonable tax program governing distributions to investors.  We have familiarity with the jurisdiction 
through a prior fund formation project and access to credible service providers (e.g., legal, accounting, fund 
administration), and have found the jurisdiction to be administratively efficient, which keeps down costs and resourcing for the ARAF and its investors.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk categor y Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Exit and Valuation Risks  
● The ARAF will invest in companies in markets which have limited options for liquidity events / exits due to lack of developed financial 
markets, including lack of an abundance of 
private equity and venture capital firms  Financial  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium


---
*Page 95*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 91 OF 102 
 
 G 
● Many of the countries in which the ARAF 
seeks to invest control, to some extent, the 
repatriation of investment income, and capital 
and profit that result from foreign investment.   
● Accounting standards in the count ries in which 
the ARAF seeks to invest do not generally 
correspond to international accounting standards, and national accounting, auditing 
and financial reporting standards are not yet in 
place in many target countries Many portfolio 
investments will generate revenue that is 
denominated in foreign currency, and changes 
to exchange rates may affect the value of the 
ARAF’s investments in portfolio companies.  
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
In order to mitigate financial risks, ARAF expects to develop investment structures reflective of market conditions.  
For example, the ARAF expects to invest equity capital when appropriate, but will also look to invest in debt instruments and equity -like instruments that have a pre -determined liquidation date to help improve the likelihood of 
financial exits.  The ARAF also expects to capture ongoing upside through vehicles such as dividends and warrants to help offset the unpredictability of markets. The Investment Team of the ARAF expects to maintain ongoing 
relationships with potential strategic acquirers of portfolio companies and growth stage investment firms to help 
improve exit opportunities for ARAF’s investments. The ARAF will carefully monitor investments and utilize regional 
teams to stay abreast of changing markets and company conditions.  The ARAF will require its portfolio companies to 
have financial audits in order to improve transparency of financials and accounting systems.    
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring) .  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors . 
* Please expand this sub- section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 96*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level35 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate-
resilient sustainable 
development  Please elaborate on the paradigm shift objectives to which the project/programme contributes.  
 
Acumen strongly believes in the need to create a Paradigm Shift through our interventions that 
is much greater than the already significant impact we have on the individual enterprises we invest in and on the large groups of smallholders  that they serve. I n everything we do we aim to 
create genuine and sustainable Systems Change by testing and proving new commercial business models that place low -income consumers, in this case smallholder farmers, at their 
core and innovate to meet their needs. This means t hat our investee enterprises need to listen 
closely to the real needs of low income smallholders, as the success of their core business models depends on the success and loyalty of their smallholder customers/suppliers  
(safeguarded by our Lean Data model, see Section E1) .  
 
ARAF will be the world’s first climate change fund that is focused on agribusiness SMEs that 
serve BoP populations in Africa .  With partnership from the GCF, this Fund will demonstrate 
that agricultural value chains can be made climate r esilient by investing in smallholder farming, 
catalyzing millions of dollars in private capital in climate resilient agriculture in Africa . Africa 
presents a huge opportunity in agriculture given its underdeveloped nature, as new climate 
aligned developments can put the sector on the path of sustainable development without the 
need for unwinding existing developments and costs of unlearning.  
 
Acumen believes that to truly create a paradigm shift towards a business ecosystem that 
supports climate resilient A frican agriculture, we need a comprehensive approach rather than 
piecemeal solutions. Therefore, in addition to investing in agribusinesses that directly enable 
climate resilience for smallholders, we will in parallel invest in businesses that enable the s cale 
up of the resulting climate resilience benefits, as we strongly believe that these are key to the 
development of an enabling ecosystem for sustainable agriculture in the target countries (see 
our key learnings on scaling businesses in Section C1). We will safeguard ARAF’s climate-
focus through the addition of an individual on the ARAF Investment Committee who shall be 
responsible for the climate focus of ARAF’s investment strategy, and shall have a veto over 
investment decisions that are not reasonably  expected to contribute to the climate adaptation 
goals of the fund (see Section C7).  
 
In addition, through ARAF, Acumen will also look to invest in partnership with the public sector 
and global corporates. We have experience in this space and would levera ge that experience 
to build mutually beneficial partnership. This will further allow Acumen to leverage its learnings and experience in climate resilience to influence how the public sector and corporates 
approach challenges in agriculture.  
                                                             
35 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 97*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 
This influx o f private capital and alignment of public policy with climate resilience objectives  has 
the potential to uplift agricultural growth in these developing countries and pull millions of 
smallholder farmers out of poverty  in a environmentally sustainable way . This will allow 
Acumen to develop a strong track record in climate resilient agriculture and will enable Acumen 
to raise future, larger funds to invest in more companies that are aligned with the GCF’s impact 
goals.  
  
To understand the nuance of the paradigm shift, we will track a number of indicators at ARAF 
and Project/Programme levels using a combination of data from the company and customized 
Lean Data projects that we will do with them. We will also use this data to conduct analyses and distill i nsights at ARAF -level on a regular basis. Section H2 lays out the Lean Data plan for 
ARAF.  
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable 
people, communities 
and regions  ● Total number of direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries, 
disaggregated by gender   
● Number of people adopting a wider 
variety of livelihood 
strategies/coping mechanisms 
Percentage of 
beneficiaries relative 
to total population  
● Percentage of 
beneficiary households living below World Bank’s 
$3.1 line per person 
per day   
Company  
and Lean 
DataSM 
 
 
  
  
 
0 
 • 0.5M 
Direct 
beneficiari
es, 2 M 
indirect 
beneficiaries  • 10M 
individuals; 50% 
women 
• 2.1M 
Direct Beneficiaries, 7.9M
36 
Indirect Beneficia
ries 
• 3.9% of 
total population 
• 25-50% of HHs below 
$3.1 line  Investment 
impacts the 
family’s 
livelihood and 
hence every 
single family 
member  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the  
  
    These indicator s 
will be collected 
using Lean 
Data . It will 
                                                             
36 Based on weighted average family size of 4.8 people in ARAF countries


---
*Page 98*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 102 H 
most vulnerable 
people, communities 
and regions  Company 
and Lean Data
SM explore the 
individual constituents  of 
resilience and well-being such 
as access (to services and resources), 
reduced risk of 
losses 
(economic, 
health, lives, 
etc.) and 
enhanced production/prod
uctivity (in 
agriculture, 
livestock, and 
other economic activities)  
A2.0 Increased 
resilience of health 
and well -being, and 
food and water 
security  Increase in number 
of food secure 
households among 
the ARAF 
beneficiaries (in 
areas/periods at risk 
of climate change 
impacts)   Lean 
DataSM 0 0.3M 
households  1.25M 
household
s37 Quality of life is 
a good 
composite 
metric that 
measures 
monetary and 
non-monetary  
improvements 
37 Based on weighted average family size of 4.8 people in ARAF countries


---
*Page 99*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term (if 
applicabl
e)  Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A6.0 Increased 
generation and use of 
climate information in 
decision -making  • Increase in 
number of people 
using climate 
information 
products/services 
for decision-
making among 
ARAF 
beneficiaries   Company 
data  0 0.2M 
direct 
benefic
iaries  
0.6M  
indirect 
benefic
iaries  0.62M  direct 
beneficiaries  
2.37M  indirect 
beneficiaries  This indicator is 
qualitativ e 
and/or 
quantitative in 
nature  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  • Number  of 
farmers reporting 
increased 
adaptive capacity 
(or means to it 
e.g. reduced risk, 
more stable 
incomes)  Company 
data and 
Lean DataSM 0 0.5M 
Direct 
benefic
iaries  
2M 
indirect 
benefic
iaries  2.1M Direct 
Beneficiaries  
 7.9M Indirect 
Beneficiaries  
 Lean Data is in 
the process of 
crystalizing our 
approach to 
directly 
measuring 
adaptability to 
climate change. 
We wi ll have a 
better idea of 
targets a year 
into investing.  
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk -
reduction processes  • Number of  
people reporting 
increased 
awareness of 
climate threats 
and risk reduction 
processes among 
ARAF 
beneficiaries  Company 
data and  
Lean DataSM 
 0 0.4M 
Direct 
benefic
iaries  
1.4M 
indirect 
benefic
iaries  1.5M Direct 
Beneficiaries  
5.5M Indirect 
Beneficiaries  
 For instance, 
number of 
beneficiaries 
with improved 
access to 
information via 
technical 
assistance  
Project/ programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
Equity  
Increase in climate 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of ● Total number of 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by Company 
and Lean 
DataSM  
 0.5M 
Direct 
benefi
ciaries  • 10M 
individuals; 
50% women  
• 2.1M Direct 
Beneficiaries, *“Given the 
nature of the 
investments, 
output could not


---
*Page 100*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 102 H 
38 Based on weighted average family size of 4.8 people in ARAF countries  smallholder farmers in 
ARAF countries*  gender 
N.A.  2M 
indirec
t 
benefi
ciaries 7.9M38 
Indirect 
Beneficiaries  
• 1% of total
population
25-50% of HHs 
below $3.1 line  be defined 
based on log-
frame theory 
approach. 
Nonetheless, 
once the 
investment will 
be delivered, 
ACUMEN will 
track the 
number of 
farmers 
reached by 
each 
beneficiary 
company. We 
will also track 
selec t social 
performance 
metrics for the 
companies and 
do cross -
portfolio 
comparisons 
using Lean 
Data. Examples 
of these metrics 
are mentioned 
in section E1”  
Technical  assistance  
Increase in access to 
financial services for 
women Women reached 
with formal financial 
services in the target population 
 Company 
and Lean 
DataSM 0 • 25% more
women than
the national /
regional
average
Increase in mobile adoption and use of 
digital services by 
women Women adopt 
mobile phones and 
use digital services 
in the target 
population  Company 
and Lean 
DataSM 0 • 25% more
women than
the national /
regional
average
Increase in participation by women in agricultural 
extension programs  Women participating 
in agricultural 
extension programs 
in the target Company 
and Lean 
DataSM 0 • 20% more
women than
the national /
regional
average


---
*Page 101*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
population  
     •   
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Equity  
Pipeline development 
and Investing  Acumen, through ARAF, will invest 
in 18 -20 agribusinesses that are 
contributing in increasing the climate resilience of smallholder 
farmers. Each investment will have 
the following stages:  
• Pipeline development and initial 
screening  
• Due diligence  
• Deal approval and legal documentation  
• Execution    
Post Investment Management  This will involve:  
• Reviews to ensure targets are met 
• Post-investment support to 
understand and improve social 
performance through lean data 
and TA    
Exit This will involve:  
• Negotiations to close exit 
transactions  
• Legal documentation for exit  
• Receipt of proceeds from exit  
   
Technical Assistance  
Funding for climate adaptation interventions including gender specific 
initiatives  • Support training and extension 
services to enable small holder farmers to adopt climate 
resilient inputs and practices  
• Support diversification of income streams for a business  
• Shifting a business and its smallholder suppliers/customers 
to value chains that are better 
aligned with a changing climate 
environment  
• Gender initiatives  that enhance 
the uptake of digital services by 
women, improve their access to


---
*Page 102*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 
  financial services and enhance 
their participation in agriculture 
extension programs.  
 
Business Development Services (BDS) and 
Management / Employee 
Training  • Deliver interventions to address 
the most common technical barriers to scale  
• Leadership Development   
• CEO Summit Events   
• Capacity Building Summits  
   
Lean Data Support to understand and augment 
the impact of portfolio 
companies  Activities will include analyzing 
need for TA support to undertake 
Lean Data exercise to capture farmer feedback. After due analysis 
a TA project plan will be prepared 
and approved and therefore 
implemented.  
Both the investee company and 
smallholder farmers will be direct 
beneficiaries. LD will allow farmers 
to share feedback on products and 
services being offered and in turn 
allow the investee company to tailor 
its services more closely to the 
needs for the farmers and make 
their interventions more impact ful.   
Other (TA Audit Fees / Legal Fees / ESG 
reporting, etc.)  Activities will include appointing auditors to audit use of TA funds, or 
legal fees related to transaction or 
ESG reporting costs.  
Direct beneficiary will be ARAF and 
the investee company.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid- term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.  
 
Reporting schedule for GCF  
 The following outlines the reporting schedule that ARAF will follow for GCF:  
 
• Fund bi-annual  and annual reporting  
• Mid project evaluation (Yr 6 ) 
• Final evaluation (after completion)  
 
LEAN DATA: POST -INVESTMENT SUPPORT TO UNDERSTAND AND IMPROVE SOCIAL PERFORMANCE  
 Section E1 goes into detail about Acumen approach to understanding social performance of our companies and 
portfolios, Lean Data. Since the inception of Lean Data in 2014, we have successfully completed over 80 projects and 
surveyed over 35,000 low income customers of companies in the Acumen portfolio and the portfolios of other leading 
actors in the impact investing space like Omidyar Network and DFID Impact Fund managed by CDC.  
 
The Lean Data team has seven members, who are based in different Acumen geographies and provide dedicated 
support to our local portfolio teams in- country. Lean Data and Portfolio teams work along- side each other starting from 
the diligence process and all the way through to the exit stage of investments. Once Acumen’s investment in finalized, the Lean Data team starts working closely with the leadership and staff at the investee company to ensure that our data 
collection is suitably customized to the compan y’s needs. Our priority is to collect data that not only help us understand 
the social performance of our companies but also helps them make more informed decisions to serve their customers 
even better.  
 
To collect data in the most cost -effective way whil e ensuring quality, we have recruited and trained research teams and 
established partnerships with technology providers in each of our geographies. While most of our data collection 
happens over the phone, we have used a number of technologies to collect data in the past including SMS, IVR and 
tablets, to name a few. Good data collection often needs a combination of methods and we continue to pilot ways of 
combining different approaches.  
 
Our suggested plan for Lean Data with companies under ARAF is in the next subsection. We will work closely with GCF 
to fine- tune this.  
 Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project/programme.  
 
Acumen typically takes a board seat/ observer seat in its investee companies, and this will hold true for ARAF as well. 
This seat provides ARAF representative with access to company’s key information and enables them to contribute to high level strategic decision making to ensure alignment with fund objectives which in the case of ARAF will be focused on climate adaptation.


---
*Page 104*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
There will be a Relationship Manager from ARAF team for each of our investments who will actively engage with the 
senior management and board of the investee and ensure that their business strategy remains aligned to our climate 
adaptation objectives.  
 
An Annual Review of all investee companies will be conducted where progress against their budgeted financial as well 
as impact targets will be assessed. Based on this review, there will be a discussion on next year objectives and targets 
and a formal plan will be agreed with the company’s management for achieving them.  
 
To track that ARAF is achieving its climate adaptation objectives, A RAF team  will work with each investee company 
and our Lean Data team to develop and track a number of proprietary indicators to measure progress at ARA F and 
Project/Programme levels. We will initiate various Lean Data projects over the course of the fund’s  life to evaluate 
improvements in climate resilience among farmers, including improved income levels, income stability, access to 
climate information systems and other metrics. We will consolidate data for analyses and form insights at ARAF -level 
on a regu lar basis. This will help us track progress against ARAF objectives and will enable us to provide timely 
feedback to investee companies where realignment in their business strategy is required.   
 
We will also track  standard financial metrics, social performance, ESG metrics, competitive positioning and ongoing 
market trends in the industries and geographies in which ARAF’s portfolio companies operate, in each case as reported 
and audited by portfolio companies.   
 
With respect to financial reporting, Acumen will pay particular attention to top and bottom line trends, cash balance, 
cash flow requirements as well as any other significant changes in financial performance and health.  Acumen will also 
monitor operational metrics and ongoing working capital needs.  With respect to social performance tracking, Acumen 
will monitor metrics which are agreed upon with each portfolio company’s management at the time of initial investment.  
These typically include units sold as a proxy for Lives Impacted as well as other important social data points that are 
gathered as part of ongoing operations.  
 
Acumen will actively monitor ESG matters in portfolio companies from point of investment onwards.  This will typically 
include 1) monitoring ESG risk areas, 2) assessing progress made on the ESG Action Plan, and 3) evaluating any changes in the business, which might create additional ESG risks.  The Portfolio Manager is expected to report all serious ESG issues (such as labor or manufacturing accidents) to Acumen.  Additionally, Portfolio Managers and the 
Managing Director, with the support of Acumen’s investor relations professionals, will update the investors on ESG 
progress, risks and other pertinent ESG updates as part of the Annual Review process (described below).  
 
To monitor ongoing market trends, Acumen will typically inquire about key hires and departures, strategic priorities and 
any ongoing regulatory and legal processes.  In some cases, ARAF’s investments will be structured in tranches, with 
specific requirements  for additional disbursements.  In these scenarios, Acumen will monitor progress against 
established milestones in order to anticipate future disbursements.  
 
Specific documents, systems and processes used to carry out the above monitoring include:  
 
a) 100-Day Plan 
 Portfolio Managers for Fund investments plan to develop a “100- Day Plan” at the time of an investment in collaboration 
with the management of the relevant portfolio company.  This document identifies the key near -term action items the


---
*Page 105*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 102 
 
 
 H 
 company has co mmitted to completing, as well as the challenges the company may face and the actions that can be 
taken to mitigate those challenges.  The 100- Day Plan will typically target three to four key priorities that can each be 
broken down to two to three specific  tasks with clear timeframes and lines of responsibility.  Examples of areas that the 
100-Day Plan may focus on include corporate governance, management capacity building, sales and marketing, and 
operations and information management.  The Portfolio Manag er will monitor the progress of the action items included 
in the 100- Day Plan, typically through monthly reports from the portfolio company along with general communication 
with its management.  
 
b) Performance Management and Metrics  
 
i. eFront FrontInvest  
 
The Manager intends to utilize eFront’s FrontInvest product, a leading portfolio management platform for private equity 
and venture capital firms.  This platform will be used to house all data related to pipeline tracking, deal execution and 
management, and por tfolio level analysis and valuation.  The platform is expected to be used to produce regular 
reports, including on portfolio company operations and impact.   
 
c) Annual Review Process  
 The annual review process is a culmination of the monthly and quarterly reviews that occur throughout the year.  The 
purpose of the annual review is to assess the performance of ARAF’s portfolio companies on financial, operational and social and environmental impact metrics; to identify those portfolio companies that are facing significant challenges as 
well as those that have seen superior performance; to foster detailed discussion and thought amongst the Investment 
Team members and the IC as to how best t o support the portfolio companies going forward; and ultimately to inform 
strategic decisions related to the overall portfolio strategy.   
 
The annual review document is supplemented by a Post -Investment Management Plan (“Post Plan”) that outlines an 
engagement strategy with respect to each investment.  The Post Plan is developed along the same timeline as the 
annual review document and is discussed in the same forum.  The Post Plan identifies key post -investment 
management priorities and outlines quarterly  deliverables for each.  The annual review documents will also include an 
update report on ESG matters.  
 
In conjunction with the above- described annual review, the Investment Director will conduct a review of ARAF’s 
underlying portfolio investments and mak e any adjustments deemed necessary to the valuation of each of the 
investments, including write -downs of any impaired investments.  Acumen will also host an annual investor conference 
for the investors.


---
*Page 106*
---

ANN
EXES 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 102 OF 102 I
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents.  
This Funding Proposal does not constitute an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to purchase any 
security of the ARAF. Any such offer or solicitation will only be made pursuant to the final Confidential 
Private Placement Memorandum issued with respect to the ARAF, which qualifies in its entirety the information set forth herein and which should be read carefully prior to any investment in the ARAF for a 
description of the terms, merits and risks of such an investment.  I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  (To be provided within 30 days after the submission of the Funding Proposal)  
- Annex 1A Letter of No -objection (Uganda)   
- Annex 1B Letter of No -objection (Nigeria)  
- Annex 1C Letter of No -objection (Ghana)  
☐ Feasibility Study  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable) 
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (If applicable)  
-      
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
(If applicable)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation Report  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
☐ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation  
-


---
*Page 110*
---

GCF/B.19/22/Add.20
Page 106 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Acumen Resilient Agriculture Fund (ARAF)  
Accredited entity  Acumen Fund, Inc.  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 3 (I3)  
Note: Environmental and social report disclosure not required for 
Category C and Intermediation 3 projects and programmes.  
Environmental and  social report disclosure information  
Description of 
report/disclosure  N/A  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  
Other link(s)  
_
_______