=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Rudo Matsheza
/CreationDate: D:20180126182201+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/ModDate: D:20180206104700+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
27 February – 1 March 2018  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 15  GCF/B.19/22/Add.18  
6 February 2018  
Consideration o f funding 
proposals – Addendum 
XVIII  
Funding proposal package for FP07 6 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ Climate -friendly Agribusiness Value
Chains Sector Project”;
b)No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);  and
c)Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

Project/Programme Title:  Climate -friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project  
Country/Region:  Cambodia  
Accredited Entity:  Asian Development Bank (ADB)  
Date of Submission:  June 2017


---
*Page 3*
---

Contents  
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
Section I ANNEX ES 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
•Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can eith er directly incorporate information into this
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents
such  as project appraisal document.
•The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 4*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 80 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Climate -Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion    Kingdom of Cambodia  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Ministry of Environment  
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  Asian Development Bank 
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒    International
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity  (EE): Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
(MAFF) , Cambodia ; Implementing entities include MAFF, Ministry of 
Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRAM), and Ministry of Rural 
Development (MRD). For signing the loan and grant agreements, the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will be the EE to represent the 
government of Cambodia.  Beneficiaries include households, farmer 
water user communities, private sector and staff of financing institutions.  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total 
investment, million USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)
☒   Medium (50<x≤250) ☐  Small (10<x≤50) 
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation    ☒   Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  5 June 2017  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Dr. Srinivasan  Ancha, Principal Climate Change Specialist  
Organization  Asian Development Bank  
Email address  asrinivasan@adb.org  
Telephone number  +63-2-632-4786  
Mailing  address  6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City, Metro Manila 1550 Philippines  
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)
Reduced emissions from:  
☐Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐Low emission transport 
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)  
☐Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply 
chain management, etc.)  
☒Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and 
management, etc.)  
Increased resilience of:  
☒Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and 
supply chain management, relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems , etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☐
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary


---
*Page 5*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 80 
 A 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives  and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
• The project aims to reduce climate change vulnerability and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of four agricultural 
value chains in Cambodia, enhance resilience and productivity of target crops , and increase agricultural 
competitiveness and household incomes in th e project areas.  The project will operate in four vulnerable provinces , 
which have a history of agricultural losses due to extreme climate events and  where main transport corridors are 
already available to link production to markets, namely  Kampong Cham an d Tbong Khmum provinces along the 
Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) southern corrid or, and Kampot and Takeo provinces  along the south -coastal 
corridor  (please refer to map in Annex 8) . The project aims  to enhance  infrastructure resilience to climate change 
and “last mile” connectivity, enabling transformation  of transport corridors into economic corridors.  
• The GCF resources , along  with the Asian Development Bank ( ADB) and the government funds , will be used to  invest 
in (i) climate  smart agribusiness value chain infrastructure , (ii) capacity strengthening in climate friendly agriculture, 
and (iii) enabling environment for  sound agribusiness policy. The project will improve climate resilience at each stage 
of the value chain1 by investing in critical  infrastructure2, and support  intensification of production and 
commercialization of rice, maize, cassava and mango  in a changing climate . The project will create  an enabling policy 
environment that addresses climate risks  to promote long -term sustainability and enhance profitability for farmers 
and agribusiness enterprises.   
• The primary measurable benefits , corresponding to the GCF’s six investment criteria,  are as follows :  
a. First, t he project will reduce GHG emissions by  at least  240,000  tons of CO 2 equivalent by 2024, through  
promotion of renewable energy and  introduction of biodigesters , while increasing household  incomes for 390,000 
direct beneficiaries . An a dditional 3.25 million  tons of CO 2 equivalent will be reduc ed from implementation of 
climate smart  agricultur e (CSA)  practices such as  reduced tillage, laser land levelling, water, nutrient and 
pesticide management , and restoration of soil cover  in agricultural landscapes.   
b. Second, the project will contribute to a transformative impact through: (i) introduction of policies and standards 
for the creation of an enabling investment environment in climate -smart agribusiness es; (ii) an increase in 
institutional capacity  to support climate -resilient agriculture and maintain climate -proof infrastructure; (iii) the 
deployment of  technologies promoting CSA and information and communication technologies ( ICTs ); and (iv) 
changes in behaviour of stakeholders regarding  potential benefits of private and public partnership s (PPPs) .   
c. Third, the project will create economic, social and environmental co -benefits, such as a  15% increase in yield s; 
improving water use efficiency (by 5 -10%) and energy savings (~20%) of at least 50 agribusiness units as well 
as a 10% reduction in post -harvest losses; investing in climate -proof infrastructure to provide more sustainable 
access to markets; installing  12,000 biodigesters  and 6 ,000 compost huts  to improve  household air qua lity and 
benefiting productivity wh ile reducing GHG emissions from fuel -wood  and avoiding methane release to the 
atmosphere from stored manure ; building capacity of men and women on the use of climate information services  
and CSA practices along the whole value chain . 
• This project targets the needs of  the most vulnerable population s, including those residing in flood prone or drought -
prone  areas, women  (at least 150,000)  and rural communities .  The project targets the agricultural sector, which has 
suffered extensive  losses in terms of crops and infrastructure during previous  extreme climate events.  
• The project is fully aligned with the country’s national priorities in climate change adaptation and mitigation and will  
build on best practices and lessons learned within the country  and the  GMS . The project is economically viable with 
economic internal rates of returns (EIRRs) of at least  14% for various subprojects .  
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if applicable)  31/05/2018 
Expected financial close (if applicable)  30/12/2024  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 1 July 2018                End: 30 June  2024  
Project lifespan  6 years   
                                                             
1 The value chain stages include : input supply, production, post -harvest, processing, transportation, marketing and trade, and consumption.  
2 Critical infrastructure includes irrigation infrastructure (tertiary canals and water retention ponds), production  infrastructure (testing, processing 
and transformation), energy infrastructure (renewable), post -harvest (storage facilities), and roads (rural and feeder roads) – along with their 
related management systems .


---
*Page 6*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 80 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
A detailed financial model and sensitivity analysis, including key assumptions, is included in Annex 3.  The selected 
financial instruments (a mix of concessional loans and grants) h ave been determined to constitute the best possible 
mechanisms by which to channel significant investment into much needed infrastructure rehabilitation, while leveraging 
private sector participation through the creation of an enabling e nvironment.   
Output  Activity  Amount 
(for entire 
project)  
(rounded)  Currency Amount 
(for 
entire 
project)  Local 
currency  
(KHR)  GCF 
funding 
amount  Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient  
Output 1:  
Critical 
agribusiness 
value chain 
infrastructure 
improved and  
made climate 
resilient  Activity  1.1 Rehabilitating 
water management 
infrastructure to climate 
resilient condition  44,145  thousand 
USD   NA NA 9,884  USD  
Activity  1.2 Upgrading 
agricultural cooperative 
value chain infrastructure  9,612  thousand 
USD   NA NA 0 USD  
Activity  1.3 Improving 
connectivity to 
cooperatives and markets 
through climate resilient 
farm road networks   38,290  thousand 
USD   NA NA 8,294  USD  
Activity  1.4 Strengthening 
infrastructure for 
agricultural quality and 
safety testing  5,158  thousand 
USD   NA NA 0 USD  
Activity  1.5 Promoting 
renewable energy for 
value chain improvement  13,594  thousand 
USD   NA NA 4,878  USD  
Output 2: 
Climate 
smart 
agriculture 
and 
agribusiness 
promoted  Activity  2.1 Deploying 
climate resilient varieties  3,876  thousand 
USD   NA NA 2,785 USD  
Activity  2.2 Strengthening 
capacity in climate 
friendly production 
practices and 
technologies  9,280  thousand 
USD   NA NA 7,090  USD  
Activity  2.3 Promoting 
farm mechanization and 
extension  692 thousand 
USD   NA NA 0 USD  
Output 3: 
Enabling 
environment 
for climate 
friendly  
agribusiness 
enhanced  Activity  3.1 Formulating 
climate friendly 
agribusiness policies and 
standards  1,203  thousand 
USD   NA NA 722 USD  
Activity  3.2 Promoting 
green finance and risk 
sharing mechanisms  2,094 thousand 
USD   NA NA 1,444  USD  
Activity  3.3 Supporting 
climate risk management 
through information and 
communication 
technologies (ICT)  4,055 thousand 
USD   NA NA 3,524  USD  
Project 
management Project Management  7,239  thousand 
USD   NA NA 1,343  USD


---
*Page 7*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 80 
 B 
 Financing charges  2,149 thousand 
USD   NA NA 36 USD  
Total project 
financing     141,390 thousand 
USD   NA NA 40,000  USD  
A detailed  breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type  and disbursement schedule is included in the Annex 5.   
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  141,390,000 USD   
(b) GCF 
financing  to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable grants  
(vi) Grants  
     10,000 ,000 
………………  
………………  
………………  
………………  
     30,000 ,000 USD  
 
 
 
 
USD  (32)  years  
 
 
 
 (0.25) %  
 
 
 
Cambodia is a least developed country (LDC) as per UN classification and remains highly dependent on 
concessional funds for public investments in infrastructure and human capital. Up to 80 percent of the 
country’s population live in rural areas, and about 75 percent remain below or marginally above the 
poverty line (US$1.25 per  person per day), leaving them vulnerable to economic, social and 
environmental shocks. Even the smallest shock can send this population group back into poverty. 
Borrowing by the government is limited to activities designed to leverage significant economic  growth, or 
to long -term investment in infrastructure needed for economic growth.  
Cambodia is highly vulnerable to both climate variability and climate change because of its low capacity 
to adapt and its heavy reliance on climate -sensitive sectors such as water resources and agriculture. 
Livelihood activities and economic sectors depend ent on these resources have traditionally been highly 
sensitive due to the country’s unique geographic conditions and hydrological system. In countries such 
as Cambodia, where infrastructure standards are weak, the average costs of addressing climate 
resilience in rural infrastructure are estimated to be between 20 and 30% of base costs. Additional 
resources from GCF are , therefore, required at the best available levels of concessionality to harness  full 
resilience and GHG mitigation  benefits  in the targete d value chains. The proposed use of GCF funds is 
highlighted at the end of the description of each activity.   
The project financing plan has been designed to direct ADB loan proceeds for those activities that are 
expected to generate income, more rapidly and more directly; whereas GCF Loan proceeds are for 
activities that involve some risk and some income generation, but for which immediate results may not 
be visible. The GCF loan is used  for only two out of 11 project activities. They are “rehabilitating water 
management infrastructure to climate resilient condition ” and “Improving connectivity to cooperatives and 
markets through climate resilient farm road networks ”. 
The GCF  grant procee ds are targeted  mainly  towards activities that (i) deliver resilience outputs (e.g. 
climate resilient crop varieties, climate friendly agricultural  production technologies and practices, ICT 
services to support climate risk management , etc.) that have the potential to be scaled up and scaled 
out; (ii) promote renewable energy use  (bioenergy and solar energy ) to reduce the carbon footprint of 
the value chain ; (iii) address key barriers for enhancing adaptive capacity  of vulnerable populations and 
ecosystems ; and (iv) strengthen technical capacity  of institutions , farmer  group s and other stakeholders 
on climate friendly agriculture , agribusiness and farm mechanization .  
The GCF grant proceeds will be separated from the lending lines. ADB will have three separate 
agreements with the government, with three separate accounts for ADB loan, GCF loan and GCF grant


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 80 
 B 
with separate disbursement streams.  ADB loan, GCF loan and GCF grants are disbursed simultaneously 
depending on the time of implementation of activit ies.  
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)         40,000  USD  
 Options   
 
(c) Co -
financing  to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Loan  
In-kind 
In-Kind 
 90,000,000  
  7,612,000 
  3,778,000 
 Thousand 
USD  
USD  
USD  
 ADB* 
Government * 
Beneficiaries  
 32 years  
 1-1.5%**   
  senior  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: Asian Development Bank  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing 
institution.  An extract from the approved Country Operations and Business Plan is attached  as Annex 4 . 
**The ADB loan will have a 32 -year term, including a grace period of 8 years; an interest rate of 1.0% 
per year during the grace peri od and 1.5% per year thereafter.  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE  
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE)  deploys the GCF financing  directly  to the recipient , (i.e. the 
GCF financing passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE)  or if the AE is the recipient 
itself, in the proposed financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be 
skipped.  
Not applicable  
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE , which entails a financial instrument 
and/or financial terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to 
specify the proposed instrument and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
Choose an item.  ………………….  Options  (  )  years  (   ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and /or terms between what is 
provided by the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
Not applicable  
B.3. Financial Market s Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was  (non-concessional) determined? Not applicable  
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which 
could be tapped to finance the proposed project/programme .          Not applicable  
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1 -year T-Bill, 5 -year government bond, 5 -year corporate bond (specify 
credit rat ing) and 5 -year syndicate loan.                                           Not applicable   
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.         Not applicable


---
*Page 9*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 80 
 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
Cambodia is an agrarian country , with its econom ic growth largely reliant on the agricultural sector.  Over 80% of the 
population lives in rura l areas and most of them depend on rainfed agriculture for living .  Climate variability, especially  
water availability due to  erratic precipitation patterns, has  posed constraints to agricultural productivity, and these impacts 
are expected to significantly increase due to projected climate change .3  The latest National Water Status Report of 
MOWRAM confirms that the frequency and intensity of floods, droughts and windstorms has increased since 1989, when 
national weather and climate data began to be reliably recorded (MOWRAM 2014). Observed impacts of  climate change 
trends in recent years have manifested by more intense rains over shorter periods leading to floods, delayed onset of the 
rainy season (preventing any early wet season crops), longer dry seasons and more intense El Niño related droughts, 
and unexpected dry periods during the rainy season, untimely rains spoiling ready to harvest or drying crops, such as 
rice and maize.4 Key historical trends include:  
• Mean annual temperature has increased by 0.8  ̊C since 19605. The frequency of hot days6 and hot nights has 
increased significantly since 1960 in every season and the average number of ‘hot’ days per year has increased by 
467 since 1960.  Conversely, the average number of ‘cold ‘days per year has decreased by 19 (5.2% of days) since 
1960, and  the number of ‘cold’ nights per year has decreased by 46.  
• Mean annual rainfall does not show consistent increase or decrease since 1960  (an estimated 0.2% decrease per 
year)8. From 1960, the proportion of rainfall that falls in heavy events has increased at a rate of 0.67% per decade .  
• The frequency of extreme weather  events (floods and droughts) has increased since 1987, with 9 recorded events 
between 1987 and 1999, and 19 events since 20009. Also, the number of provinces affected by each event  has been 
increasing. For example, the 2011 flood affected 4 provinces, but the 2013 flood affected 20 provinces. Likewise, 
drought in 2004 affected 5 provinces but the 2016 drought affected all 25 provinces of the country.  
Recent climate vulnerability ass essments show that “Cambodia will experience changes in temperature and rainfall 
patterns by 2050 with significant ramifications for communities and ecosystems .10 Mean annual temperature is projected 
to increase by 0.4˚C to 1.3˚C by the 2030s, 0.7˚C to 2.7˚C by the 2060s, and 1.4˚C to 4.3˚C by the 2090s. Frequency of 
“hot days” is annually projected to occur on 14 -49% of days by the 2060s, and 20 -68% of days by the 2090s, marking a 
substantia l increase in the frequency of hot days from the baseline of 12.2% of days in 1970 -1999. Rainfall is projected 
to increase, particularly during wet seasons, offset by a decrease of rain in the dry seasons. Rainfall projections from 
different models have be en consistent in showing increases in rainfall, particularly increases in wet season rainfall from 
June to August ( -11 to 31% by 2090) and September to November ( -8 to +42% by 2090), but will be partially offset by 
projected decreases in December to Februa ry (‐54 to +36%).  
High risks of floods and drought, combined with poverty and low adaptive capacity, make Cambodia one of the most 
vulnerable countries in the world.11 The agriculture sector, particularly cropping, is already highly sensitive to climate 
variability: for example, an increase in temperature of 1°C might result in 10% decline in rice production and increase in 
pests, making rice farming not viable for many farmers, leaving them with fewer options and less income.  Although 
Cambodia is considered a “water rich” country with a renewable water resource amounting to 32,695 m3/person/year, 
only 15% of the cultivated rice area in Cambodia is irrigated, in comparis on to 28% in Thailand and 33% in Viet Nam. It 
                                                             
3  GSNCSD 2015. Cambodia’s Second National Com munication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. General 
Secretariat, National Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom Penh.  
4  IFAD, Cambodia: Environment and Climate Change Asses sment, 2013.  
5  UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles.  C. McSweeney, M. New, G. Lizcano  et al., (2010). The UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles: 
improving the accessibility of observed and projected climate information for studies of climate change in developing countri es. Bulletin of 
the American Meteorological Society, 91, 157 –166. 
6  Idem. UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles. ‘Hot’ day or ‘hot’ night is defined by the temperature exceeded on 10% of days or nights in 
current climate of that region and season.  
7  Idem. UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles. The increase in frequency over th e 43‐year period between 1960 and 2003 is estimated 
based on the decadal trend quoted in the summary table. 
8  T. Heng Chan, 2015. Observed and projected changes in temperature and rainfall in Cambodia.  
9  Source: EM -DAT: The Emergency Events Database - Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) - CRED, www.emdat.be . 
10  See USAID, Mekong Climate Change Impact and Adaptation Study for Lower Mekong Basin, November 2013, Bangkok, Thailand 
http://www.mekongarcc.net/sites/default/files/cambodia_june2014 -press -small_0.pdf , Agricultural development and Climate Change: The case of 
Cambodia, CDRI Worki ng Paper 65, Phnom Penh 2011; Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 -2023, National Climate Change 
Committee, Phnom Penh 2013; Climate Change: Vulnerability and Impact Assessment, SNV, Phnom Penh 2014;  See also World Bank, 2011, 
Vulnerability Risk R eduction and Adaptation to Climate Change in Cambodia, available here 
http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportalb/doc/GFD RRCountryProfiles/wb_gfdrr_climate_change_country_profile_for_KHM.pdf  ; Cambodia 
Agriculture in Transition: Risks and Opportunities, World Bank Economic and Sector Work, Report No. 96308 -KH, Washington 2015  
11  Cambodia is ranked 8th most vulnerable on the Maple Croft Climate Change Vulnerability Index 2015.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 80 
 C 
is among the Southeast Asia countries with the least share of irrigated versus rain -fed agriculture, which makes 85% of 
rice cropping area in Cambodia fully exposed to changing rainfall patterns.   
Cambodia’s ec onomy grew consistently during the past 10 years due to improved macroeconomic stability and public 
financial  management reforms. Gross domestic product (GDP) grew at annual rates of about 7.0% , reaching $18.05 
billion in 2015.12  The n ational poverty rate was reduced from 50.2% in 2002 to 17.7% in 2012 but 40% of the population 
remains  vulnerable.13 The agriculture sector accounted for 29% of GDP in 2014, with crop production contributing 59.4% 
of the sector’s GDP.  The gross value addition for  agriculture increased from KR5, 596 billion in 2004 to KR9,087 billion 
in 2013.  However, overall agricultural sector growth slowed from 5.4% in 2009 to 0.24% in 2015 respectively,14 mainly 
due to extreme weather events  such as floods and droughts . Low and d ecreasing yield,  combined with high levels of 
post-harvest losses affect Cambodia n producers’  ability to set competitive pricing for agriculture commodities in regional 
and global markets.  
Cambodia’s agricultura l value chains , besides being highly vulnerable to impacts of climate change,  are not yet well 
developed in comparison with neighboring countries such as Thailand and Viet Nam, and with respect to domestic as 
well as export markets  due to  critical  infrastructure  gaps and a range of  capacity  and policy constraints. Production  and 
distribution costs are high , largely due to high energy and transport costs, and profits are hampered by high rates of post-
harvest losses (~15 –20%). A lthough o ver 60% of inhabitants are engaged in farming, with women accounting for 70%, 
agriculture sector investments have not yet translated in to sufficient local benefits . Farming remains mostly subsistence -
based  and rain -fed, with low productivity . In addition , labor shortage in rural areas has increased due to migrati on to 
urban areas, which in turn led to rise in agricultural wages by 206% between 2005 and 2013. Private sector investment 
remain s low due to an unfavorable agri-business environment. Stringent quality and food safety standards are 
constraining Cambodian farmers ’ acces s to competitive markets , while a lack of access to effective processing technology 
leads to low levels of value addition for Cambodia commodities . Consequently , despite  strong market demand, value 
chains in Cambodia remain fragmented, leading to sub -optimal efficiency with poor geographic reach, and low 
transmission of retail prices to the producer.   
Opportunities.  Recognizing these challenges, the government’s agriculture sector strategic de velopment plan (2014 -
2018) aims to enhance competitiveness of the agriculture sector through improvements in productivity (intensification), 
diversification and commercialization. Measures include (i) expansion of extension services, improvement of seed qu ality 
to respond to markets, and better post -harvest technology; (ii) creation of enabling environment for the private sector and 
adoption of Good Agricultural Practices; (iii) strengthening of policies for increasing agricultural business and export and 
improving product quality and standards (e.g. sustainable rice platform); (iv) strengthening of analysis capacity for the 
National Agricultural Laboratory  (NAL) ; (v) rehabilitation of infrastructure of state farms and agricultural development 
centers; (vi) implementation of the strategy and action plan for climate change adaptation and mitigation; and (vii) 
promotion of private investment in agriculture through public -private partnerships. The government also aims to promote 
biogas and bioenergy consumption ,15 a priority in Cambodia ’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).16  
The government is fully committed to be coming an integral part of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) for the free 
market of goods, services and skilled labor , with expectation that there will be a borderless ASEAN community  by 2030 .  
Improved regional integration has resulted in increased investments in transport connectivity and trade facilitation. To 
reap the benefits of expanded markets, it is imperative for Cambodia to strengthen  its agricultural competitiveness.  
Investing in climate smart and sustainable infrastructure , strengthening  the policy environment and addressing capacity 
gaps at all levels is vital to ensuring the continued viability and competitiveness of the agricultur e sector . For example, 
intensified crop production through  adoption of climate smart agriculture practices and climate resilient varieties, improved 
production and post -harvest infrastructure , and access to markets will enhance food security and poverty al leviation, 
reduce post -harvest losses substantially and help farmers to better cope with climate change  while also reducing GHG 
emissions . Likewise, integration of bioenergy and other renewable energy options can enhance the overall 
competitiveness of valu e chains through reduced energy costs  while reducing emissions . Similarly, farm mechanization 
combined with agribusiness operational and management skills, especially through agricultural cooperatives, can help in 
addressing labor shortage. Farm cooperativ es also provide a mechanism to encourage farmers to work together to 
enhance their bargaining power, product trading, and farming incomes.  
                                                             
12   Food and Agriculture Organization. 2015. Cambodia Socio -economic Survey 2015 ), Phnom Penh.  
13  World Bank. 2015. Cambodia Agriculture in  Transition: Opportunities and Risks,  Washington DC.   
14  National Institute of Statistics. 2016. Phnom Penh.  
15 Royal Government of Cambodia , 2014. Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (2014 – 2023 ), Phnom Penh . 
16 Royal Government of Cambodia , 2015 . Cambodia’s Intended National Determined Contribution , Phnom Penh .


---
*Page 11*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 80 
 C 
With GCF  support, Cambodian agriculture and agribusinesses can become more climate resilient with a lower carbon 
footprint and realize comparative and competitive advantages for economies of scale and continuity of supply to break 
into new markets and achieve import substitution , while ensuring the sector competitiveness  in a changing climate . The 
support from GCF compl ements key objectives of the government’s agriculture sector strategic development plan and 
the Industrial Development Policy.  
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
This project is part of an overall program designed to reduce climate change vulnerability and GHG emissions of 
agricultural value chains, thereby increas ing the productivity and competitiveness of the agri culture sector in three low 
income  countries (Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar)  of the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) .  Each project will work 
in areas connected by the GMS  transport corridor, and is designed to achieve the objective of enhanced climate resilience  
while also contributing to reducing the carbon  footprint of the value chains .  Each project ad dresses identified gaps in 
terms of climate smart production capacity, infrastructure, and policy, with a view to leading to the professionalization of 
agribusinesses and the long -term viability of selected value chains.   
Baseline scenario  
In the baseline scenario, Cambodia faces increasing climate change vulnerability and in its efforts to increase production, 
increasing GHG emissions from the agriculture sector. Low capacity and insufficient access to technologies, compounded 
by an inadequ ate policy environment, maintain producers in a situation of high vulnerability to climate risks  and leads to 
a gradual decline in agricultural livelihoods . 
Climate vulnerability:  Given that 80% of the population in Cambodia derives its livelihood from agr iculture, the degree 
of exposure to climate extremes and long -term climate changes is high .17 In recent years , Cambodia experienced severe 
losses in the agricultural sector due to floods . For instance, in August 2011, heavy rains and overflow of the Mekong river 
impacted 18 of the 24 provinces of Cambodia and destroyed crops and communal infrastructure, including national, 
provincial and rural roads, irrigation schemes, rural water supply, schools and health centers, amounting to at least $ 624 
million in damages and losses.18 Droughts are also recurring, with a trend towards accentuation of the severity of water 
shortages during dry and wet seasons .19  Based on data of the past 20 years, loss es in agricultural production were 
mainly due to flooding (about 62%) and drought (35%)20. 2015 -2016 saw the country suffering from a 1 -in-35 year drought, 
with drastic reductions in rainfall (over 50%) and severe impacts on yields and, as a result, food se curity. Low yields, 
coupled with natural disasters  and a lack of access to water during dry periods , contribute to temporary food shortages. 
A mapping of food security concluded that seven provinces are classified as severely to extremely food insecure, an d an 
additional seven  as moderately insecure . Adaptive capacity among rural populations and national institutions remains 
low and  many households have been locked into a cycle of debt caused by borrowing money as a coping strategy during 
natural calamities  and emergencies. It has been estimated that the negative impacts of climate change led to a 10% loss 
in the GDP in 2015.21   
There are several institutional, technical, financial, informational and policy -related barriers to address climate change 
vulnerability. However, e fforts to address climate vulnerability have been stepped up with the launch of the National 
Adaptation Program of Action in 2006, followed by the Climate Change Strategic Plan in 2013.  Work is underway to 
develop the National Ada ptation Plan (NAP).  The Government of Cambodia is implementing a number of projects 
designed to pilot adaptation technologies, increase adaptive capacity and address key adaptation priorities, including: 
the Cambodia Climate Change Alliance (CCCA) with EU  funding, whose objectives are to strengthen governance of 
climate change issues; the project “Reducing vulnerability of Rural Livelihoods through sub -national planning (UNEP) , or 
the project to strengthen climate information and early warning systems (UND P) and Pilot Program for Climate Resilience 
(PPCR) of Climate Investment Funds.  The government has identified several priority actions to reduce vulnerability in its 
recent Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC).  
The RGC is also working with t he Mekong River Commission (MRC) to address transboundary climate change issues.   
Other baseline programming, undertaken with the support of bilateral and multilateral partners, is designed to address 
fundamental bottlenecks to development, including thro ugh infrastructure investment (e.g. Rural Road Network 
                                                             
17 Nang Phirun, Sam Sreymom, Lonn Pichdara and Ouch Chhuong (June 2014), Adaptation Capacity of Rural People in the Main Agro -
Ecological Zones in Cambodia , CDRI Working Paper Series No. 93 (P hnom Penh: CDRI).  
18  ADB, 2012. Flood damage Emergency Reconstruction Project  (RRP 46009): Preliminary Damage and Loss Assessment, Manila.  
19  Bert Coerver and Elga Salvadore, UNESCO -IHE, Drought Analysis, Cambodia, 2016.  
20 RGC, Second National Communication to the UNFCCC, 2016.  
21  http://www .khmertimeskh.com/news/26780/10 --of-gdp-lost-to-climate -change/


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 80 
 C 
Improvement Project with ADB support), smallholder poverty reduction and agricultural diversification (e.g. IFAD and  
ADB), or energy development .  
Greenhouse gas emissions.  The agriculture sector is  expected to grow at an annual rate of 5% to meet national 
economic growth and export targets, as well as to contribute to the population’s food security needs. At the same time, 
Cambodia has 57% forest cove r, which the government endeavo rs to increase and  maintain, to ensure livelihoods for 
forest -dependent communities and future generations. However, the pressure on natural resources and land is high. The 
latest available GHG inventory suggests that Cambodia was an overall net carbon sink in 2000 ; in 2000 , total emissions 
of the two main GHGs (CH 4 and N 2O) from agriculture reached 21,112 GgCO 2-eq. Rice cultivation accounted for 68% of 
emissions, enteric fermentation for 16% and agricultural soils for 11% .22  
Approximately  75% of households in Cambodia use firewood for cooking, 8% use charcoal and 16%, liquid propane 
gas.23 An estimated 88% of fuel wood comes from forests, which leads to forest degradation and deforestation, with 
resulting loss in carbon sinks. It is estimated that 77% of the wood in Cambodia  is non -renewable and the usage of this 
for cooking leads to substantial GHG emissions, such as long life CO 2 and short lived ones such as black carbon .24 Black 
carbon is a particular ly strong contributor to climate change as it has a global warming potential of 2,421 times to that of 
CO 2 over a 100 -year period. In addition, a substantial part of the fuel wood is collected, which is both a drudgery and a 
significant time expenditure, esp ecially for women, while purchased wood on the other hand, is a burden on the limited 
households’ revenues.   Although most of the energy used for cooking comes from wood, the overall energy consumption 
of charcoal is larger (38,371 Terra Joule (TJ) versus  33,720 TJ in the energy balance). The difference results from relying 
on inefficient charcoal kilns from which only 24% of the wood energy is transferred to charcoal while 76% is lost. In the 
target project  provinces, Kampong Cham, Kampot, Takeo, and Tbon g Khmum, the Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations’ ( FAO) wood fuel integrated demand supply overview mapping (WISDOM)25 showed that there is a 
wood fuel deficit. Under a business as usual scenario, the carbon footprint of the agriculture sector is expected to 
increase, as Cambodia continues to pursue production increases, value addition through expansion and enhanced 
processing and trade.   
Efforts to address GHG mitigation in agriculture sector  include projects implemented with GEF support (e.g. Scaling up 
of Renewable Energy Technologies in Cambodia (IFAD) or Reduction  of GHG emissions through promotion of 
commercial biogas plants (UNIDO)). These projects are rela tively small in scope and aim at piloting or demonstrating 
potential technologies, rather than leveraging impact at scale.  Some projects are aimed at enhancing carbon 
sequestration, mainly through afforestation and sustainable forest management.  
Key barri ers 
In order for the country  to achieve its growth objectives in the agricultural sector  in a climate friendly manner , and to meet 
its commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC ) and Paris Agreement , 
a number of barriers must be addressed, which are accentuating and perpetuating climate change vulnerability, hindering 
sector competitivene ss, and undermining the performance of the sector as a whole .   
a) Critical infrastructure deficit s 
Cambodia’s lack of infrastructure  is large ly due to its history of conflict, low population density and limited economic 
capacity to invest in infrastructure.  At the production stage , inadequate number of irrigation schemes to allow for sufficient 
water  availability , especially during drought , is a major constraint .  The existing schemes have been designed with now 
outdated climate parameters and need to be upgraded .  Inadequate  maintenance, due to limited operation s and 
maintenance ( O&M ) resources among farmer user groups , has led to the de teriora tion and gradual abandonment of 
irrigation  schemes, and a return to single season rainfed cropping, with lower yields . Post -harvest drying is practiced 
using inadequate means, such as tarpaulin or concrete bases, which leads  to quality, safety and phytosanitary issue s. 
Storage structures are still rudimentary, leading to inefficiencies in the value chain and post -harvest losses.  
In addition , climate change events are contributing to  increasing post -harvest losses, as higher humidity levels and rainfall 
during harvesting seasons are preventing proper drying of crops.  For example, rice c rops with a higher level of moisture 
(over 14%) are of lower quality, tend to rot faster and fetch lower prices.  Furthermore, the lack of cli mate -resilient roads 
linking village s and communes to the main transport corridors accentuate the sector’s low competitiveness and restricts 
access to neighboring markets. For example, rural roads represent 22.7% of Cambodia’s national road network, of whi ch 
only 5% are paved, and most of which are routinely impacted by extreme events such as torrential rainfall, extreme heat 
                                                             
22  RGC, Second National Communication to the UNFCCC . 
23 National Institute of Statistics and Ministry of Planning, 2015, Cambodia Economic Survey, Phnom Penh.   
24 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Executive Board 77 Meeting: Annex 4 (MOE proposed and endorsed).   
25 FAO 2007: http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/FCIT/PDF/WISDOM.pdf


---
*Page 13*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 80 
 C 
and droughts.  Furthermore, high energy costs  (or lack of access to energy sources) at the processing stage , and high 
transportation costs reduce the potential value addition and profit that farmers can expect to make from their production, 
and act a crosscutting barrie r.   Higher production prices, combined with lower quality output , mean that agriculture is  not 
yet a profitable sector . This general infrastructure deficit is increasingly exacerbated by climate change impacts. 
Unfortunately, the rate of national investment in agricultural infrastructure ( $150-200 million per year) is insufficient to 
address the development needs, let alo ne to meet the additional cost  for making the existing and new critical infrastructure 
resilient to climate change impacts. For example, the cost of infrastructure development is expected to increase by over 
13% on average to make the infrastructure low -carbon and climate -resilient. [cf. ADB publication “Meeting Asia’s 
infrastructure needs” https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/227496/special -report -infrastructure.pdf ] 
b) Inadequate capacity  and policy environment  for the development of resilient agri-business  
Although over 60% of inhabitants are engaged in farming, with women accounting for 80%, agriculture sector investments 
have not yet translated into substantial local benefits. While some progress has been made in strengthening the Provincial 
Departments of Agriculture (PDA) in various provinces, including through ADB suppo rt, weaknesses remain among PDA 
staff regarding  the provision of support to farmer groups and to developing agri -businesses. C apacity constraints among 
farmer groups and cooperatives are also preventing the successful operation of drying and storage infras tructure, and 
this is co ntributing to perpetuating post -harvest losses, low produce quality and therefore, low prices and diminished 
income.  The Provincial Departments of Water Resources and Meteorology (PDWRAM) of the selected provinces, in 
charge of overseeing irrigation infrastructure also ha s limited capacity in delivering adequate support to the establishment, 
operation, monitoring and evaluation of Farmers’ Water User Communities (FWUC). Although several  irrigation schemes 
have been established, t he number of functioning schemes remains severely limited. For example, out of 2,790 irrigation 
schemes in the inventory of Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRAM), the number of functioning or 
partially functioning FWUCs is estimated at 88, w hich highlights the lack of capacity of FWUCs  to properly operate and 
maintain existing infrastructures .  
Production methods are outdated and not consistent with emerging climate conditions, and natural resources 
management, both on -farm and off -farm, is i nadequate.  This leads to the degradation of the resource base, which 
reduces yields and product quality.   There is also a need to promote technologies that can allow farmers to sustainably 
increase p roductivity while reducing labo r and production costs, i ncluding energy, across the entire value chain.   
Farmers also lack  access to extension, and to reliable and accurate agronomic and climate information services to 
innovate in climate -smart practices and to cope with climate shocks. For example,  a recent a ssessment of climate 
services’ capacity ( http://www.unisdr.org /files/33988countryassessmentreportcambodia[1].pdf ) notes that Cambodia was 
lagging in terms of observation network and forecasting technologies as well as human resources and institutional 
capacity.  With current state of physical, human and financial resources, the existing services cannot meet the rapi dly 
growing needs (e.g., weather forecasting, early warning systems) of different socio -economic sectors, particularly 
agriculture as it faces more rapid climate change and climate uncertainty. Cambodia’s meteorological and hydrological 
network originally included 20 Synoptic stations (including climatological), 200 rainfall stations, and 80 manual and 12 
automated hydrological stations. Among synoptic stations, 8 were automatic weather stations (AWS) and 12 stations 
were manual (conventional analogue syste ms). Several AWS ceased functioning after 1 to 2 years of operation due to 
lack of maintenance and insufficient training as well lack of operation funds.  
In view of the above, ADB is strengthening meteorological and hydrological network through three sepa rate projects: (i) 
Under ADB Loan 3125: Flood Damage Emergency Reconstruction Project – Additional Financing , 8 AWS and 10 
Hydromet stations were already established. (ii) Under ADB Loan 3289: Uplands Irrigation and Water Management 
Sector Project , 15 hydr omet stations and 15 AWS are being established.  (iii) Under ADB Loan 2970: GMS Flood and 
Drought Risk Management and Mitigation Project, 7 Hydromet stations and 11 AWSs are being built.  The project aims to 
make use of such infrastructure in delivering app ropriate information. Currently, means of climate information 
dissemination are currently limited to TV, radio and newspapers and notifications through local authorities. These are not 
effective for rapid onset events and often reach users too late.  Adapt ed agro -meteorological advisories based on latest 
information and communication technologies (ICT) are still lacking, such as for example improved seasonal outlooks, 
enhanced 5 and 10 -day bulletins, or crop specific forecasts and analytics. These services are either not produced, 
delivered at insufficient levels of granularity and reliability, or not reaching the end users26. 
In addition, there is a lack of economic incentive for environmental and ecological  stewardship among farmers. Most of 
the agricultural residues are used as fuel for cooking or burnt in the open, leading to increased carbon emissions. 
                                                             
26 See for example Strengthening of hydro -meteorological services in Southeast Asia - Country Assessment Report for Cambodia, 2013, UNISDR and 
E-agriculture platform for Kampong Cham Province, ADB, 2016.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 80 
 C 
Firewood use for household and industrial needs contributes to deforestation and leads to watershed degradation, with 
adverse impacts  across the agricultural sector in terms of increased run -off, water losses, erosion and landslides, flooding 
damage, and an overall decrease in water availability during dry seasons, further limiting productivity potential.  
With consideration to the infrastructure, capacity and policy barriers and baseline scenario of current and projected 
climate change impacts explained above, the objective of the project is to reduce climate change vulnerability and 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of four agricultural va lue chains, enhance climate resilience and productivity of target 
crops, and thereby increase agricultural competitiveness and rural household incomes in the project areas . The project  
will seek to address the  above mentioned barriers in an integrated appro ach that combines investments in infrastructure, 
production assets, and capacity at all levels .  The project expects to make a significant contribution to reducing 
vulnerability to climate change and GHG emissions from the agricultural sector in Cambodia.  
C.3. Project Description  
The Climate -Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project (CFAVC P) is structured across three complementary 
outputs, namely:  
• Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate resilient  
• Output 2: Climate  smart  agriculture and agribusiness promoted   
• Output 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly agribusiness  enhanced  
A theory of change diagram representing the main goal, pre -conditions and necessary interventions needed to achieve 
those pre -conditions is given below:  
 
The project will improve climate resilience and reduce carbon  footprint of each stage of the agricultural value chain by 
investing in climate resilient  agricultural production and post -harvest infrastructure, supporting production  intensification  
and commercialization of rice, maize, cassava and mango, and by promoting the use of low-carbon technologies at 
various stages in the value chain . The project will support these  investments by building capacity of all value -chain  
stakeholders and contributing to the creation of  an enabling policy environment for agribusinesses, which will promote 
long-term environmental sustainability and enhance profitability for farmers and enterprises .  Expected end of the project 
results are: 
• Enhanced climate resilience of 27 water management systems , 33 post -harvest storage facilities built or 
upgraded to climate resilient standards, 50 climate friendly agricultural cooperatives  and other physical assets  
(e.g., at least 2 50 km resilient rural roads) , and release of three additional climate resilient varieties of crops;


---
*Page 15*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 80 
 C 
• GHG emissions reduced by 240,000  tons27 of CO 2 equivalent  through promotion of  renewable energ y (and by at 
least 3.25 million tons from adoption of  climate friendly agricultural  practices over time) ;  
• 5-10% water savings, 20% energy savings, and 10% in post -harvest losses ; and  
• At least 15% increase in yields  for rice, maize, cassava and mango , benefitting at least 390,000 farmers  directly 
and 9 75,000 indirectly ( total beneficiaries: 1.3 65 million) . 
 
Project outputs and activitie s: 
Output 1:  Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate resilient.   
Under this output, the project will invest in improving climate resilience and reducing carbon footprint of critical 
infrastructure along the whole value chain. At the production  stage, climate -resilient irrigation and water management 
structures will be established and / or rehabilitated to increase crop yields. At the production and post -harvest stages, 
renewable energy will be introduced to optimize on -farm resources, and climate -proof ed storage units  will be built to 
improve resource efficiency, reduce post -harvest losses, and enhance quality and v alue chain linkages. At the processing 
stage, energy efficient processing facilities will be built . Finally, climate -resilient rural roads will be constructed to  link 
villages to markets and transport corridors . The proposed interventions will encourage the private sector to work more 
closely with the producers and agricultural cooperatives through public -private partnership  (PPP)  arrangements.  Women 
and other vulnerable groups will be proactively involved in the identification, selection, and implementat ion of agribusiness 
investments  and women -led agro -enterprises will be explicitly supported . 
Within this output , several  subprojects  have been identified and feasibility analys es completed for three  representative 
subproject s.  Each sub project will be the subject of a selection process and further feasibility assessment and design 
(see Section C7 on implementation arrangements) prior to inclusion in the project’s annual plan. Selection criteria and 
envisioned procedures for subproject  development, implementation and monitoring are listed in the project administration 
manual (PAM ).  
Activity  1.1: Rehabilitating water management infrastructure to climate resilient condition  
The l ack of irrigation systems , surface and ground water extraction infrastructure restricts most farmers  to a single rain -
fed crop per year, while p oor on-farm water management is constraining production.  High rainfall variability and expected 
changes in rainfall regimes from climate change are expected to exacerbate this situation. T he project will rehabilitate 
and modernize  at least 27 irrigation and water management  systems  to climate resilient condition , which will increase 
water availability for crop production  in at least 15,000 ha , making at least 25,000 households  more resilient to climate 
shocks or slow onset climate changes.   
Of the existing 426 on-farm water catchment ponds in target  provinces, most lack efficient operations and maintenance. 
Many of the po nds are silted, and dry up early during the dry season.  The project will therefore seek to construct or 
rehabilitate  at least 800 on -farm water catchment ponds  and small reservoirs . Rehabilitation of existing ponds and 
reservoirs  will include performing de -silting works, and upgrading standards to withstand changed climate patterns and 
projected climate changes, including overflow and flood control mechanisms, increased depth for added storage, and 
restoration of the vegetation in the immediate landscape , using  fruit trees or other high value specie s (e.g. for fodder 
production) . Distribution systems will also be upgraded. Each pond will be used for supplementary irrigation not only for 
the target crop but also for more intensive horticulture and tree crop production , and will be sited to collect surface run -
off.  Designs will also include  sediment traps to avoid excessive sedimentation , and reduce maintenance requirements . 
Ponds  will secure the water supply for  the wet season rice crop and  other cash crops such as water melon and mung 
bean to be planted after the harvest of wet season rice. With the proposed irrigation scheme , farmers will be able to grow 
two rice crops per year with flexibility in early wet seas on rice production and supplemental irrigation for wet season rice 
production, as well as to extend cropping areas using more stable irrigation water in early wet season rice and secure 
water for other cash crop in dry season.  (see Annex 2a for detailed fe asibility assessment of the representative Trapaing 
Run Reservoir).    
In addition, laser land leveling and drip irrigation systems will be introduced at farm level  to effectively prepare the 
land and manage water resources.  These practices will increase field irrigation and water use efficiency, while reducing 
emissions  and reducing labor costs . The promotion of laser leveling will contribute to a reduction in water use  and a 
reduction of seed broadcast ing application rates l eading to less wast age of seeds .  The project expects to disseminate 
the technology, including equipment and training – and related mechanization workshops to allow for local maintenance 
and repairs  (please refer to section F2 regarding technical assessmen t). Interventions related to introducing drip irrigation 
                                                             
27 This is a conservative estimate that accounts only f or direct emissions reductions from the implementation of energy -related measures such as 
biodigesters and solar energy. Please refer to Annex 3B for details.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 80 
 C 
systems  will focus on mango. Mango crops are dependent on rain, therefore late rains or lack of rain have  an impact on 
yields, fruit q uality ( juice content, size ) and flavor . Erratic rainfall  also reduce s the likelihood  of achieving two crops rather 
than one crop in 12 months , even  with successful floral manipulation . In addition, while higher temperatures reduce flower 
fertility, irrigation will reduce orchard ambient temperature, therefore balanci ng out the impacts on the crops.   While few 
mango farmers irrigate their crops, t he yields are low  - fluctuating from 10 -15 tons per hectare , with only 20% of yields 
delivering high -grade exportable fruit . Introducing drip irrigation for mango production will improve the quality of the fruit, 
increase yields , and reduce the value chain’s sensitivity to climate change and climate variability  (Please refer to Annex 
2b for detailed feasibility study) . 
ADB loan financing fo r the Activity  amounts to $34.038 million . In addition, $5.276 million of GCF loan funds  and $4.608 
million GCF grant funds  will support the upgrade and climate -proofing of th e selected  infrastructure, as per  climate 
projections related to rainfall, evapotranspiration, run -off and temperature at the 20 50 horizon. Total finan cing for the 
Activity  will be  $44.145 million , inclusive of the government  cofinancing .  
Activity  1.2: Upgrading a gricultural cooperative value chain infrastructure  
The increasing frequency of extreme events such as floods , exacerbated by climate change, poses a serious challenge 
to sustainability of post-harvest operations in target provinces. Currently the drying, storage, and processing facilities at 
agricultural cooperatives are rudimentary and are highly vulnerable to impacts of climate change. In addition, t he lack of 
inclusion of poorer small -scale farmers in value chain development prevents them from transforming their traditional 
production and supply practices into commercial demand -driven processes. The main constraint to effective and lasting 
linkages between processors , traders and small farmers is that the latter do not produce sufficient quantities of high 
quality produce .  Pro cessors and traders therefore obtain their supply from larger, more equipped farmers, leaving 
smallholders outside of the trading cycle.  Furthermore , yields and quality of produce are impacted by multiple variables, 
including access to sufficient inputs ( e.g. seeds, soil and water), application of adequate production practices and 
technologies for pest management and fertilization, and the conditions of post -harvest storage. At present the drying 
process is undertaken on the ground, over tarpaulin and stor age structures, if they exist, are rudimentary. For instance, 
in case of cassava chips,  a stable product is attained when the moisture content is below 14%, as anything higher  leads 
to black spot and molds, as well as a reduction in the starch percentage. In terms of cleanliness, g ravel and dirt in the 
sample can be problematic for the traders and processors. If not processed within 4 days , the roots of fresh cassava will 
deteriorate.  Humidity and high temperatures in storage negatively impacts the quality of the product, and can also 
encourage the appearance of insects, pests and diseases.  In addition to poor post -harvest management, infrequent and 
unexpected rainfall increased the expos ure of harvested crops to hu midity , leading to the development of aflatoxins  
produced by certain molds , and  resulting in  food safety threats to the whole food chain.  
The project will support agricultural cooperatives to integrate adaptation measures in post -harvest infrastructure 
investments , including through the  construction of climate -proofed post-harvest units for cleaning, drying and storage. In 
addition, the cooperatives will use energy -efficient technologies, thereby reducing GHG emissions.  For the  agricultural 
cooperatives to benefit from the project’s support, they will be required to meet strict criteria, such as willingness and 
readiness to integrate climate -resilient and low carbon technologies within their cooperatives at every stage of the va lue 
chain  (including renewable energy use) . The storage units will reduce post -harvest losses, improve the grain or cassava 
chip sample and its moisture content , and ensure a better price by providing delivery flexibility to processors within the 
value cha in. Storage units will be climate -proofed  to take into consideration emerging climate conditions and anticipated  
climate extremes and their impacts (droughts, floods, pests).  This will include providing for improved aeration, drainage 
and runoff management, humidity control, pest control, and waste management.  In addition, solar power  will be 
introduced within the stores for ventilation  and drying , lighting and powering manag ement systems. Energy efficient 
technologies will also be implemente d in the infrastructure for drying,  processing  and storage to reduce carbon emissions 
from fuel wood currently used to operate these facilities. The improvements in stocking rates and qual ity of produce after 
harvests will encourage processors and buyers to form closer linkages with cooperatives as it will stabilize supply and 
demand and therefore pricing issues relating to the availability and oversupply of the product, as well as offer co ntinuity 
of supply.  (Please refer to Annex 2 c for detailed feasibility study .) 
ADB loan financing for the Activity  amounts to $9.042 million . Total finan cing for the Activity  will be  $9.612 million , 
inclusive of the government cofinancing.   
Activity  1.3: Improving connectivity to cooperatives and markets through climate resilient farm road networks  
Improved farm roads are vital for enhancing agricultural competitiveness  as they provide basic inputs for all -round 
socioeconomic development through creating conditions for better access and connectivity of farmers  to markets and 
services . Farm  roads also stimulate and expand non -farm activities in rural areas by accelerating  and enhancing 
production and consumption linkages that will eventually multiply employment opportunities for the poor. Current farm


---
*Page 17*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 80 
 C 
road infrastructure in target provinces is highly vulnerable to impacts of climate change. For example, a two -week flooding  
in 2011 caused losses and damage of nearly $600 million to rural infrastructure, especially farm road networks.  
Upgrading and climate proofing of farm road networks , as per climate projections related to rainfall, evapotranspiration, 
run-off and temperat ure in the 2050 horizon,  is thus crucial t o maintain farmers’ connectivity to markets , and to link farms 
to storage and drying units at agricultural cooperatives. Therefore , the project aims to  improve  climate resilience of 
farm  roads and tracks of at least 250 km , using appropriate design standards and construction materials ( depending 
on the traffic volumes and community needs ).  
Several  climate resilient design features (e.g., adjusting side slope, paving road surface, cross drainage improvement, 
scour checks) were considered: Of these (i) increasing embankment heights; (ii) providing cross drainage; (iii) selecting 
embankment materials suitable for increased permeability  and (iv)  green plan ning (bioengineering) to protect from erosion 
and landslid es were  considered for road sections that are exposed to higher risk of damage due to flooding. Regarding 
increased embankment heights, an average 0.2 m design height above the conventional road design height has been 
adopted. However, this will be reconfi rmed during the detailed design stage based on detailed hydrological data. As for 
cross drainage, the preliminary design has considered the adequacy of existing structures (pipe and box culverts, and 
small bridges of single span) and has included readjustm ents with additional structures for strengthening cross drainage. 
This again will be reconfirmed during detailed design while refurbishing the existing structures for their optimal use. For 
embankment materials, laterite has been cost optimal, again to be reconfirmed during detailed design, especially for road 
sections that are exposed to higher risk of damage due to flooding.  
In addition to improving climate resilience of farm roads in target provinces, the project will strengthen  capacity of the 
Ministry  of Rural Development (MRD), and the Provincial Departments of Rural Development (PDRD)  to develop 
guidelines for improving climate resilience of rural infrastructure .  In cooperation with MRD, the project will also build 
capacity of civil engineers in des ign, construction, maintenance and climate proofing of rural road networks. Operations 
and maintenance costs will be jointly borne by the M RD and the communities.   
Within this Activity , the GCF funds will be used to support climate -proofing of farm roads so that they resist the climate 
shocks anticipated under climate change scenarios . ADB loan financing for the Activity  amounts to $29.996 million. In 
addition, $4.668 million of GCF loan funds and $ 3.606 million of GCF grant funds will support the upgrade and climate -
proofing of the roads. Total financing for the Activity  will be $38.290 million, inclusive of the government cofinancing.  The 
GCF financing  amounts to 21.6% , including g rant financing of 9.4%  of the total investment  under this activity.   
Activity  1.4: Strengthening i nfrastructure for agricultural quality and safety testing  
The challenges in quality and safety of produce  apply to export markets  as well . Cambodia faces a major challenge due 
to its lack of infrastructure for agricultural testing at the national level to ensure food quality and safety in line with 
international standards . This is currently preventing farmers from exporting their products.  Under this Activity , the project 
will supp ort the newly inaugurated  Plant Biotechnology Laboratory (PBL)  of the National Agricultural Laboratory 
(NAL)  through  (i) establishing genetically modified organism (GMO), plant toxins, bio -fertilizer and organic fertilizer testing 
capacity; (ii) supporting  ISO 17025 accreditation; (iii) developing tissue culture protocols for cassava  and banana ; and 
(iv) assisting in the laboratory commercialization process to achieve partial cost recovery. The project will supply analytic al 
testing equipment for GMO analys is and bio -fertilizer and organic fertilizer testing, the supply of tissue culture equipment 
and materials that will include making the tissue culture laboratory aseptic and the supply of growth media, etc. and 
plantlet weaning facilities, as detailed in t he procurement plan  (Annex 11) . Pesticide residue rapid test kits for field -testing 
and desktop testing equipment for plant toxins will also be supplied. Quality and safety testing infrastructure will be 
upgraded at the NAL to test 1,500 samples. The long -term strategy is to gain ISO 17025 accreditation , not only for the 
tests supported by the project, but also those tests in which the NAL feels that accreditation can be achieved. The other 
targets are for the PBL to generate revenue at least $75,000 per an num in year 6 and to license tissue culture technology 
to two private sector companies.  On matters of biosafety and biotechnology policy and standards, as well as upgradation 
of the laboratory infrastructure and capacity, MOE biosafety experts will be inv olved.  ADB loan financing for the Activity  
amounts to $ 4.302 million. Total financing will be $5.158  million, inclusive of the government cofinancing.    
Activity  1.5: Promoting r enewable energy for value chain improvement  
Energy costs in Cambodia are among the highest in the region, and contribute to reduced competitiveness of agricultural 
value chains. Under this Activity , the project will develop  integrated systems for managing agricultural waste and residues 
in rice, maize, cassava and mango value chains to enhance competitiveness, create reliable energy supply, reduce GHG 
emissions and environmental risks, and contribute to energy independence.  In addition, f irewood use remains 
widespread, especially  in the rural areas of the target provinces.  This creates a cycle of forest degradation and increased 
carbon emissions.  In the four target provinces, wood scarcity is already being felt, due to over -use of resources .  Lack


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 80 
 C 
of access to reliable and renewable energy sources hampers agricultural growth and value addition.  Key barriers to 
accessing renewable energy sources, including biodigesters, include the lack of technical knowledge on the design an d 
operation of units, the costs of equipment and investment required, and some perception -based cultural reticence, which 
the project will address in an integrated manner, through training, demonstration, awareness raising, and the development 
of sustainab le financing mechanisms, including green finance options.  The reliance on traditional fuels also has 
environmental, social and human costs : World Health Organization  estimated that 14,729  premature deaths occur 
annually in Cambodia alone, which could  be attributed to household air pollution from combustion of  solid biomass fuels 
(IHME, 2015). With 80% of the Cambodians cooking with biomass and often using inefficient stoves, the situation has 
become critical as trends indicate that demand for charcoal  is increasing.28 It is estimated that the use of a biodigester, 
at household level, can reduce the need for fuel wood  for cooking and lighting by 90%.  
The project will deploy rural renewable energy infrastructure by installing 12,000 biodigesters and 6,000 compost 
huts  at household level  within the area of target cooperatives, while harnessing the fertilization potential of bio -
slurry in target provinces .  This will be conducted in line with the NBP, including norms and practices designed to 
ensure adequate subsidization . Biogas will be produced using agricultural wastes as well as manure , benefitting health 
and productivity of 90,000 persons, including 43,353 women, due to improved household air quality and time saved from 
not having to collect fuel wood for cooking .  Beneficiary households will be required to provide cofinancing  prior to the 
installa tion of the digesters.  The four selected provinces for the project are endowed with a relatively high animal 
population (860,000 cattle and 550,000 pigs) and represent around 27% of the total biodigester potential of whole 
Cambodia. The National Biodigester Program (NBP) estimated biodigester potential for the country as 1 million. So far 
the total number of installed biodigesters NBP reached 25,383  country -wide in 2016 (of which 2,835 in Kampong Cham, 
34 in Tbong Khmum, 3,515 in Kampot and 4,101 in Takeo), far below the anticipated target and well beneath the country’s 
potential29. The total biodigester potential has been estimated at 268,000 units in  the four target provinces, but the project 
will support only 12,000 , subject to meeting strict selection criteria such as counterpart funds, memberships in agricultural 
cooperatives, etc.  
The project also consider ed household energy consumption, customer satisfaction (especially with regard to saving time 
spent on collection of firewood, air quality benefits due to reduced indoor air pollution) and  potential grid expansion over 
the next 5 years.   The project  will a lso explore  opportunities for biogas production from commercial livestock enterprises 
and small town sustainable solid waste management  during project implementation . By investing in biodigesters, the 
project will contribute to the replacement of agrochemi cal fertilizers by bio -slurry (biodigesters’ effluent), which will 
optimize resources, improve yield, reduce  fertilizer  use and GHG emission s, while also improving farmers’ health by 
reducing exposure to agrochemicals and to smoke from cooking with fuel wo od. Investing in bio -digesters will also reduce 
pressure on forest resources for fuel wood, therefore reducing the deforestation rate while contributing to reducing GHG 
emissions.   
As noted under Activity  1.2, the project will also promote the use of solar energy within post -harvest and processing units 
at agricultural cooperatives and provincial agricultural development centers in order  to assist with value addition.  The 
solar energy deployment at agricu ltural cooperatives and provincial agricultural development centers is expected to  play 
a strong catalytic role in the development of solar market in rural Cambodia. The quality of solar systems will be ensured 
through using  certified companies and product s. 
For this Activity , the GCF will contribute $4.878 million (grant) to support the use of renewable energy for reduced 
emissions  while the ADB contribution will be $2.054 million .  The total cost of the output will be $13.594 million , inclusive 
of government and beneficiary co -financing.    
Output 2: Climate s mart agriculture and agribusiness promoted  
Under this output, the project will support the upgrading of the targeted value chains by increasing access to climate 
resilient varieties  and by disseminating, at scale, the best available production technologies and practices for climate 
friendly  production  of crops . Through this output, the project expects to reach 40,000  farmers through training, technical 
capacity building, technology t ransfer, and to set up supportive technologies and mechanisms. The output will also 
introduce resource -efficient practices,  and strengthen capacity for productivity and quality improvement, reduction of post -
harvest losses,  and marketing.  
Activity  2.1: Deploying c limate resilient varieties  
                                                             
28 ADB (2009): Status and Potential for the Development of Biofuels and Rural Renewable Energy: C ambodia:   
 http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/30309/biofuels -cambodia.pdf  
29 Government of Cambodia, National Bodigester Program, please refer to http://nbp.org.kh/ProgrammeArea.aspx


---
*Page 19*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 80 
 C 
Under this Activity , the project will address the cross -cutting constraint of availability in improved varieties and breeds. 
The project plans to support the Cambodian Agricultural Research and Development Institute ( CARDI) to deploy 
climate -resilient rice and maize varieties , including seed production and multiplication , in co llabo ration with the 
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). The varietal characteristics will include tolerance to higher temperatures, sal t 
water, drought, prolonged submergence as well as the release of three additional climate -resilient varieties of rice and 
maize with shorter cropping cycles. CARDI already has over 200 climate resilient lines that can be trialed within a 5 to 6 
year-program that includes continued selection, agro -climatic adaptation, climate resilient trait evaluations, yield 
comparisons as well as f armers’ and processors’ evaluations. Field adaptation trials will be carried across the country to 
determine agro -climatic adaptation. International technical assistance support will be provided to CARDI to develop a 
commercialization program with recommen dations on the legal framework to establish intellectual property rights and 
partial cost recovery for the institution. The use of climate resilient varieties will be an essential aspect of upscaling  climate 
smart agriculture practices introduced under Activity 2.2.  
Within this Activity , the GCF will contribute $2. 785 million grant  to support the identification and multiplication of climate -
resilient seed materials and varieties, including materials that are resilient to flooding, droughts , salinity and pests and 
diseases .  ADB contribution will be $0.794  million loan and the total cost of the output will be $ 3.876 million , inclusive of 
government co -financing.    
Activity  2.2: Strengthening c apacity in climate friendly production practices and technologies   
Farming in Cambodia remains mostly subsistence -based and rain -fed due to limited irrigation infrastructure, and low 
yields are compounded by outdated production tools and practices. The lack of access to reliable extension services and 
the ab sence of climate information services prevent farmers from not only developing into professional agricultural 
cooperatives, but also from effectiv ely coping with climate change.  CSA training  has been  limited  to date in the project 
areas, despite that  the c urrent good agricultural practice training incorporates some CSA techniques. Aspects related to 
the management of off -farm landscapes and micro -watersheds are also not fully disseminated, perpetuating a state of 
low environmental awareness, environmental d egradation, and decreasing yields. CSA, combined with investments in 
rural infrastructure  and inputs offers  significant potential to increase yields to a profitable and sustainable level. For 
example, the combination of sound CSA practices with improved ge rmplasm has the potential to increase yields for 
premium aromatic rice to 4.5t/ha, aromatic rice 5.5t/ha and white rice 6t/ha, for maize 8 -10t/ha and for cassava above 
40t/ha, while CSA combined with drip irrigation in mangoes can increase yields by 30%.   
Under this Activity , the project will  support the deployment of a farmer -oriented training program on CSA, reaching 
at least 40,000 farmers  (of which at least 40% will be women), focusing on the rice, cassava, maize and mango value 
chains. Government officials from the Provincial Departments of Agriculture (PDAs),  agricultural cooperative boards and 
their members , as well as farmers  and water user communities will receive both formal training and on -farm 
demonstrations on the following topics:  
(i) CSA practices, including  laser land leveling, alternate wetting and drying, sustainable agricultural waste 
management, rational use of inputs (water, energy fertilizers, and pesticides), agro -forestry and soil cover 
maintenance techniques, anti -erosive landscaping , as well as other modern practices that result in reduction 
of GHG emissions from cropping, and the practical applications relating to standards compliance;  
(ii) CAMGAP and sustainable rice platform ( SRP), in relation to record keeping . The project will prepa re training 
manuals and materials for SRP standard s for sustainable rice cultivation, for CSA, and for CAMGAP for 
tropical fruit.   
(iii) Agricultural cooperative management and  business development  plans  including book keeping, accounting  
and t he importance of t he access to crop value chains and marketing;  
(iv) Management and operation of provincial agricultural development centers and mechanization workshops for 
government staff  (see Activity  1.3);  
(v) Management, operation and maintenance (O&M) of drying and storage units for maize, rice and cassava as 
well as all other infrastructure ; and 
(vi) Uses of  climate information and climate services.  
The technical assistance will be delivered through a competitively recruited service provider. T o the extent possible, the 
services  of international institutions, such as  IRRI, FAO  and the International Water Management Institute will be taken . 
The project will include training for farmer groups, such as FWUCs and cooperatives, on the management of natural 
resources both on -farm and o ff-farm, with a view to restoring the immediate landscape in and around project sites.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 80 
 C 
For this Activity , the GCF will contribute $7.090 million (grant) to support adoption and wider dissemination of climate 
friendly technologies and practices to farmers, and improved climate services. The total Activity  costs, including ADB 
contribution of $ 1.480 million and government cofinancing, will reach $ 9.281 million . 
Activity  2.3: Promoting f arm mechanization and extension  
In target provinces  of the project , there are insufficient training facilities that would allow for extension workers to become 
fully versed on climate friendly  practices  and phytosanitary standards,  and this lack of skills prevents the sector from 
reaching higher productivi ty. To support the ongoing delivery of extension services on climate friendly  agriculture, the 
project will establish  or improve  four Provincial Agricultural Development Centers (PADC) and four Provincial 
Agricultural Engineering Workshops  at provincial le vels.  This will  create resource and training centers for service 
provision, and to support linkages among technical service providers, agribusinesses and farmer s. The project will finance 
the building of a PADC in Takeo, Tbong Khmum and Kampong Cham provi nces and the rehabilitation of the existing 
extension/agricultural development center in Kampot.   Technical assistance  will be provided to manage the training 
facilit ies.  
Training  provided by t he Centers will include Climate -Smart Agriculture technologies  and practices, techniques promoted 
by the Sustainable Rice Platform and the Cambodia Good Agricultural Practice (CAMGAP) standards, as well as farm 
management topics such as operating of agricultural cooperatives, FWUC account ing, bookkeeping and business  
planning, together with agricultural machinery and equipment repair, operation and maintenance . The project will also 
support the construction of three mechanization workshops , including classrooms in Kampot, Kampong Cham and 
Tbong Khmum and commissioning  a new workshop and classroom in Takeo. Technical assistance will be provided 
for agricultural engineering design and fabrication, repair, operation and maintenance . Equipment and tools for 
the repair and maintenance of agricultural production and processi ng equipment will be supplied. The equipment and 
tools for the manufacture and assembly of agricultural production and processing equipment, together with the supply of 
design, training and classroom equipment to the provincial workshop units will also be provided . 
The total Activity  costs, including ADB contribution of $ 545,000 and government cofinancing, will reach $ 691,700. 
Output 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly  agribusiness enhanced  
Under this output, the project will invest in the creation  of an enabling policy and regulatory environment for 
agribusinesses, the identification of opportunities for private sector engagement in climate change mitigation and 
adaptation,  and provision of  improved climate information services to allow farmers to plan their cropping season. This 
output will facilitate harmonization of standards, public -private partnerships , and green financing.  
Activity  3.1: Formulating c limate friendly agribusiness  policies and standards  
In Cambodia, t here is a need for agribusiness to achieve competitive advantage , to realize economies of scale and 
continuity of supply , and to break into new markets.  To facilitate competitiveness and growth among agri-businesses, 
enabling conditions must be set. For instance, i n Cambodia , MAFF and the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) have not yet 
developed a comprehensive  policy for agribusiness. Any agribusiness policy would  provide stability in the sector to 
encourage private investment (including  “green” investment ) and should fully integrate climate change concerns, to 
imprint a climate friendly vision for businesses in the sector.  The policy should  promote  both mitigation and adaptation 
opportunities and socially appropriate best practices. The project’s support to  climate friendly  agriculture and 
agribusiness policy development  will involve  technical assistance towards :  
(i) identification of measures to remove barriers for private sector investment in climate friendly  agribusiness;  
(ii) identification of  investment strategies for the public sector to enhance climate  smart agribusiness growth;  
(iii) promotion of the development of climate -friendly infrastructure so that Cambodia’s agribusinesses have a 
comparative and competitive advantage with their regional counterparts ; and  
(iv) creation of institutional and legal frameworks conducive to supporting and assisting climate -smart 
agribusiness, particularly with respect to regulations, taxes, business registratio n, licenses and the multiplicity 
of government instituti ons involved in the sector. The project will seek to  identify reforms required to ease  
freedom to do business  while promoting adequate social, environmental and climate -related standards,  and 
to improve efficiencies in logistics and administration.  
In deve loping specific policy recommendations on climate smart agriculture and agribusiness, the project will support 
MAFF to lead an inter -ministerial and development partner coordination mechanism, especially with MOC , MRD  and 
MOE among ministries, and International Fund for Agricultural Development  (IFAD ), FAO, USAID and Australia’s DFAT 
among development partners. This  coordination mechanism  is to ensure synergies and avoid overlaps with other 
initiatives, and contribute to policy harmonization across the government. The coordination mechanism will also ensure


---
*Page 21*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 80 
 C 
that various  projects do not produce different guidelines or policy tools on the same topics.  The project will also provide 
support to the technical working group on climate change in agriculture,  forestry and fisheries (TWG -CCAFF) to promote 
policies to facilitate the adoption of CSA.  
In terms of climate -related agricultural standards, the International  Organization for Standardization (ISO) is currently 
developing ISO 14080 towards climate neutr ality in different operations and ISO 26000 to consider climate change 
adaptation. The project will support developing climate -conscious standards for agribusiness operations aimed 
at climate neutrality and effective adaptation . For standards that have been drafted already, the project will support a 
technical review followed by public consultation to determine impact for the eventual endorsement by the National 
Standard Council (NSC), with a view  to align  the standards with the Cambodia Standard (CS) mark .  For  the standards 
that are yet to be drafted, working groups will be formed to develop the first draft, followed by technical committees for 
the review of the drafts, and by public consultation , with the eventual endorsement by the NSC.  The project will support 
activities related to certification and compliance that concerns climate change issues and human health and welfare in 
line with corporate social responsibility (CSR) guidelines. This includes support to good agricultural practices (GAP) for 
mangoes , developing  a CAMGAP standard for fair trade, organic production, tropical fruit, and support to the SRP. All 
standards are aimed at strengthening environmental protection and, for those compliant, allow entrance  in specific val ue 
chains demanding such standards. The CSR and SRP standards are expected to go further in ensuring worker health 
and safety as well as guaranteeing that there is no child or bonded labor, and ensuring workers have a living wage and 
an equitable share of the profits within the supply chain.  
The GCF contribution to this Activity  will be  $722,000 in grants , while the ADB will contribute $410,000.  The total cost of 
the Activity  is $1.203  million, including government cofinancing. GCF funds will be used to support the development of 
climate -relevant standards and policies, as well as for dissemination of such information .  
Activity  3.2: Promoting g reen finance and risk sharing mechanisms   
Private sector participation in agribusiness value chains  in Cambodia  is currently low, due to a difficult business 
environment in the target  provinces.  Linkages between producers and processers or traders remain weak .  There 
currently exists a framework for PPPs , which ADB has supporte d.  However, the current framework, legal and institutional 
setting, is not conducive to green investment. Furthermore, there are no adequate risk -sharing mechanisms between 
government, local producers and the private sector, meaning that smallholders are o ften left bearing a disproportionate 
amount of risk.  This limits innovation and the potential upscale of innovative climate friendly  technologies.  The project 
will seek to make recommendations to fill these current gaps  based on lessons learned and feasi bility assessments from 
previous and ongoing projects, and to introduce innovative mechanisms that can be applied in the project sites.   
Under this Activity , the project  will support dialog between public and private sector stakeholders at the national le vel by 
convening an inter-ministerial committee and promoting the establishment of crop -centric PPP forums for each 
value chain  (cassava, maize, rice and mango), both of which will meet twice a year. After each forum is held, the IMC 
would meet to review the points raised in crop forum s and respond to the recommendations. The project will also support 
the revision and updating of the PPP framework, and its associated regulatory instruments, with attention paid to 
addressing unforeseen climate externalities associated with private sector development.  
To further encourage climate -friendly private sector engagement  and to orient the m arket towards “green ing” the value 
chains , the project will strengthen the capacity of financial institutions to devise and channel climate -friendly 
agribusiness investments . This will build on the Mekong Sustainable Finance Working Group and the Micro -Finance 
Institutions (MFI) Client Protection Principle to help Cambodian financial institutions develop environmental and climate 
screening criteria and tools to guide their lending activities.  Coordination and lessons sharing will also be pursued with 
the Association of Banks in Cambodia (ABC), which has recently launched the Cambodian Sustainable Finance Initiative 
(CSFI), an effort to develop sustainable finance principles and announced plans to work towards integrati ng 
environmental and social safeguards and lending standards into their business decisions. CSFI is supported by USAID, 
Pact, Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) and Mekong Strategic Partners, in partnership with the National Bank of 
Cambodia and MOE. CSFI  is aimed at developing and strengthening finance sector safeguards and risk management 
standards related to social and environmental impacts which are potentially created through the private sector.   
The project will complement CSFI activities by providin g training and capacity building for commercial banks and 
microfinance institutions  in targeted areas  on (i) identification, benefits  and opportunities of green financing , especially  
through environmental and climate risk screening criteria ; (ii) awareness of green climate financing principles , operations 
and requirements; (iii) integration of green climate finance criteria into credit application  and reporting procedures ; and 
(iv) reporting on green finance . This training is expected to  reduce the risk aversion of commercial banks, while also


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 80 
 C 
strengthen ing linkages, trust and shared understanding between lenders, borrowers, and input and services providers 
regarding climate friendly agribusiness investment opportunities.   
The project will al so seek to reduce  the financial risks associated with impacts of climate change , particularly those borne 
by small producers,  through creating an enabling environment for risk sharing mechanisms such as weather index 
based crop insurance  (WICI) . Because penetration of crop insurance in Cambodia is extremely low, the project will first 
examin e financial and regulatory constraints in developing the insurance market, and will then identify mechanisms to 
overcome such barriers.  
The project will build on the work of the Cambodian Centre for Study and Development in Agriculture (CEDAC), which is 
preparing a new generation of insurance products incorporating lessons learned from the first pilot. It will also explore 
inclusion of  cassava and maize to rice among t he portfolio of insurable crops.  In addition, the project will explore  
supporting the establishment of a contingency fund  by providing matching funds. The fund could be operated based on 
agreed procedures by a consortium of cooperatives and financial inst itutions. Interest earned from the fund could be 
utilized to match the cost of insurance premium and used for medium frequency and medium impact disaster events, 
while the weather index systems would cover only catastrophic events, therefore helping to red uce insurance premium. 
The feasibility of other value chain financing options such as warehouse receipt financing scheme s may be looked into. 
In this case , credit facilit ies and guarantee scheme s would only be made  available for activities  that meet specific climate 
screening criteria .  
The project will also consider support ing small scale piloting of financing instruments that have potential to drive 
investments to scale in Cambodia, based on previous experience in ADB projects and on advi sory provided by the Global 
Innovation Lab for Climate Finance .30 Some examples include : (i) the Agricultural Supply Chain Adaptation Facility 
(ASCAF)31: this is a mechanism in which a partner financial institution (e.g., a Rural Development Bank, which is being 
encouraged to lend to cooperatives) can share some of the contract farmers’ credit risk through first-loss guarantee for 
example . (ii) Climate -smart Lending Platform32: The long -term goal of the Pla tform is to mainstre am CSA metrics into the 
credit scoring systems of financial institutions without concessional backing in order to improve agricultural lending 
portfolio resilience to climate change, and to create strong incentives for farmers to adopt CSA practices and ha rnessing 
private finance.  
Within this Activity , the GCF  grant  will finance $1.444 million  to support technical assistance towards  the c reation of 
enabling environment  for climate -friendly financing  and the exploration of risk sharing mechanisms  such as crop 
insurance , while ADB’s contribution will amount to $507,000 focusing on public -private partnerships  and training of 
financial institutions . 
Activity  3.3: Support ing climate risk management  through i nformation and communication technolog ies (ICT)  
In order to support t he enabling environment for deployment of low -carbon climate resilient value chains, the project will 
strengthen capacity of local stakeholders to use  improved information and communication technologies and 
agro -meteorological services .  It will include provision of training to MAFF on the formulation and dissemination of 
dynamic or updated crop calendars, the formulation and distribution of advisories for slow -onset climate events such as 
droughts, improved delivery of seasonal  climate forecasts , as well as early warnings for extreme rainfall events.   
The project will pilot the implementation of an ICT platform in Kampong Cham province to facilitate adoption of more 
energy -efficient and water use efficient measures, climate  friendly  agriculture practices and farm credit services. The 
project will support the acquisition and collection of climate and crop data to support crop modeling, as well as the design 
of tools and guidelines for managing climate risks at farm and landscape levels, linked to the ICT platform  and to the 
training on CSA to be provided to farmers.  In addition, climate services and data  sets required to establish weather -
based crop insurance schemes ( see Activity  3.2) will also be obtained, contributing to climate risk sharing awareness 
raising and the creation of an enabling environment for private sector investment into the  agricultural  sector.  Under this 
Activity , ADB will contribute $ 183,000 in loan financing, while GCF will con tribute $3.524 million in grants . The total cost 
of the Activity , including government co -financing is $ 4.055  million.  
C.4. Background Information on Project Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
                                                             
30 http://climatefinancelab.org/  
31 For more details: http://climatefinancelab.org/idea/agricultural -supply -chain -adaptation -facility/  
32 For more details: http://climatefinancelab.org/idea/climate -smart -finance -smallholders/


---
*Page 23*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 80 
 C 
The Executing Entity for this project – the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries ( MAFF) – has the vision to 
contribute to poverty reduction, ensure enough and safe food for all people, through modernization of agricultural sector 
based on a new approach and with changed scope and pace for accelerating agricultura l economic growth, and 
sustainable natural resources management and conservation. It has many  technical institutions: General Directorate of 
Agriculture (GDA), General Directorate of Rubber (GDR); General Directorate of Animal Health and Production (GDAHP) ; 
Forestry Administration (FA), and Fisheries Administration (FiA). MAFF has the following functions:  
• Develop and implement agricultural development policy to improve the standard of living of the people.  
• Participate in the formulation of land reform and land use policy  
• Orientations and plans for the development of all sectors of agriculture  
• Conduct monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of policies and activities for agricultural development  
• Monitor the development of the natural resources of the  agricultural sector and facilitate the exploitation of natural 
resources to meet the needs. Of the country and respect for ecosystem  
• Defining regulations on the management, preservation of natural resources of the agricultural sector, and 
monitoring of im plementation  
• Evaluate and train human resources for agricultural development by raising the level of technical knowledge and 
understanding.  
• Provide technical support and technical advice to farmers to improve production and productivity of agriculture.  
• Identify principles and follow up implementation, enhance and improve the functioning of relevant association 
organizations.  
• Study and disseminate scientific, technical, and economic information in all sectors of agriculture  
• Introduce land development work and improvement of land quality and use of agricultural land, plant varieties, 
varieties, animals, and medicines Agriculture meets the geographical conditions of the region to ensure high yield 
and balance Natural environment  
• Co-operate and cooperate with foreign, international, non -governmental organizations for the development of all 
sectors of agriculture  
• Participate in promoting and promoting investment, exporting agricultural products and food  
• Participate in the work of the Mekong River Basin in accord ance with the duties of the Ministry  
• Participate in costing and marketing of agricultural products  
• Collect state budget or cooperate with the Ministry of Economy and Finance in collecting state  
• Safe food inspection of all agricultural products ranging from  planting to final stages of primary processing.  
Since 2005, ADB, the World Bank and other development partners have been carrying out joint country portfolio reviews 
in Cambodia to address common issues across the portfolios. This review provides the plat form for discussing 
governance issues at project implementation level and engaging all stakeholders to implement the GGF, which has been 
adopted by all ADB -funded projects since 2008.  
MAFF’s ADB Project Implementation Track Record  
ADB has been working with the MAFF for many years. Since 2009, in addition to the Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and 
Smallholder Project, the following ADB -financed loans and grants have been approved, with MAFF acting as the 
executing agency or implementing agency:  
• Loans 3006/3007: Climate Resilient Rice Commercialization Sector Development Program (approved in 2013, 
ongoing ) 
• Loan 2376: Tonle Sap Lowlands Rural Development Project (2010 - 2017, rated successful)  
• Loan 2873: Trade Facilitation: Improved Sanitar y and Phytosanitary Handling of GMS Trade Project (approved in 
2013 , ongoing)  
• Grant 0241 -CAM: GMS Biodiversity Conservation Corridor Project (approved in 2010, ongoing )  
• Grant 0426 -CAM: GMS Biodiversity Conservation Corridor Project Additional Financing (approved in 2015, ongoing ) 
• Loans 2672/2673 and Grant 0220: Water Resource Management Sector Development Program (approved in 2010 , 
ongoing)  
In addition, MAFF implemented several other projects of development partners such as the World Bank, JICA, KOICA, 
and China.  MAFF is one of the pilot ministries to receive ADB support on public financial management program that helps 
to improve the budget preparation, monitoring and oversight. Training and capacity support has been provided to help 
MAFF improve the quality of its budget proposal, budget implementation, internal audits and the availability of information 
for external audit s. Projects funded by ADB and other development partners have been audited by external independent 
auditors.  Regarding procurement, Cambodia Resident Mission (CARM) has provided annual training for procurement


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 80 
 C 
since 2011, and organized quarterly “procureme nt clinics” jointly with the World Bank and JICA since 2013. Staff of MAFF 
and other agencies, have regularly participated in these activities.  
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
In general terms , Cambodia’s excess production  of four target crops  has been traditionally exported to neighboring 
countries and the European Union  (EU).  However, in recent years, a change in phytosanitary rules and trade regimes 
has meant that Cambodian production can no longer meet the quality requirements for entry into European markets.   The 
loss of this market is being partially compensated by a new trade agreement with China, where demand for raw produce 
remains high.  However, demand is also increasing for value -added products, such as for example rice noodles a nd flour, 
cassava chips, dried or puréed mango, and maize -based feed, whi ch the current value chains can not yet provide.  In 
efforts to support the agricultural commodity exports, the Royal Government of Cambodia articulates its agriculture policy 
in the R ectangular Strategy II by zero tax for all agricultural crops exports.  
Rice:  Cambodia reached self -sufficiency in rice in 1990 and became a net exporter of rice and paddy in 1995. Per MAFF 
statistics, Cambodia rice production in 2014 - 2015 was 9.3 millio n tons, which includes dry season crop production of 
2.18 million tons and a wet season crop production of 7.14 million tons with an average yield of 3.1 tons per hectare. 
Compared to 2007, production has increased by 38.61%, yield has increased by 17.46% and cultivation area has 
increased by 18.16%. The domestic demand is 49.6% of the total production resulting in a surplus of 4.71 million tons 
indicating a significant export potential.  Cambodia ’s milled rice has duty -free access to EU markets and relies  on those 
markets , with 62% of exports destined for Europe. The Country has a preferential duty to the USA and Canada, the latter 
is approximately $12 per ton .  However, Cambodian production is no longer meeting phytosanitary standards required 
by these mar kets, such as pesticide content, humidity levels and other controls, resulting in large amount of unsold excess 
production.  There is no official data on cross border trade to Vietnam and Thailand, however based on traders’ estimate, 
Cambodia exported more  than 2 million tons of paddy per annum in -between 2012 -2015. The milled rice export was 
538,396 tons in 2015. Cambodia rice production is estimated to increase 10% by the year 2020 amounting to 10 million 
tons. The domestic demand is expected to be 5 mil lion tons resulting in 5 million tons of surplus for export. The cross -
border trade to Thailand and Viet Nam is estimated to reach 3 million tons of paddy and 1 million tons of milled rice.  The 
farm gate price of paddy dropped in 2015/2016 with the reduction of price by 8% for fragrant variety (from KR 1,250/kg 
($313/ton) in 2014/2015 to KR1,150 /kg ($288/ton) in 2015/2016) and by 12% for IR66 variety (from KR820/kg ($205/ton) 
in 2014/2015 to  KR750/kg ($188/ton) in 2015/2016). The decrease in the farm gate price is due to lower demand in  
Thailand and Viet Nam  and the domestic miller’s limited capacity to buy the local paddy during the time of harvest.  
Maize: Production increased rapidly betwee n 1995 – 2013 due to improved productivity and the expansion of the 
cultivation area. However, the area under cultivation decreased 41% from 239,748 h a in 2013 to 143,517 h a resulting in 
reduced production from 926,846 tons in 2013 to 549,607 tons in 2014.  This was due to the fall in market price and 
demand from Thai and Vietnamese buyers. The average on -farm price for grain of maize dropped in 2015  – from 
KR1,1 40/kg ($283/ton in 2014 to 930/k g ($231/ton) in 2015. It is estimated that the annual demand for Cambodia maize 
will decrease due to increasing domestic production in Thailand and Viet Nam . The USDA reported that Viet  Nam 
imported 2.3 million tons in 2013/2014, with the forecast of reduced import of 1.8 million tons in 2015124. There is no 
official da ta of Cambodia maize export to Thailand and Viet Nam , but traders’ estimate suggests 80% of Cambodian 
maize is exported to these two countries. It is difficult to forecast future of Cambodia’s maize production due to uncertainty 
of market demand  Thailand and Viet Nam . However, considering high growth rate of 7% per annum for demand of animal 
feed in Southeast Asia market, Cambodia’s maize production is estimated to increase 20 -30% in next 5 years.   Cambodia 
has the potential to increase its produ ction to one million tons per annum if the country can access international markets 
directly without relying on Thailand and Viet Nam  markets as cross border trade.  This would imply sales of raw materials 
as well as feed and other transformed products.  The average on -farm price for maize in 2015 was KHR 930 per kg 
($231/ton) for grain and KHR 500 per kg ($124/ton) of cobs . The average delivery price was KHR1, 060/kg ($2637ton) 
for grade 1 and KHR700 ($174) ton) for grade 2 .  
Cassava:  Production has been in creasing rapidly since 2007 due to the expansion of the cultivation area under the 
Economic Land Concessions (ELC). The production increased by 91% between 2010 -2014 compared to 2007 - 2010. In 
2014, national cassava production increased significantly to re ach more than 11.94 million tons of fresh roots  (from 
521,459 h a), an increase of 180% compared to production in 2010. The increase in production was a direct result of 
farmers switching to cassava production due to fall in maize price. The current cassava  yield of 20 - 30 tons per hectare 
could increase up to 45 tons per h a, if planted on virgin soil. Cambodia is currently mostly exporting fresh cassava tubers 
through border trade to Thailand and Viet Nam . There are 6 starch processors in Cambodia but only 3 factories are in


---
*Page 25*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 80 
 C 
operation, processing about 1% of total national production. Cambodia cassava is expected to increasingly find access 
to global markets reducing dependence on Thailand and Viet Nam . Since the start of export of dry cassava chips for 
ethanol production to China in 2013, export has gradually increased; 60,000 tons in 2013, 150,000 tons in 2015, and 
200,000 tons in 2016 , respectively.  By 2020, Cassava production may reach 14 million tons of fresh root per annum, and 
export of dry chips to China is estimated to reach 500,000 tons per annum.  The export to Thailand and Viet Nam  is also 
likely to increase, if Cambodia can address the issues of transport and logistics.  The cassava market price  increased 
between 2013 and 2015, but it dropped in 2016 due to lower demand in Thailand and Viet Nam . The cassava price was 
$62.5/ton for fresh root and $185/ton for cassava chips in 2013, which increased to $67 and $189  respectively in 2015 . 
In 2016, pri ce dropped to $60/ton for fresh root and $138/ton for chips.  
Mango: Cambodia produces more than 250,000 tons of mango fruit per year, with average yields of 15 tons/ha/annum. 
Mangoes are exported to Thailand  (~20,000 tons in 2015)  and Viet Nam (~35,000 tons in 2015)  through border trade as 
fresh fruit (predominantly the variety Keo Romeat). Mango fruit market prices are relatively consistent across the country 
with differences only related to varying transport costs and variety. MAFF has signed  a MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) on relating to a Mango SPS Protocol with Government of the Republic of  Korea on 9 December 2015. 
The MOU will help Cambodian farmers/traders supply mangoes to a new export market in Republic of  Korea, but 
Cambodia mango es will need to satisfy Republic of Korea ’s quality standards .  It is estimated that Cambodia’s mango 
production could  increase by 20% in next 5 years. Depending on processi ng capacity and ability to meet  SPS protocols, 
Cambodia could potentially export ma ngo to new markets such as China and Japan as well.  The average on -farm price 
for fresh mango fruit in 2015 was KR1,000/kg ($246/ton) and wholesale price was KR1,500/kg ($370/ton). High quality 
mango (Grade A) for export to Thailand and Viet Nam commanded a higher price of KR3,500 per kg ($864/ton. However, 
in 2013 and 2014, on -farm price dropped as low as KR400/kg ($ 100/ton) due to lower demand in  Thailand and Viet Nam .  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
Applicable permits and licenses for this project include :  
- Construction permits  to be delivered by MAFF, MOWRAM and MRD, in line with current regulations and in 
cooperation with provincial authorities;  
- Environmental impact assessments and management plans will be developed in line with ADB and the 
government ’s legal requirements.  Initial environmental examinations  (IEEs)  for representative subprojects have 
been produced. IEE s include environmental manag ement plans (EMPs)  and monitoring plans.  Detailed EMPs  
and assessments will be produced prior to implementation for each subproject ;  
- Licenses for the creation and operation of processing plants, agri -food business, repair workshops and any other 
private sector enterprises will be obtained by project beneficiaries as part of normal business applications. The 
project will support beneficiaries in obtaining the licenses required by the Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of 
Industry and Handicraft and Ministry of  Health where relevant.  
- Seed certification and germplasm quality assurance will be ensured under the framework of the Law on Seed 
Management and Plant Breeders rights (2009), which foresees that new or introduced varieties must be 
registered with the Minis try of Industry and Handicraft, after the application has been evaluated by MAFF  under 
the distinctiveness, uniformity and stability (DUS) protocol.  The General Department of Agriculture (GDA) of 
MAFF is responsible for seed certification and a fee is pai d for the certification, the quality assurance requires 
seed testing and recommendations to the seed supplier on correct labeling.   
Taxes: The government will finance taxes  and duties for  all project goods , equipment,  and services  through exemption . 
GCF funds will also benefit from such exemption. ADB and GCF contribution includes taxes  and duties for civil works .  
Insurance : Firms contracted by MAFF -PMU will be required to have the necessary insurance  policie s. The Government 
has agreed to follow ADB Procurement Guidelines , including conditions on insurance .  ADB standard contract templates 
will be used for the contracting of goods and services.  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Project Administration Manual  (PAM) : 
The PAM describes the essential administrative and management requirements to implement the project on time, within 
budget, and in accordance with the policies and procedures of the government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The 
PAM include s (i) project descript ion, (ii) implementation plans and procedures, (iii) project management arrangements, 
(iv) costs and financing, (v) financial management, (vi) procurement and consulting services, (vii) environmental and 
social safeguards, (viii) gender and social dimensio ns, (ix) performance monitoring, evaluation, reporting and


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 80 
 C 
communication, (x) anticorruption policy and accountability mechanism. It also includes references to all available 
templates and instructions either through linkages to relevant URLs or directly i ncorporated in the PAM.   
MAFF, in coordination with MOWRAM and MRD, and their provincial departments are wholly responsible for the 
implementation of the project, as agreed jointly between the borrower and ADB, and in accordance with the policies and 
proce dures of the government and ADB. ADB staff is responsible for supporting implementation, including compliance 
by MAFF, MOWRAM and MRD of their obligations and responsibilities for project implementation, in accordance with 
ADB’s policies and procedures.  After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President 
(RRP), changes in implementation arrangements are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to relevant government 
and ADB administrative procedures (including the Project  Administration Instructions) and upon such approval, they will 
be subsequently incorporated in the PAM.  
Executing entity (EE) and implementing agencies  (IAs) :  
MAFF is the EE, in close coordination with MOWRAM and MRD. The General Directorate of Agricultu re, CARDI, General 
Directorate of Animal Health and Production (GDAHP), the General Department of Technical Affairs of MOWRAM and 
the General Department of Technical Affairs of MRD will be implementing agencies  (IAs) . The IAs will be responsible for 
monito ring project progress and evaluating project outputs. Monitoring and evaluation , including for climate change 
indicators,  shall be in accordance with the project design and monitoring  framework (DMF) . MEF will represent the 
government in signing the ADB an d GCF loan and grant agreements.  
Project Steering Committee  (PSC) :  
The PSC, chaired by the Minister of MAFF  and comprising representatives (at the level of Under Secretary of State or 
above) of the MEF, MOWRAM, MRD, MOC, Ministry of Industry and Handicrafts (MIH) and Ministry of Environment 
(MOE), will provide oversight , coordination and policy guidance in all aspects of project implementation, except land 
acquisition and resettlement which is the responsibility of the Inter -Ministerial Resettlement Committee (IRC). Other 
ministries may be invited to attend as observers when specific issues of their concern are for discussion.  The figure below 
represents the composition of the PSC. 
 
Project Management Unit (PMU):  A PMU,  chaired by the Under Secretary of State as project director and assisted by 
a project manager and  comprising additional four staff each from  MAFF  (financial officer, procurement officer, safeguards 
officer and M&E officer) , MOWRAM (Director, irrigation/civil engineer, financial officer, and procurement officer) and MRD  
(Director, civil engineer, financial officer, and procurement officer),  will be responsible for overall project management, 
procurement and financial management . The PMU updates the project implementation progress to the project steering 
committee. Three consultants ( rural infrastructure  specialist  and team leader, financial mana gement and procurement 
specialists) will support the PMU. The project implementation structure at national level is summarized in figure below .


---
*Page 27*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 80 
 C 
 
At provincial level, t he Provincial Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (PDAFF), Provincial Department 
of Water Resources and Meteorology (PDWRAM) and Provincial Department of Rural Development (PDRD) will be key 
agencies working with  guidance and technical support from relevant national departments . A provincial project 
implementation unit (PPIU)  will be established i n each of the four target provinces . The PPIU will be chaired  by th e director 
of PDAFF, and comprising representative s of PDWRAM and PDRD, and PDAFF  staff related to Cooperative s, 
Agricultur al Extension , and Animal H ealth  and Production. PDWRAMs  will be responsible  for coordinating  all field 
activities with  FWUCs, while PDRDs will be responsible for all farm roads and connectivity to agricultural cooperatives. 
The project implementation structure at provincial level is summarized in figure below . 
 
 
The project implementation consultants (PIC) and other technical specialists as well as service providers including 
government staff as resource persons will carry out a range of capacity buil ding and training activities, as well as pilot 
demonstrations and detailed engineering designs.  ADB will Monitor the progress of project implementation on a regular 
basis as well as on behalf of GCF . It will ensure that the donor fund flows to the project are achieved in a timely and 
efficient manner. It will also conduct review missions and provide oversight on the activities defined in the project 
administration manual  to ensure that all procurement is in compliance with ADB procedures. Insofar as public institutions


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 80 
 C 
are concerned, the project will involve planning, budgeting and technical departments beyond the PMU to support the 
climate change mainstreaming efforts. Likewise, Climate change focal points from the respective ministries – MAFF, 
MOWRAM, MRD – and the Ministry of Environment (MOE) will be involved in the climate change action monitoring and 
review process.  The management roles and responsibilities of various organizations  responsible for project 
implementation at national and provincial level s is summarized in  the table given below .   
 
Implementation 
Organizations  Management Roles and Responsibilities  
 
Ministry of 
Agriculture, 
Forestry and 
Fisheries - 
executing entity  MAFF will:  
(i) Ensure the project is implemented successfully in accordance with the Financing 
Agreements and manage the associated fiduciary risk ; 
(ii) Ensure that the project through the PMU is well managed and that the project 
performance is monitored through implementation up to completion and required project 
reports are generated  and submitted to the concerned parties ; 
(iii) Delegate sufficient powers to the PMU team members to ensure that it is able to operate 
its affairs with a minimum of disruption and interference ; 
(iv) Ensure that the PMU team remains intact, as far as possible, during the whole project 
implementation period ; 
(v) Ensure that all performance management requirements agreed to with the Financiers are 
strictly followed ; and  
(vi) Ensure that the targeting criteria and implementation arrangements of the project 
activities are strictly followed.  
Project steering 
committee  Chaired by Minister of MAFF with representatives from MEF, MOWRAM, MRD, MOC, MIH and 
MOE. In order that decisions are made quickly it is recommended that the various PSC 
members will be the rank of Secretary of State. The PSC may invite other persons and 
agencies to discuss specific agenda items, when required. The PSC will:  
(i) ensure interagency cooperation at national level;  
(ii) review and advise on policy issues and implementation constraints;  
(iii) ensure integration with othe r donors and government related development activities;  
(iv) meet at least twice a year and monitor implementation progress;  
(v) approve annual work -plans and budgets;  
(vi) set up a multi -departmental procurement committee for the project; and  
(vii) provide overall guidan ce on project implementation.  
Project 
Management Unit  A PMU, chaired by the Under Secretary of State as project director and assisted by a project 
manager and comprising additional four staff each from MAFF (financial officer, procurement 
officer, safeguards officer and M&E officer), MOWRAM (director, irrigat ion/civil engineer, 
financial officer, and procurement officer) and MRD (director, civil engineer, financial officer, 
and procurement officer), will be responsible for overall project management, procurement and 
financial management. Three consultants (tea m leader, financial management and 
procurement specialists) will support the PMU. The PMU will be responsible for:   
(i) Reporting to the PSC on the project implementation progress;  
(ii) Day-to-day project implementation, planning and budgeting, disbursement, moni toring 
and reporting;  
(iii) Facilitating disbursement and withdrawal applications;  
(iv) Coordinating activities and report progress to the PSC and ADB;  
(v) Liaising with the national and provincial implementing agencies and initiate and 
coordinate effective communication  between all project stakeholders, and provide 
guidance and coordination to the implementing agencies;  
(vi) Consolidating annual work plans, financial management and procurement plans  including 
preparation of annual forecast of contract awards and disbursements ;  
(vii) Conducting monitoring and compliance of environmental and social safeguards, including 
gender action plan;  
(viii) Establishing and implementing PPMS;  
(ix) Carrying -out administrative, technical and financial management and reporting at national 
level;


---
*Page 29*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 80 
 C 
(x) Measuring, m onitoring and evaluating the performance in delivering development impact 
against established performance targets and goals of the project;  
(xi) Establishing and managing of the main advance  account, submission of withdrawal 
applications to ADB, retention of su pporting documents, and overseeing subaccounts;  
(xii) Procuring goods and services, and recruiting consultants following ADB procedures to 
assist in project implementation, preparing of feasibility studies; preparing detailed design; 
supervising of construction;  and safeguards monitoring ; and  
(xiii)  Submitting of progress reports, annual audit report and financial statements and project 
completion report.  
Land acquisition and resettlement , if any,  will be the responsibility of the IRC.  
MEF  (i) Allocation and timely release of counterpart funds;  
(ii) Communicate with ADB for any amendments in the allocation of the loan/grant amount;  
(iii) Recruitment of a firm for annual audit of project accounts;  and 
(iv) The General Department of Resettlement to be responsible for resettlement iss ues that 
relate to project interventions . 
Implementing 
agencies  The CARDI, GDAHP, the General Department of Technical Affairs of MOWRAM, and the 
General Department of Technical Affairs of MRD will be implementing agencies. Specific Roles 
and responsibilit ies of the IAs are as follows:  
(i) National Agr icultural Laboratory: (a) provide laboratory equipment specifications; (b) 
implement GMO, plant toxin and organic fertiliz er testing; (c) achieve ISO 17025 
accreditation; (d) develop TC protocols; and (e) adapt procedures for partial cost recovery 
of services ;  
(ii) Department of Agricultural Engineering: (a) support to provincial engineering workshops; 
(b) technical support to capacity and training of farm mechanization O&M, tool fabrication; 
and (c) promotion of eng ineering workshop service provision ;  
(iii) Department of Agric ultural Cooperative Promotion: (a) support to the establishment, 
management and operation of storage units; (b) capacity and training in agribusiness, 
business plan development and bookkeeping; and ( c) identification and prioritization of 
AC for project support (infrastructure and capacity building) ; 
(iv) The General Directorate of Animal Health and Production: (a) oversee the biodigester 
program; (b) biodigester standards development; and (c) bio -slurry u tilization ; and  
(v) Cambodia Agricultural Research and Development Institute: (a) climate resilient maize 
and rice variety development, trials, demonstrations in collaboration with IRRI; (b) seed 
production, multiplication and distribution;  and (c) commerciali zation of the seed business.  
 
For MOWRAM and MRD, responsibilities will be:  
(i) Day-to-day project implementation, planning and budgeting, disbursement, monitoring 
and reporting;  
(ii) Facilitate disbursement and withdrawal applications;  
(iii) Coordinate activities and re port progress to the EA;  
(iv) Elaborate annual work plans, financial management and procurement plans  including 
preparation of annual forecasts of contract awards and disbursements related to the 
PMU’s scope of work;  
(v) Conduct monitoring and compliance of environmental and social safeguards, including 
gender action plan;  
(vi) Implement PPMS by measuring, monitoring and evaluating the performance in delivering 
development impacts against established performance targets and go als of the project, 
related to the PMUs scope of work;  
(vii) Carry -out administrative, technical and financial management and reporting at national 
level;  
(viii) Establish and manage the sub -account, submission of withdrawal applications to ADB, 
retention of supporting  documents, and overseeing sub -accounts;  
(ix) Procure goods and services and recruit consultants following ADB procedures to assist in 
project implementation related to the PMU’s activities; and


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 80 
 C 
(x) Submission of progress reports, annual audit report and financial statements and project 
completion report.  
 
Provincial Project 
Implementation 
Units  At provincial level, the PDAFF, PDWRAM and PDRD will be key agencies working with guidance 
and technical support from relevant national departments. A PPIU will be established in each of 
the four target provinces. The PPIU will be chaired by the director o f PDAFF, and comprising 
representatives of PDWRAM and PDRD, and PDAFF staff related to cooperatives, agricultural 
extension, and animal health and production. PDWRAMs will be responsible for coordinating all 
field activities with FWUCs, while PDRDs will be  responsible for all farm roads and connectivity 
to agricultural cooperatives. More specifically and within the scope of the subproject s, the PPIUs 
will have responsibilities detailed below : 
(i) Assist in the implementation of CSA to include the revision of a cropping calendar and 
cultivation schedule on the basis of the improved water supply and confirm seasonal water 
requirements based on the existing climate data and hydrological studies;  
(ii) Assist in the identification of beneficiary households, under the reha bilitated irrigation 
system, who are interested in aggregating their land plot for laser land leveling and 
enhance mechanization;  
(iii) Assist in the extension of land leveling as a tool to improve water use efficiency; and  
(iv) Assist the FWUC to gain access to imp roved inputs.  
 
For on -farm water management (pilot drip irrigation and water catchment ponds):  
(i) Assist in the identification of pilot drip irrigation sites and water catchment ponds and 
ensure compliance with the eligibility criteria;  
(ii) In coordination  with training advisers, develop a suite of capacity building programs related 
to on -farm water management, the use of water catchment ponds, climate smart 
agriculture, CAMGAP and sustainable rice platform as well as skills training in 
mechanization;  
(iii) The PDAFF w ill organize and arrange field days and training days at the site in conjunction 
with the private sector service provider;  
(iv) The PDAFF will seek guidance from the DAEng on the technical and infrastructure aspects 
of the pilot drip irrigation scheme and water  catchment ponds;  
(v) Work with mango farmers to form a mango producer groups or a cooperative and promote 
joint marketing initiatives; and,  
(vi) Assist the PMU M&E consultants in monitoring the impact from the subproject  investments 
by carrying out annual impact monitoring surveys of beneficiary farmers and other value 
chain stakeholders.  
 
For agricultural cooperative storage units:    
(i) In association with project training advisers assist in the development of a suite of capacity 
building programs related to rice, maize, cassava and mango post -harvest management 
and storage and agribusiness development;  
(ii) Coordinate with JICA agricultural cooperative business orientation work to ensure the 
training is compatible with the existing training manuals;  
(iii) The PDAFF will organ ize and arrange open days to the cooperatives to demonstrate the 
work undertaken;  
(iv) The PDAFF will have an oversight on the technical and infrastructure aspects of the 
storage unit construction;  
(v) The PDAFF will seek guidance from the Department of Agricultura l Cooperative 
Development on developing accountancy procedures line with the Law on Agricultural 
Cooperatives; and  
(vi) Assist the PMU M&E consultants in monitoring the impact from the subproject  investment 
by carrying out annual impact monitoring surveys relat ing to storage unit management and 
operation, trading progress and make recommendations for improv ement.


---
*Page 31*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 80 
 C 
 
For the off -farm water management subproject s:   
(i) Provide necessary data (rainfall data, water basin studies etc.) and support to the design 
engineer s;   
(ii) Review the cost estimates and the bill of quantities to ensure all items are included in the 
overall subproject  cost estimates and that cost norms applied are adequately 
representative for the completion of works;  
(iii) In consultation with MOWRAM, issue te chnical confirmation that the design is appropriate 
to the local circumstances of the subproject  and conforms with MOWRAM design 
standards;  
(iv) Respond to questions issued by the PMU on technical matters in relation to the proposed 
design;  
(v) Assist in the ident ification and recruitment of suitably qualified design engineers and 
contractors to carry out the work;  
(vi) Supervise the quality assurance supervision to be performed by the consulting engineer 
during construction of the subproject ; 
(vii) Prepare fortnightly progre ss reports on construction progress for submission to 
MOWRAM and the PMU;  
(viii) Assist in the formation of FWUCs and provide necessary training to operate and manage 
the irrigation system, as well as oversee the major maintenance tasks beyond the 
capacity of the FWUCs; and  
(ix) Prepare the annual budget to be submitted to MOWRAM for the operation and 
maintenance of the water management and irrigation schemes.  
For farm roads and cooperative storage unit market connectivity:  
(i) Determine the requirements for feeder farm  road improvements at each of the proposed 
50 storage units to be constructed; and  
(ii) Identify interventions required to make the rural roads climate resilient and monitor the 
work to ensure quality and on -time completion.  
 
For biodigesters and bio mass manag ement:  
(i) Supervising and reviewing design engineers work and following up and monitoring field 
implementation ; and  
(ii) Managing capacity building activities particularly for O&M and use of compost huts, and 
consolidating and reporting project benefits monitoring and evaluation.   
 
ADB (i) Monitor the progress of project implementation on a regular basis as well as on the behalf 
of the other lenders/donors;  
(ii) Ensure that the GCF and ADB  fund flows to the project are achieved in a timely and 
efficient manner;  
(iii) Conduct review missions; and  
(iv) Provide oversight on the activities defined in the project Procurement Plans to ensure tha t 
all procurement is in compliance with ADB procedures.  
 
Selection of subproject s 
Within the four provinces, a number of  infrastructure  subprojects under output 1 have been identified by the design 
consultants, primarily related to (i) irrigation and water management infrastructure , including  (a) irrigation systems; (b) 
surface water catchment ponds; (c) pilot drip irrigation systems , (ii) agricultural cooperative s; (iii) rural connector roads; 
and (iv)  biodigesters .  For example, a  total of 27 irrigat ion subprojects have been pre -screened to ensure consistency 
with eligibility criteria including ADB and the government’s social and environmental safeguards.    
 
For all subproject s, the first stage of the feasibility process is the recruitment of national consultants for the preparation 
of the feasibility study and detailed design. The feasibility study for each subproject will include a survey, technical


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 80 
 C 
specification criteria, soci al and gender safeguards, land compensation and resettlement, environment and economic 
feasibility.  The studies will be reviewed by the PIC and if satisfactory will be passed onto the IA for further scrutiny and  
through the PMU and then on to ADB for no o bjection. If unsatisfactory the national consultants will be asked to revise 
the feasibilities, if practical. Once there is no objection from ADB the subproject will be presented to the PSC for 
endorsement and then if approved the design will then be under taken.  In case a candidate subproject does not meet the 
eligibility criteria, it will be replaced by the next priority candidate subproject from that respective province under the l ist 
of eligible subprojects identified is exhausted. If candidate subproje cts not listed are considered, they will be examined 
and screened with the support from an independent consultant acceptable to both ADB and the executing entity EE , and 
submitted to ADB for approval.  Once the feasibility studies have been approved, the na tional consultants will prepare the 
detailed design. Detailed design of subprojects will take due account of projected climate change impacts and incorporate 
design features that enhance resilience of the interventions.  
 
The provincial line agencies will assist the national consultants in carrying out the necessary surveys and the relevant 
line agencies as well as the PIC will provide technical support to the national consultants as required. Provincial technical  
specialis ts of the PPIU will also assist in providing local knowledge and facilitate the feasibility. The detailed designs will 
be reviewed by the relevant line agencies to ensure compliance with standards and regulations of the government. Once 
approved by the rel evant technical line agencies, resettlement action will be initiated if required. The PIC will review the 
detailed design to ensure compliance with appropriate standards and resettlement as well as the environmental 
management plan (EMP) with ADB safeguard s statement. The PMU will review and approve the detailed design and 
then initiate the bidding process.  
 
The selection criteria applied for various infrastructure subproject s under output 1 are listed below :  
Activity 1.1: Rehabilitating water management infrastructure to climate resilient condition   
Critical design features  contributing to climate resilience  include (i) enhanced storage capacity; (ii) improved regulation 
of flow rates, including adequate flow capacity of regulators and other structures t o prevent or reduce scour ; (iii) improved 
water allocation within the command area, including  division of the command area into compartments to allow for orderly 
cultivation of a part of the area in case of water shortage; (iv) concrete lining  of distribut ion canals to reduce the seepage 
losses; (v) enhanced flood resilience; and (vi) improved drainage and salinity control (in affected areas).  
In addition, climate resilience in infrastructure interventions are enhanced by the following measures: (i) high o ver-all 
efficiencies (High output per m3 of water); (ii) optimal balance between water demand and water availability; (iii) limited 
reliance on pumping; (iv) predictable and reliable water allocation over time and within the scheme; and (v) effective 
cooperation between farmer water user groups (FWUGs) in terms of sharing knowledge about management options, 
covering both cultivation and water management.  
1.1a: Irrigation and water management subproject s 
(i) The subproject is an existing small to medium scale irrigation system with good balance betwee n water demand 
and raw water availability ; 
(ii) The command area of the subproject  should be sufficient to demonstrate climate change adaptation measures 
(improved technical design , enhanced water use efficiency, good agricultural practices, and improved water 
use governance), and to ensure that the subproject  would be more climate resilient than now.  
(iii) The subproject identified should have strong political and community ownership in terms of commitment to 
implement climate change adaptation measures and ensure effective operations and maintenance (O&M);  
(iv) The subproject  is not supported by other ongoing o r proposed development projects financed by ADB or other 
development partners;  
(v) A farmer water user group (FWUG) or farmer water user community (FWUC) already exists or there is evidence 
of high potential to establish a FWUG or FWUC;  
(vi) The subproject  should i nvolve rehabilitation of both primary canals and distribution canal networks (secondary 
and tertiary canals) to ensure that water reaches the farms, with minimum water loss;  
(vii) The subproject  has low irrigation efficiency and low water productivity, and scope  for improvement, with 
sufficient water resources;  
(viii) The subproject  should have viable economic returns (a minimum economic internal rate of return of 12%);  
(ix) The subproject  should require as little land acquisition as possible;  
(x) The subproject  should not resul t in any involuntary resettlement;


---
*Page 33*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 80 
 C 
(xi) The subproject  should have high potential for cluster (cooperative) development and include vulnerable 
communities, poor and women farmers as beneficiaries.  
(xii) The subproject  should enhance capacity of the beneficiaries to o perate and maintain irrigation schemes 
sustainably with little or no external intervention other than the normal extension services.  
 
1.1b: On -farm surface water catchment ponds : 
 
(i) The recipient must be a smallholder willing to work with the project to impl ement climate resilient agricultural 
practices associated with surface water catchment;  
(ii) The recipient must have a land title or the land is secured in his or her name;  
(iii) Preference is given to female headed households;  
(iv) The plot of land has problems relating  to excessive rainwater run -off or drainage channels or gullies running 
through the plot, both of which can be “tapped” to provide supplementary irrigation;  
(v) The smallholder can show that there will be benefits to intensive agricultural production through using of the 
pond as a supplementary irrigation source;  
(vi) The farmer commits not to sell or transfer the land to a third party during the life of the project, to ensure capital 
gain;  
(vii) The farmer commits to contribute to necessary O&M of water catchment pond; and 
(viii) If required, the farmer has no objection for his or her farm to be used as a training and demonstration location 
for the duration of the project.  
 
1.1c: Drip irrigation demonstr ations   
 
(i) The recipient must be a smallholder and not an absentee farmer;  
(ii) The recipient must have a land title or the land is secured in his or her name;  
(iii) The recipient has marketing contacts that require Grade A fruit or has the potential of gaining such c ontracts  
(iv) The recipient must grow the Keo Romeat  mango variety or other climate resilient varieties that are amenable 
to floral manipulation and have market potential  
(v) The recipient has access to the water or quality water is available for a borehole and pon d construction (if of 
sufficient size or replenishment to satisfy the water demands of irrigating mango);  
(vi) The recipient must work with the project and accept technological innovations of drip irrigation , including 
necessary O&M ; 
(vii) The farmer commits not to s ell or transfer the land to a third party during the life of the project, to achieve 
capital gain and; and  
(viii) The farmer has no objection for his or her farm to be used as a training and demonstration location for the 
duration of the project.  
 
Activity 1.2: Upgrading a gricultural cooperative value chain infrastructure   
 
(i) The cooperative must be registered for more than a year and is able to access loans;33 
(ii) The cooperative stores seed and/or is trading or has a business plan to develop a trading agribusiness with  
potential downstream value chain linkages;  
(iii) It should have at least 1,000 m2 land available or planning to buy similar area of land;  
(iv) It should have a reserve fund, with preference to those reinvesting at least 10% above the minimum legal 
requirement of 20%  gross profit (the minimum stipulated in the Law on Agricultural Cooperation 2013) into the 
reserve fund;  
(v) The cooperative should have strong commitment to implement climate change measures to reduce vulnerability 
to impacts of climate change, and reduce ca rbon footprint of its operations through promoting renewable energy 
(e.g., solar roofs) and improving energy efficiency.  
                                                             
33  Agricultural cooperatives can  be registered with MAFF and those that have access to formal financing. The Rural Development Bank will support those 
cooperatives with good management and business plans with loans, this is a recent move (June 2016) and is backed by an AFD gu arantee whic h commits 
to cover 65% of any losses; average loan size $5,000.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 80 
 C 
(vi) It should have strong commitment of cooperative management team and approved by at least 2/3 of members 
as detailed in Article 43 on th e Law of Agricultural Cooperatives.34 However, the 2/3 majority will be for all 
members and not just those attending general meetings;  
(vii) The cooperative should develop a realistic and technically viable O&M plan for post -harvest and renewable 
energy infrastru cture at the cooperative  
(viii) The area under cooperative primarily grows rice, maize and/or cassava; and  
(ix) There is full social and gender inclusion within its membership.35  
 
Activity 1.3: Improving connectivity to cooperatives and markets through climate resilie nt farm road networks    
(i) Candidate road should be an existing road connecting farms to the existing agricultural cooperative or other 
agricultural market center;  
(ii) Candidate road should complement ADB’s past, ongoing and future interventions and provide the potential for 
higher economic growth by reducing transport costs for the movement of farm produce to agricultural markets;  
(iii) There should be  a strong political and community commitment to implement adaptation measures and support 
O&M  of farm road networks ; 
(iv) Candidate road should be consistent with MRD’s priorities for rural development and decentralization;  
(v) Candidate road should not involve land acquisition and should not require resettlement of roadside structures, 
market sites or communities;  
(vi) Candidate road should not produce a negative impact on the local indigenous people,  
(vii) Candidate road should not produce a negative effect on the environment, other  than the effects that occur during 
the construction period, and which are to be  managed through an environmen tal management plan.  
(viii) Candidate road should achieve the economic threshold limit of 12% for the  economic internal rate of return  
(ix) Candidate road must have at least 40% female beneficiaries.  
 
Activity 1.5. Promoting r enewable energy for value chain improvemen t - Biodigesters  
 
The biodigesters reduce GHG emissions through three pathways: (i) substitution of non -renewable cooking and lighting 
fuel by a renewable fuel (biogas), (ii) reduction of methane emissions from manure by capturing and burning methane for 
thermal energy (cooking and lighting) and (iii) displacement of chemical fertilizers by bio -slurry. The design criteria of 
biodigesters include: (i) durability, reliability and maintenance requirements; (ii) local availability of construction materials; 
(iii) appropriateness of the design for areas with high water tables; and (iv) costs.  
 
The selection criteria for households eligible for a bio-digester  are as follows:  
(i) Commune members who are located within the catchment area of those agricultural cooperativ es supported by the 
project;  
(ii) Households having at least 15 kg manure available daily and at maximum 150 kg per day;  
(iii) Commitment to adopt climate smart and good agricultural practices such as composting, mulching, organic 
agriculture, climate resilient varieties;  
(iv) Preference to female headed households , and households committing to O&M of biodigesters ; 
(v) Preference to households with presence of respiratory related illnesses due to air pollution or those households at 
risk that use biomass for cooking;  
(vi) Capa city to contribute funds either by having own funds or taking loans;  
(vii) Commitment to use bio -slurry as a fertilizer substitute;  
Procurement procedures  
The procurement of goods, works, and consulting services will be in accordance with the ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015,  as amended from time to time) and consulting services guidelines (March 2013, as amended from time to time)  
and the government’s procurement manual for externally financed projects in Cambodia updated version May 2012. The 
                                                             
34  Article 43: decisions relating to statute, internal regulations, division, amalgamation or dismissal of members shall be made  by two thirds majority of votes 
of members present in the gener al meeting. Other decisions of the general meeting shall be made by majority of votes of members present.  
35 A study on Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index surveyed 13 countries, including Cambodia which was undertaken late 2012 and included 2,100 
households in 84 villages across 17 districts. Cambodia achieved the highest score for Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture of the  13 countries. The 
study noted that 92.6% of women achieved adequate empowerment and that 94.7% of the women had achieved gender pa rity, But the indicator which 
contributed most to disempowerment for women was ‘group membership: USAID. 2014. Measuring Progress Toward Empowerment: Women ’s 
Empowerment in Agriculture Index: Baseline Report.


---
*Page 35*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 80 
 C 
procurement of works and goods contracts estimated to cost from $3 million and above for works and $1 million and 
above for goods shall be procured under international competitive bidding (ICB). Contracts estimated to cost from 
$100,000 to below $3 million for works and from $100,000 to below $1 million for goods will be procured through the 
national competitive bidding (NCB) procedures. Minor items estimated to cost below $100,000 for both works and goods 
will be procured through shopping method. Contracts estimated to c ost less than $5,000 for both works and goods may 
be procured under direct contracting method.  All consulting services will be procured by PMU using the QCBS (90:10) 
procurement method.   
MEF is the official representative of the Royal Government of Cambodia as the borrower of funds. It is the responsibility 
of MEF to : (i) fulfil l government fiduciary and financial management oversight ; (ii) provide sufficient counterpart funds for 
project activities in a timely manner ; and (iii) ensure that delays ar e not encountered in procurement and recruitment. 
MEF, in close cooperation with the EA, will be responsible for fund flow. MEF will operate the main advance  account, 
with three designated subaccounts for MAFF, MOWRAM and MRD. The advance  accounts are to b e used exclusively 
for ADB’s eligible expenditures. Three subaccounts, with a threshold of $10,000 each in each province, will be opened 
by the PDAFF, PDWRAM and PDRD to cover the project’s day to day operations. The directors of PDAFF, PDWRAM 
and PDRD in each province will be accountable for proper use of advances and reconciliation of the subaccounts. The 
EA has committed to submit the audited annual project financial statement to comply with ADB requirements in terms of 
timeliness, completeness and accep table quality.  
The PMU is required to prepare budgets for significant activities as stated in the financing agreement and PAM with 
sufficient details to allow meaningful monitoring of the subsequent performance. The funds flow is arranged and disbursed 
based on the government’s standard operating procedures and FMM and ADB’s procedures with further discussions 
among concerned parties, such as MAFF, MEF, and ADB.  
All consulting services will be procured by MAFF -PMU. Procurement of civil works  contracts for t he subprojects will be 
carried out by the PMU and in conjunction with MRD and MOWRAM national technical departments, where appropriate, 
within the PMU will provide national technical support (NTS) of the concerned ministry following NCB procedures. A bid 
evaluation committee will be formed and the PIC will assist the committee in the opening and evaluation of tenders. 
Recommendations which bid to accept will be passed on to the PMU for contract award. The procurement of goods, 
works, and consulting services  will be procured in accordance with the government’s procurement manual for externally 
financed projects in Cambodia updated version May 2012 and the ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended 
from time to time) and consulting services guidelines (Mar ch 2013, as amended from time to time) in case of consulting 
services. The diagram below represents the flow of funds structure:  
 
Construction methodology  
Construction will be undertaken using service providers.  Responsibility for co nstruction supervision for post -harvest 
structures, irrigation infrastructure and farm roads will be given to the relevant line ministry ( MAFF , MOWRAM, M RD), 
and training on procurement and supervision of construction will be provided in line with capacity assessment s of project 
partners. Following completion of construction, operations and maintenance costs will be borne jointly by the project


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 80 
 C 
beneficiaries (communities, such as FWUCs) and provincial governments, as part of ongoing budgets. The overall project 
implementation plan is attached in Annex  9. This implementation plan will be updated annually and submitted to ADB 
with contract and disbursement projections for the following year.  
For irrigation subproject s, during construction and po st construction, the project will aim to enhance the capacity and 
solicit matching community and state budget resources to deliver operation and maintenance ( O&M ) services to irrigation 
schemes and assist FWUCs with funding and backstopping. The present go vernment policy on O&M sustainability is that 
at the end of construction the project is handed over to MOWRAM’s Irrigation Agriculture Department and the O&M is 
shared with MOWRAM and FWUCs with MOWRAM being responsible for the major assets while FWUC has the 
responsibility for on -farm level infrastructure.  
Infrastructure Operations and Maintenance (O&M)  
Infrastructure O&M is critical to ensuring its continued effectiveness and productivity, and improper or inadequate O&M  
arrangements can undermine the long -term utility of the investments and lead to more costly rehabilitation efforts . The 
root causes of underperformance of O&M in Cambodia are  insufficient funding, inadequate capacity, and inappropriate 
governance structur es. The government’s manual on Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) requires that  that t he EA/IA 
must determine the impact of the project on its annual resources/budgets for O&M and how these additional future costs 
will be covered by the RGC or EA to ensur e sustainability . SOP Para 50 also recommends that a comprehensive O&M 
plan must be developed at an early stage of project development . MEF  established an O&M budget of about $15 million 
per year for all types of infrastructure. The amount is limited, but the ministry plans to increase O&M budget gradually. 
The project aims to address the O&M barriers related to governance, capacity, funding and technology as follows:  
(a) Institutional arrangements:  For each water management infrastructure sub -project, the PDWRAM will encourage 
FWUGs or FWUCs to establish O&M committees and prepare O&M plans. Likewise, each agricultural cooperative 
will be requir ed to prepare a realistic and technically viable O&M plan for infrastructure related to renewable energy 
and post -harvest operations. The O&M plans will clearly define the roles and responsibilities of the different 
stakeholders, include a schedule of rout ine maintenance activities, initial user tariffs (wherever applicable), and 
collection mechanisms for at least the first few years after construction, as well as estimated O&M costs for the 
lifespan of the infrastructure. O&M plans will be updated and fina lized on completion of the subproject and agreed 
upon. Formal links with the PDAFF, PDWRAM, PDRD  at provincial level  and MAFF, MOWRAM and MRD will be 
established, with their roles and contributions to O&M included in the plans. The number of completed subp rojects 
that have O&M plans in place, and the number of subprojects that are functional and used by communities a year 
after completion will also be monitored. The PMU staff will visit a sample of the subprojects after completion to 
evaluate O&M. The proje ct will also have a mechanism for effective complaints handling or grievance redress 
mechanism on O&M.  
(b) Capacity building:  As part of output 2, the project will have a strong focus on O&M learning. O&M training will be 
provided at regular intervals to FWUGs , FWUCs, agricultural cooperative members, biodigester beneficiaries and 
other stakeholders, including provincial government authorities, and, where appropriate, small -scale contractors or 
private companies involved in the O&M. The project will raise aware ness of the need for O&M through several 
channels including videos and distribute simple pictorial manuals or user -friendly guides to help communities in 
carrying out O&M activities. Capacity building will also include communication materials and informati on campaigns 
to encourage appropriate behavior in support of O&M, such as proper use of infrastructure, fee payment, and so 
forth. Some efforts will also be devoted to enhancing organizational and managerial capacity of FWUCs on O&M. 
The project will suppo rt a community networking strategy —a peer -to-peer learning initiative —that supports the 
sharing and dissemination of best practices and lessons learned on O&M and will facilitate integration, business 
relations formation, and cross -fertilization throughout . Finally, the project budget includes post -construction training 
and technical support to O&M. The project design and monitoring framework (DMF) includes that at least 27 FWUCs 
will develop capacity to operate and maintain their irrigation schemes.  
(c) Finan cing:  The project budget covers short -term financing needs for routine O&M.  To the extent possible, O&M 
financing of irrigation sub -projects would be partly covered by user fees from FWUGs or FWUCs. In addition, 
MOWRAM will seek support from MEF O&M budge t (currently about $15 million annually). The Department of 
Agricultural Cooperative Promotion (DACP) of MAFF will also allocate limited O&M budget for cooperatives to be 
supported under the project. Farmers’ willingness to contribute labor or cash for O&M  of infrastructure at agricultural 
cooperatives will also be a criterion for support. The project will establish appropriate incentives for O&M wherever 
feasible, by exploring public -private partnerships (PPPs) that can play in commercializing O&M efforts.  Financial 
support for each major sub -project will be made conditional on the set -up and operationalization of relevant O&M 
arrangements. The sub -projects that provide information on O&M costs and responsibilities will be prioritized for


---
*Page 37*
---

    
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 80 
 C 
support. The infor mation may include: O&M costs to be financed (e.g., operations and minor repairs versus major 
repairs or capital costs), ways to finance O&M costs after subproject completion (e.g., water user fees, post -harvest 
infrastructure usage fee), and responsibilit y to pay for O&M (F WUCs, cooperative members and/or local government 
authorities).  
(d) Technical issues:  This project aims to rehabilitate infrastructure to a climate resilient condition through good design, 
proper materials, and appropriate supervision. It is  expected that such infrastructure will have lower long -term O&M 
costs. In this process, the best practices learned from other ADB projects regarding design quality and construction 
will be followed. Efforts will be made to select appropriate design and te chnology, use local materials of required 
quality, and provide supervision to ensure construction is according to specifications. Such efforts will help optimize 
the tradeoffs between the lifecycle costs (investment costs and O&M requirements) and the scal e of benefits to the 
community. For biodigesters, only those biodigesters meeting national biodigester standards will be commissioned. 
Project implementation consultants will assess alternative technical solutions and inform communities of associated 
lifecycle costs, including future O&M costs.  
The following table summarizes O&M arrangements planned for each type of infrastructure under output 1.  
Infrastructure 
type Institutional 
arrangements  Capacity building  Financing  Technical issues  
1.1 Rehabilitating 
water 
management 
infrastructure to 
climate resilient 
condition  FWUGs and FWUCs, 
with support from 
PDWRAM, will 
prepare O&M plans 
for each irrigation 
sub-project.  The project will 
train FWUGs and 
FWUCs on O&M 
through workshops, 
awareness raising 
and multime dia. MOWRAM will seek 
MEF budget on O&M. 
The project will 
encourage  collection 
of water user fee 
from FWUCs.  Climate resilient design, 
proper construction 
materials, and 
appropriate supervision 
will be ensured.  
1.2 Upgrading 
agricultural 
cooperative value 
chain 
infrastructure   Each agricultural 
cooperative, in 
cooperation with 
DACP, will develop 
and O&M plan for 
post-harvest 
infrastructure.  The project will 
train cooperative 
members on O&M 
for post -harvest 
infrastructure.  DACP will seek MEF 
budget on O&M for a 
few cooperatives. 
Farmers will be 
encouraged to 
contribute labor or 
fee to O&M of post -
harvest infrastructure.  Good design, proper 
materials, and 
appropriate supervision 
will be ensured.  
1.3 Improving 
conn ectivity to 
cooperatives and 
markets through 
climate resilient 
farm road 
networks  Agricultural 
cooperatives, in 
cooperation with 
PDRD, will develop 
O&M plan for rural 
roads.  The project will 
train cooperative 
members on O&M 
of farm roads.  PDRD will encoura ge 
farmers to contribute 
labor to maintain farm 
roads; MRD will seek 
MEF budget on O&M 
to cover critical 
roads.  Climate resilient design, 
proper construction 
materials, and 
appropriate supervision 
will be ensured.  
1.4 Strengthening 
infrastructure for 
agricultural quality 
and safety testing  National Agricultural 
Laboratory (NAL) will 
be responsible for 
O&M of all lab 
facilities.  The project will 
train NAL staff on 
O&M of laboratory 
facilities.  NAL will allocate 
necessary O&M 
budget.  Internationally certifi ed 
laboratory equipment 
will be procured.  
1.5 Promoting 
renewable energy 
for value chain 
improvement  National Biodigester 
Program, in 
cooperation with the 
General Directorate 
of Animal Health and 
Production , will 
provide advice on The project will 
train farmers on 
O&M of 
biodigesters and 
cooperative Farmer beneficiaries 
will be encouraged to 
cover the costs of 
O&M for biodigesters. 
The cooperativ es will Quality of biodigesters 
and solar systems will 
be ensured through 
procurement from 
certified companies.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 80 
 C 
O&M to project 
beneficiaries.  members on O&M 
for solar panels.  allocate resources for 
O&M of solar panels.  
 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
The project implementation timetable  is in Annex 9.


---
*Page 39*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 80 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Cambodia is one of the mo st climate vulnerable  countries in Southeast Asia, affected by floods and droughts on a 
seasonal basis. Weak adaptive capacity, poor infrastructure, and limited institutions underpin  the country’s vulnerability 
to climate variability and change. Floods and droughts have been r ecognized by the government as some of the main 
drivers of poverty. Climate change impacts are expected to become increasingly visible, and future projections of climate 
change indicate more severe variability, higher levels of risk and exposure, and poten tially significant losses in 
livelihoods and income . The existing root causes of Cambodian vulnerability are high poverty rates, high dependence 
on climate sensitive livelihoods with increasing environmental degradation, compounded by limited institutional  capacity, 
technology, and infrastructure.  With 80% of the population continuing to depend on rural livelihoods, adaptation in the 
agriculture sector is not only a necessity, it can help drive economic development at a faster pace, provided the enabling 
conditions are put in place.  
The GCF finance will make a real contribution to move the traditional agriculture development efforts towards a more 
climate resilient and low -carbon trajectory, with a comprehensive package of support to build in resilience an d climate 
smart features in the agriculture value chain development, with some of the project outputs bearing considerable 
potential for scaling up and scaling out. Without the GCF ’s contribution, investments in Cambodia’s agriculture sector 
would only consider  current weather conditions, leading to a missed opportunity for increased productivity and resilience , 
and placing the entire value chain at continued exposure and risk  to climate change impacts .  The risk level posed by 
climate change would remai n high, and the targeted regions, rather than benefiting from a growth opportunity, would 
become gradually impoverished.  In order to make the investment fully resilient and to reduce vulnerability among project 
beneficiaries, a number of additional activi ties are required that can only be financed through GCF support . 
  
The value added by GCF support includes the following:  
 
- Extending the performance and lifespan of water, transport, post -harvest and agro -processing 
infrastructure  while also reducing the recurring maintenance and repair costs.  The combined effect of these 
climate -proofed infrastructure investments will be a stronger agro -economic activity and improved livelihoods 
throughout the four provinces, by increasing connec tivity in all seasons and by ensuring increased and 
continuous availability of higher quality products ; 
- The GCF support will also lead to the creation of added value at lower costs  to producers, by promoting the 
use of ‘leapfrogging’ technologies, such as precision -farming, laser land leveling, and ICTs ; 
- The combined impact of the project’s activities will also lead to reduced overall carbon footprint  of the entire 
value chains through the promotion of readily available renewable energy sources, the promoti on of energy 
efficiency measures and the use of climate smart agricultural practices.  
- Leveraging larger scale private sector investments into green and climate  smart agricultural activities  
by promoting the integration of climate change concerns into agribusiness policy  and by encouraging the 
emergence of public -private partnerships conducive to investment in climate -friendly value chains ;  
- Setting standards and norms  that will help orient f uture private and public investments towards climate -friendly 
value chains , including by removing barriers to green finance and climate -based crop insurance ;  
- Building lasting technical, institutional and policy capacity  among government, local enterprises , and 
communities, to understand and address climate risks and to develop adequate adaptive strategies;  and 
- Creating the enabling conditions and services  for a broader upscale of project results , including through 
development of climate resilient varieties, climate smart agricultural production practices and technologies, the 
provision and downscaling of climate services, and by using ICTs to ensure widespread access to relevant 
climate and market information.     
D.2. Exit Strategy   
Sustainability  
The technical and financial analyses  conducted have concluded that the project is financially sustainable and that 
benefits of the project will continue to accrue after funding completion  (please refer to Annex 3  on Economic and 
Financial Analysis) .   The sustainability strategy for the overall project, including the GCF contribution, rests on the 
integrated value -chain approach adopted, which considers a package of interlinked interventions designed to reshape


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 80 
 
 D 
the way in  which agriculture is practiced in the project provinces.  The integrated approach  will create enabling conditions 
to allow local producers to derive increased and lasting economic benefit from agriculture, while conserving natural 
resources.  The project’s support to the overall policy and normative  environment in which the agriculture  sector is 
deployed will also contribute to creating conditions for sustainability. This includes revision or creation of standards, 
quality certification, good practice guidance, tra ining and regulatory support.  
 
The project builds on institutions that we re supported by previous projects, contributing to an iterative approach to 
resilience building. However, this project is innovative in certain ways to circumvent  potential institutional shortcomings 
that could prevent long -term sustainability.  For exampl e, the project intends to establish the enabling environment for 
the deployment of green finance or climate finance and climate risk sharing tools at local level.  This will include 
addressing the full scope of capacity gaps, including lack of climate serv ices and data, regulatory and institutional issues, 
capacity of the financing institutions as well as local level financial literacy and the design of innovative public -private 
partnerships for improved service delivery. The project also ties into ongoing land use planning and local governance 
processes, with the establishment of cooperatives and the strengthening of FWUCs. This will also help reduce conflicts 
over land use, land allocations and natural resources.  It is expected that after the project, agricultural cooperatives, 
villages and FWUCs will be able to sustain most project activities and outcomes independently of project -based funding . 
 
The project’s strategy for maintaining results beyond the duration of financing is based on two approaches :  
(i) Creating or strengthening local institutions and governance mechanisms, such as FWUCs, financial institutions,  
cooperatives and agri -businesses.  This will include building their capacity to continue their operations based 
on internal cost recovery and on profit generated from improved productivity and better prices ; and  
(ii) Creating or strengthening the enabling environment for adopting climate friendly agriculture practices, including 
through capacity building of extension services, local producers, cooperative members, FWUCs and other 
community -based organizations.  This will also include strengthening of the government’s capacity to provide 
timely and relevant climate information and quality testing services to producers and stakeholders in the valu e 
chain, which will enhance the entire value chain’s responsiveness to climate events, and which can create 
impact in other regions in the years beyond the project duration. The National Agriculture Laboratory will be 
supported a semi -commercial footing wi th partial cost recovery.  
The project includes provisions for the coverage, from national and local resources, of ongoing operati on and 
maintenance (O&M) costs for all infrastructures that will be built or rehabilitated, including irrigation schemes, ponds , 
roads and storage infrastructure.   Post-implementation O&M for irrigation, ponds, drip irrigation and storage units will 
be the responsibility of the respective FWUCs, farmers, orchard owners and cooperatives.  The government policy on 
O&M sustainabilit y is that at the end of construction the asset  is handed over to the relevant government department, 
and the O&M is shared between government and user groups , with government  being responsible for the major assets 
while user groups have  the responsibility for on -farm level infrastructure . 
For irrigation works, the O&M costs represent 3% of the investment cost, and a portion of the costs are to be covered 
through the collection of dues from agribusiness c ooperative members and FWUCs.  For each subproject , dur ing 
construction and post construction, the project will aim to enhance the capacity and solicit matching community and 
state budget resources to deliver O&M services to irrigation schemes and assist FWUCs with funding and backstoppi ng.  
For the rehabilita ted irrigation schemes, FWUCs will be expected to collect fees from farmers in the command areas to 
cover O&M  costs. Some government funding for these schemes may be required from time to time to ensure that they 
continue to generate the expected crop production benefits. Provided FWUCs are well established and members are 
committed to maintaining their systems, the level of sustainability of infrastructure investments under the project should 
be high.    Finally, post -harvest storage units are conc eived as commercial units that will be self -funding and managed 
by the agricultural cooperatives themselves, in line w ith current governance arrangements.  By working with private 
sector, individual producers, cooperatives and FWUCs, and by addressing all aspects of the value chain, the project 
expects to create significant added value and increased profitability for all actors of the agriculture sector.  Profitability 
is expected to become visible during  the lifespan of the project, and to serve as a basis for participants to sustain the 
activities, governance structures and technologies beyond the duration of the project .


---
*Page 41*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Adaptation impacts  
The project expects to make a significant contribution to increased climate -resilient sustainable development for the 
390,000 direct project beneficiaries and 975,000 indirect beneficiaries it expects to reach, who are among the most 
vulnerable segments of  society: smallholding, agriculture -dependent farmers. The project will lead to reduced exposure 
of the value chain to climate change by ensuring that key productive assets are adequately protected against increased 
variability and extremes.  This includes  infrastructure rehabilitation and upgrade, protection of crops after harvest, and 
dissemination of timely agro -meteorological advice.   
The project will also help reduce the sensitivity of the sector by promoting climate smart agricultural practices, as w ell 
as through  using improved varieties that are more tolerant to anticipated climate conditions .  The provision of irrigation 
infrastructure will also reduce the rate of crop loss due to drought or irregular rainfall patterns.  This will play a key 
function in making the entire crop sub -sector less sensitive to climate change.  Finally, the project will increase adaptive 
capacity by improving the skills of key value chain stakeholders, including governments, local communities and 
farmers, agri -busines s operators, agro -processors, finance institutions and the private sector  – using a gender sensitive 
approach . The dissemination of proven technologies such as ICTs, laser land -leveling, climate smart agricultural 
practices at all levels, will contribute t o increasing the adaptive capacity of producers and traders.   The project’s efforts 
in the setting of an enabling policy and normative framework will further increase institutional adaptive capacity at the 
provincial and, ultimately, national levels.   The support to developing policy and standards for adequate agri -business 
development will ensure climate -responsive development planning in the longer term.  
Key adaptation benefits from each output are  as follows : 
Output 1  will avoid lock -in of long -lived, c limate vulnerable infrastructure by constructing or rehabilitating, upgrading 
and climate -proofing water infrastructure, as well as rural roads and post -harvest/processing facilities.  This will ensure 
that said infrastructure remain operational regardless of the climate scenarios  that materialize, while providing lasting, 
cost-efficient economic assets. The project expects to climate -proof 27 water manage ment systems over 15,000 ha , 
benefitting 25,000 households, with at least 50,000 women, as well as 800 on -farm rainwater harvesting ponds and 
4,000 ha of land laser leveled to optimize the amount of water for irrigation and better germination and crop grow th.  
Drip irrigation will also be promoted to further save water and enhance water use efficiency.  The project expects to 
construct or upgrade  80 post -harvest storage units,  as well as four provincial agricultural development centers and four 
engineering workshops to provide agribusiness services and strengthen farmer value chain linkages.   Furthermore,  
250 km of farm roads will be built , with climate  resilient features  to ensure connectivity to markets in all weather  
conditions  to ensure increased product ion of higher quality products that can be easily sold.  
Output 2 will lead to a significant reduction in vulnerability of local populations by enhancing adaptive capacity and 
resilience through the increased production of higher quality products, leading t o better nutrition, higher incomes, and 
diversification of income sources.  Farmers will produce quality climate smart products, on time and with continuity of 
supply. Women, landless people and poor households will be included in agribusiness, mechanizati on, and operation 
and maintenance training.   The project expects to strengthen 40,000 farmers’ adaptive capacity (among which 16,000 
women) and reduce their exposure to climate risks through capacity building on CSA practices and agribusiness 
development skills, which will in turn improve productivity and diversify farming systems. The project expects to 
contribute to an increase in yields of at least 15% from the 2016 baseline (rice 2.7 tons, maize 4 tons, cassava 20 tons 
and mango 15 tons/ha) and to help  at least 50 agribusinesses to become more resource efficient along the value chain 
in terms of water savings (5 -10% efficiencies), energy savings (20%) and reduction in post -harvest losses (10%).  
Under output 3, t he project also expects to reduce vulnerability to climate change by strengthening institutional , policy  
and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and development .  This will include testing capacity for bio -


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 80 
 
 E 
fertilizers and pests and diseases,  and the establishment of a set of standards conducive to the mobilization of green 
finance and crop insurance . 
The project expects to contribute directly to the GCF’s performance monitoring framework (PMF) indicators:  
Fund level impact indicators:  
(i) A1.0  Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and 
regions  
(ii) A2.0  Increased resilience of health and well -being, and food and water security (e.g. climate -resilient 
crops, efficient irrigation systems , etc.)   
(iii) A3.0  Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change threats  
 
Outcome -level impact indicators:  
(i) A5.0  Expected strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and 
development;  
(ii) A6.0  Expected increase in generation and use of climate informatio n in decision -making;   
(iii) A7.0  Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate r isks; and   
(iv) A8.0  Expected strengthening of awareness of climate threats and risk  reduction processes . 
 
Mitigation impacts  
In terms of mitigation, the project will reduce GHG emissions by 240,000  tons of CO 2 equivalent (tCO 2eq) by 2024  
directly, in addition to at least 3.25 million tCO 2eq indirectly , distributed as follows:   
 
The project will install 12,000 additional biodigesters and 6,000 compost huts benefitting at least 9 0,000 persons, 
including 40,000 women. Biodigesters will result in an integrated farming system where agricultural wastes are reused 
and optimized. In addition, the reduced demand for fuel wood will reduce degradation of forest and the other above -
ground biomass.  Further , the reduction in chemi cal fertilizer use from utilizing bio -slurry as fertilizer also has many  
climate benefits. Not only is the production of chemical fertilizers fossil fuel intensive, the application can result in GHGs  
such as N 2O with a very high global warming potential of 298 times relative to CO 2.  Promoting energy efficiency and 
other renewable sources such as solar energy in the operation of agro -processing and storage units will also ensure 
that any increase in production and processing to respond to growing market demands is done with a reduced carbon 
footprint .   
The emission reductions resulting from the biodigesters are calculated on the basis of (a) displacement/replacement 
of biomass with biogas for cooking, and (b) reduction of methane emissions through improv ing animal manure 
management systems. The methodology for emission reductions from biodigesters is based on approved UNFCCC 
and Gold standard methodologies endorsed by the National Biodigester Program of Cambodia (2015 - NBP, Cambodia 
– The Gold Standard) . The first source is calculated with the UNFCCC default value of 77% for non -renewable biomass 
(NRB) and links therefore directly with reducing deforestation. The emission reductions are to be certified on an annual 
basis.   IPCC Tier 2 approach was used fo r calculation of baseline emissions. The UNFCCC approved “Tool for the 
demonstration and assessment of additionality” version 7.0 with a 4 -step approach (Identification of alternatives to the 
project activity; Investment analysis to determine that the prop osed project activity is not the most economically or 
financially attractive; Barriers analysis; Common practice analysis”) was used to demonstrate additionality. It is 
expected that the installation of the biodigesters can contribute to reducing charcoal and fuelwood use in cooking by 
90%.  Emissions reductions from biodigesters are expected to reach 231,627 tCO2eq over the credit period of seven 
years .  
The emission reductions resulting from installation of solar energy in agricultural  cooperatives were estimated using a 
combination of UNFCCC and GEF methodologies, with an assumed 4.5 kWh/m2 of solar power generated per day


---
*Page 43*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
(using standard sunshine days estimates, total installable capacity and rates of use as specified in Annex 3B).  T his 
results in up to 18,689 tCO2eq over the entire lifetime of the project.   
Given operational uncertainties related to operation of biodigesters and agricultural cooperatives, a conservative 
estimate of total direct emissions reductions of 240,000 tCO 2eq has been maintained.     
The indirect emissions calculation is based on an estimate of carbon sequestration potential from improved agricultural 
practices in the project areas, based on an FAO EX_ACT (Ex -Ante Carbon Assessment Tool) simulation. Promoting 
climate friendly agriculture , including landscape  management and restoration  along  with improvements in rice 
cultivation methods in four provinces . This will lead to reductions in methane emissions, and promotion of soil carbon 
sequestration . Preventing deforestation and forest degradation  through CSA as well as by promoting household level 
access to renewable energy will  avert the destruction of several ecosystem services  such as carbon storage, nutrient 
cycling, water retention, water and air purificati on, and maintenance of wildlife habitat.    Measures included under 
climate friendly agriculture  include laser land levelling, alternate wetting and drying, improvements in rice cultivation 
(e.g. System of Rice Intensification ), water use efficiency measures including drip irrigation, agro -forestry and crop 
rotation, permaculture, etc. This will reduce GHG emissions  to the extent of 6.5 million tCO 2eq (as per estimate from  
ex-ante carbon balance tool). A conservative figure of 50% is taken, the resulting GHG emission reductions over a 
period of 10 years could be about 3.25 million tCO 2eq. Please refer to Annex 3B for details on assumptions governing 
the calculations. The tracking database for direct and indirect emissions will be used for annual monitoring and 
reporting of GHG emission reductions .  
The project will contribute to the following mitigation indicators:  
Fund level impact indicator s  
(i) M1.0 Reduced emissions through increased low -emission energy access and power generation  - Expected 
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2eq) to be reduced or avoided ( 240,000  tCO 2eq directly over project 
life and 3.25 million  tCO 2eq indirectly over 10 years ); Expected increase in th e number of households with 
access to low -emission energy (12,000 households) ;  
 
(ii) Degree to which the project supports the scaling up of low -emission energy in the affected region by addressing 
key barriers:  The project will contribute to scaling up mechanisms for financing of renewable energies, 
including by encouraging finance institutions to invest in such technologies ; 
 
Outcome -level impact indicators  
(iii) M9.0 Improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions : Expected 
improvement in the management of land contributing to emission reductions in 335,000  ha 
 
(iv) Expected improvement in waste management contributing to emission reductions (e.g. the change in the share 
of waste managed using low -carbon strategies and/or the change in the share of waste that is recovered 
through recycling and composting) .  The project will improve overall agricultural waste management by 
reducing the amount of wastes that are burned and use the materials for biogas production.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 80 
 
 E 
E.1.2. Key i mpact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be reduced or 
avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  At least 35,000 t CO 2 eq 
Lifetime  A reduction of at least 240,000  t CO 2-eq by 
2024  (direct)  and 3.25 million t CO 2 eq 
(indirect)  
• Expected total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries , 
disaggregated by gender  
(reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative 
to total population , 
disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  390,000 beneficiaries, among which at least 
40% are women  
975,000 indirect beneficiaries  
Total beneficiaries: 1,365,000 direct and 
indirect beneficiaries.  
Percentage 
(%) Direct beneficiaries represent 2% of the total 
country population and 12% of the 4 
provinces population, while indirect 
beneficiaries represent 6% and 30% 
respectively.  Total number of beneficiaries 
represent 9% and 42% of total national 
population and of the four provinces 
population, respectively  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Other key indicators  include:  
Number of climate resilient water management systems 
rehabilitated and/or built  27 
Number of hectares of land laser leveled  4,000  
Length of farm roads improved to all weather condition 
(km)  250 
Number of agricultural development centers established  4 
Expected increase in the number of households with 
access to low -emission energy / Number of biodigesters 
made operational  12,000  
Number of climate -smart and gender -responsive 
agribusiness policy formulated  1 
Number of climate -relevant standards developed and 
enforced  3 
Number of farmers trained in CSA practices  and standard 
compliance  40,000 of which 16,000 women  
Number of government officials trained in climate -resilient 
practices  Up to 400, of which 40% will be 
women  
Number of staff from banks and MFI trained on green 
financing  Up to 50 
Expected increase in generation and use of climate 
information in decision -making  At least  60% of project beneficiaries 
access and use climate information 
after project completion


---
*Page 45*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
The above indicators are aligned with  the institutional readiness and impact indicators of the  national climate change 
M&E framework developed by the National Council on Sustainable Development at MOE. The total number of 
beneficiaries was derived by adding the identified number of beneficiaries for each activity, as follows . The number of 
indirect  beneficiaries was calculated using a factor of 2.5 to account for some direct and indirect benefits of 
dissemination to immediate neighbors and family members :  
 
Post-harvest storage units for agricultural cooperatives : During preparation , the project ide ntified 33 cooperatives with 
3,878 members. This figure was then extrapolated (x 2.4) to reach 9,300 members  which includes  direct beneficiaries  
and nucleus family members, with more than one family member as a cooperative member . The figure amounts to 
37,200 direct beneficiaries of cooperative climate -proof storage units.  
 
Water management systems : The target of 27 small -scale irrigation was calculated by evaluating current and needed 
water management systems in the four provinces.  For the 27 small -scale irrigation systems identified , there are 128 
villages, 31,863 households and 191,200 beneficiaries  targeted . Water catchment ponds will reach 800 households or 
5,600 beneficiaries . Ten d rip Irrigation  schemes will reach 10 villages with on average 200 households and 1,400 
beneficiaries . 
 
Biogas : Biodigesters  will be introduced to 12,000 households, benefitting 90,000 beneficiaries of which 43,350 are 
women .  The number of households was determined in cooperation with Government of Ca mbodia, which has set a 
national level target of 2 million biodigesters installed by 2020  under its NBP.  Selection of beneficiaries has also been 
conducted based on willingness to pay, since benefitting households will be required to cost -share per each 
biodigester.  
 
CSA training : the number of beneficiaries was triangulated using provincial and district -level population, to achieve 
impact at scale.  An estimated 10,000 farmers per province would be trained, with 40% of these women (16,000).  
Other benefici aries include exporters, millers, trainers, government staff, Farmer Water User Community members.  
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
This project expects to contribute to large -scale transformative impacts through the following four aspects:  
- Introduction of climate smart policies, norms and standards  for the creation of a conducive investment 
environment for agricultural enterprises, and to support the emergence of long -term PPPs  to leverage 
additional growth;  
- Increased capacity of public and private institutions , including financing institutions , to support climate -
resilient agriculture and build and operate  climate -resilient infrastructure;  Insofar as public institutions are 
concerned, the project will involve planning, budgeting and technical departments beyond the project 
management unit to support the mainstreaming efforts.  
- Increased use of up to date technologies with a high potential for leap -frogging , including for example, 
mechanization, CSA and elements of precision farming , laser land levelling and the use of informa tion 
technology to upscale the delivery of climate and market information services. In selecting and deploying such 
technologies, the project will carefully assess lessons learned from previous projects. The quality of 
technologies will be ensured through use of certified companies and/or products.  
- The project will also leverage s takeholder behavioural change  of communities and the private sector 
through  the introduction of new  financial and risk sharing mechanisms  such  as green financing or  crop 
insurance , as well as through  awareness raising . 
This project will provide opportunities for targeting innovative solutions , new market segments, up -scaling successful 
technologies, business models, modal shifts and/or processes. As such it intends to catalyze significant impact in 
Cambodia’s agriculture sector. It is estimated that the direct benefits of this project will reach 390,000 people (2% of 
the country’s population or 12% of the four provinces population), with the potent ial to reach an additional 950,000  
indirect beneficiaries throughout the four provinces (or 42% of the four provinces population).   In the long term, given


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 80 
 
 E 
that this project is tied to the presence of transboundary transport corridors, and because the ena bling policy and 
regulatory conditions will be set, the project activities could be scaled  up to the entire population of the four provinces, 
and into neighboring countries. Mechanisms will be put in place to leverage a stronger scale of  impact, including:   
• The project will focus on climate change resilient strategies across the entire food value chain , while also 
promoting resource use efficiency and renewable energy to reduce costs and allow the deployment of low 
emissions pathways.  The equation between low -carbon and lower prices will help develop a model for more 
sustainable agriculture, which will  be easier to adopt by farmers.   The development of PPP models and forums 
will also help disseminate successes and approaches to farmers beyond project beneficiaries.  
• The development of climate friendly agriculture  and agribusiness skills  as well as farm mechanization at 
local level will create new profitable business and employment opportunities within agricultural cooperatives. 
The four provincial agricultural development centers (PADC s) and four provincial agricultural engineering 
workshops will be established to improve and create resource and training centers for service provision, 
agribusinesses and farmer value chain linkages. Training on reaching climate -conscious standards will be 
provided in these centers and will create incentive s for farmers to comply with food quality and safety standards; 
both safeguarding the production systems and enhancing the market linkages and competitiveness.   The 
dissemination of other technologies including biodigesters, laser land leveling, drip irrig ation and ICTs will also 
contribute to creating high value added employment in the rural area, which could help revitalize the entire area 
and create low -carbon economic opportunities beyond those directly foreseen in the project.  
• Agricultural cooperatives  and FWUCs will also be strengthened  at the local level by building their capacity 
on agribusiness and CSA through demonstration sites showing visible evidence of climate resilience and 
increased profitability, which will speed up the up -scaling process an d allow for farmer -based autonomous 
adaptation. In addition, providing access to climate information services will enable farmers to make informed 
decisions on planning their cropping seasons and reacting to  climate shocks. Agricultural cooperatives will a lso 
enhance their connectivity and access to regional and national markets thanks to climate -proofed feeder roads, 
facilitating upscale of agribusiness opportunities.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
The project is based on an approach that in tegrates research into development processes. This includes for example 
the provision of targeted training on climate -smart agribusiness skills and climate -smart agriculture practices, O&M of 
infrastructure  or using energy efficient technologies to reduce carbon footprint  along the value chain.  
The project’s outputs include elements related to the dissemination of best available information, technologies and 
practices  and their integration into policies, standards and norms applicable at the national level . Through awareness 
raising on the economic, social and environmental benefits of the climate -smart agribusiness approach, the project’s 
interventions will reach remote communities and most vulnerable areas and promote, among others , climate -resilient 
varieties. The project will implement an aggressive knowledge management approach so that all project results are 
effectively documented, barriers are addressed, and policy change is leveraged.  The project will produce guidance 
and training materials and tech nological information packets that can be disseminated in all areas of Cambodia.  It is 
expected that regional linkages established through trade will also contribute to accelerating knowledge dissemination.  
The project will also gather lessons learned an d results through its monitoring and evaluation plan, which will be shared 
across projects and with project partners.  Finally, t he project will be linked with key regional knowledge platforms such 
as GMS Core Agriculture Support Program and GMS Core Enviro nment Program to facilitate  collective synthesis and 
cross fertilization of information and experience across the countries in the region.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
The project will support the  creation of an enabling policy and operational environment for climate friendly 
agribusinesses  by contributing to the identification and dissemination of technologies and best practices at local level, 
as well as by supporting the design and implementatio n of enabling policies, regulations, and standards . The project 
will develop a climate -smart agribusiness policy to enable public -private partnerships, which will lead agricultural 
cooperatives to not only reach regional but also international markets with  their processed products. A comprehensive 
capacity development package targeting key actors along the value chain will create an enabling environment in which 
agri-businesses across the country can evolve.  
 
The project will create enabling conditions firs t by strengthening the government’s capacity and second by developing 
a climate -friendly  agribusiness policy and climate -conscious standards. The provision of climate services will also 
create an enabling environment for the deployment of low -carbon, resil ient agricultural practices as well as for the 
establishment of public -private partnerships, green financing and climate risk sharing mechanisms.  The development 
of standards and certification for climate -resilient seeds, as well as the deployment of trai ning on CSA will help create 
an enabling environment at local and provincial level. Finally, through the value chain approach, the project will support 
linkages to markets, which is expected to create economic incentives for continued stewardship.  
 
All the  agriculture produc ts (i.e. rice, corn, cassava, and mango) targeted by the project provide tremendous potential 
for commercialization to enter new global and regional markets.  The project focuses on mass deployment of proven 
climate resilient and low carbon technologies and practices with measurable and quantifiable benefits. Even though 
these technologies and practices are often new to the country but with the proven track record elsewhere, minimizing 
the risk of adoption failure. More importantly, the project is focusing on  innovation in business model, targeting crucial 
intermediaries within the agriculture value chain. While the actors such as agriculture cooperatives and financing 
institutions already have established credibility in their own right, the project is providi ng an opportunity for new 
partnership to create new business ventures. The green financing and crop insurance provides de -risking schemes 
essential for the success of these new business ventures.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
The project contributes to the creation of improved policies through outputs 3.1 and 3.2 , including for example:  
(i) A private -sector friendly  agribusiness policy  framework ;  
(ii) The design of c limate and environment -friendly production standards ; 
(iii) The promotion of  public private partnerships ; and  
(iv) Integration of c limate information into production, planning, and financial services .  
 
This, combined with investment in climate -resilient infrastructure, is expected to help leverage long  term investment by 
the private sector in the selected value chains.   The development of standards and certification for climate -resilient 
seeds, as well as the deployment of training on CSA will help create an enabling environment at local and provincial 
level, which will lead to the adoption of more sustainable, more resilient agricultural development policies . Finally, 
through the value chain approach, the project will support linkages to markets, which is expected to create economic 
incentives for continued stewardshi p.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.3. Sustainable Development  Potential  
Wider Benefits and Priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
The project will not only contribute to the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals  (MDG)  (notably goals 1, 3, 7, and 
8), but also to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , notably SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, and 13 .   The project 
intends to create the following economic, social and environmental co-benefits, directly contributing to the SDGs . The 
gender action plan ensures that benefits of the project are inclusive and address needs of women.  
Economic benefits


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 80 
 
 E 
The project expects to create employment opportunities for landless and poor farmers such as access to off -farm and 
on-farm employment related to support services such as farm mechanization, drying, milling, grading and storage of 
produce, which will enhance their adaptive capacity, while reducing their exposure to climate risks. For example, t he 
various socio -economic benefits to be realized by the off-farm and on -farm water ma nagement  include:  
• Rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructures, which at present are barely functional, will have a significant impact 
on the potential for crop production in the command area, leading to increases in both yields and cropping 
intensities. T he estimated net incremental income per ha is about  $1,030 per year at full development and for 
an average holding would be $556 per year. Because land preparation for all crops and harvest ing for rice are 
now mechanized, labor inputs are relatively low an d within the capacity of households for most activities, the 
value of labor inputs will also accrue mostly to households rather than to hired labor ; 
 
• Agricultural impacts include an increase in  dry season  rice yields from 2 tons per ha to 2.5 tons per ha w hich 
is well below the national average of 2.7 tons per ha , and  main wet season rice increasing from 2.7 tons per 
ha to 3.5 tons per ha. The cropping intensity for the command area increases from 135% (100% for the main 
wet season rice and about 10% for ea rly season rice and 25% for dry season cash crops) to 190% with cash 
crop production in the dry season increasing from 25% to 70% of the command area. Cash crops of 
watermelon and mung beans attain yields of 7 .5 tons and 0.85 tons per ha from yields of 6 tons and 0.5 tons 
respectively  (see table below ). 
 
• Efficient irrigation services combined with technical advice and appropriate inputs allow farmers to obtain 
substantially higher yields (with estimates varying between 0.5 tons and 1.5 additional tons per hectare for wet 
season rice and up to 5 tons per ha for dry season rice), expansion of cultivated areas, and increase the 
number of crops per year ; 
 
Crop yield improvement with and without the project's interventions  
Crop  Without Project  With Project  Increment 
(tons)  Yield 
(ton/ha)  Area (ha)  Product 
(tons)  Yield 
(ton/ha)  Area (ha)  Product 
(tons)  
Early rice  2.0 10 20 2.5 25 62.5 42.5 
Main season rice  2.7 100 270 3.5 100 351 81 
Mung bean  0.5 10 5 0.85 25 21.3 16.3 
Water melon  6.0 15 90 7.5 45 338 248 
 
• Pumping costs to individual farmers in schemes where pumping is required are likely to reduce by 30 to 50% 
thanks to the introduction of renewable energy and land leveling. Drainage canals, which are part of the 
irrigation system, can also serve as d rainage in case of floods. Enhanced distribution networks to bring water 
to farmers’ fields will greatly improve perception of service to farmers and will make it easier for FWUCs to 
manage the water distribution system and collect irrigation service fees.  Replacing existing broken or eroded 
structures by new technically appropriate ones will improve the overall durability of the scheme and reduce 
O&M costs going forward ; and  
• Communities and /or individual farmers can use water resources for fish farming and water for livestock, cash 
cropping, vegetable home gardens etc. with increasing cropping flexibility and diversification.  
 
The financial analys is of the representative subprojects show that the project will have significant  benefits for rural 
households in the project areas. Members of cooperatives with drying and storage facilities will benefit from the 
improved quality of their production, both directly from the cooperative activities and through incentives to improve on -
farm practices. At current prices, members who process all or part of their crop into chips will receive $62 per ton for 
chips instead of about $17 for fresh cassava, as well as increased dividends from the trading operations of the storage 
unit. For averag e households with a new bio -digester, annual cash benefits are about $230 from savings on fuel and 
fertilizers and the impact of bio -slurry on crop yields. Owners of mango orchards in the project areas who adopt drip


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
irrigation after seeing one of the proj ect’s demonstration orchards can expect an annual benefit, once full production 
is reached, of around $2,000 per ha.  
The storage unit will offer a marketing outlet for 600 tons of dried chips equivalent to approximately 1,100 tons of fresh 
produce  and will  result in o ff-season prices to be 10 to 20% higher than in season.  The storage units will i ncrease 
household  income for not only those households that are members of the agricultural cooperatives,  but other 
households  that market their fresh cassava to th e agricultural cooperatives, hence reduc ing poverty  rates.  The project 
expects to reach a 10% increase in rural household income (from a base of KR 1.16 million/$290) over the lifetime of 
the project.  Additional demand for hired labor due to the increase i n the need to manually cut cassava (as buyers 
prefer hand cut chips over machine cut chips) will be increase as well as opportunities for direct and indirect 
employment. The agricultural cooperative’s  trading business will offer continuity of supply, stora ge infrastructure and 
through quality management and an improved quality and uniform product, the value chain linkages between producer, 
processor and trader/exporter will be stronger and in a glut market that product will sell before other lower quality o r 
substandard products. There will be increased trust amongst the value chain players.  Increased household incomes 
will lead to a reduction in household debt levels, and a subsequent decrease in the incidence of domestic violence in 
farming households .  
Social benefits  
The project expects to generate significant social co -benefits, including higher food and nutrition security through 
improved produce quality, increased incomes and stronger sanitary standards, as well as through diversification of 
produce (e.g. fish and non -timber forest products, vegetables from crop rotation and additional crop due to irrigation).  
Along with closer access to water and better water management, this will lead to overall improved health among target 
populations, particularl y vulnerable groups such as women and children.  
 
A project gender action plan has been developed recognizing women’s important role in crop production and with the 
aim of addressing some of the issues related to their limited access to technology, informa tion and extension services 
for agricultural production. Specific actions and targets are included in the project gender action plan to ensure for 
example that at least 40% of farmers benefiting from capacity building activities and technical support are w omen 
farmers, that women farmers have access to training on how to operate and maintain agricultural machinery (this is 
important given the increased mechanization of planting and harvesting, which are activities in which women are 
primarily involved), tha t women receive information on green finance and climate risk sharing instruments, and that 
they are actively involved in the selection and multiplication of climate resilient crop varieties.   
 
An estimated 50,000 women  will benefit from rehabilitated clim ate resilient water management systems, including in 
terms of reduced labor.  Furthermore, the provision of alternative energies for cooking (instead of burning residues) 
and the training on responsible use of farm inputs, particularly agro -chemicals, will  help improve household health.  
Access to lower -cost energy sources will also enable households and families to engage in economic diversification 
activities, and could improve access to education for children, particularly girls.  
Given the degree of out -migration of males from the area, it is estimated that the majority of subproject beneficiaries 
will be women. With expanded opportunities for crop intensification, the subproject may lead to some reduction in out -
migration levels, as agriculture becomes an important source of household income. School dropout levels may 
decrease, as families are better able to pay for their children’s education. Women’s access to extension services and 
technical information will be improved and women will be empowered thro ugh receiving training in agricultural 
techniques and mechanization. Increased household incomes will lead to a reduction in household debt levels, and a 
subsequent decrease in the incidence of domestic violence in farming households. During civil works, m anual 
employment opportunities will be created for households and women. Women who can read and write will have the 
opportunity to work as record -keepers.   
At the broader level, the project also expects to deliver social benefits in terms of access to impr oved knowledge and 
research, better access to extension and technical support, and opportunities for innovation.  
Environmental benefits


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 80 
 
 E 
The project will have high environmental co -benefits, in addition to leading to the reduction of carbon emissions due to  
land use change  and the introduction of biodigester s, thereby contributing to reduction of deforestation  and forest 
degradation .  The restoration of irrigation schemes and of the immediate surrounding landscape s around project -
supported infrastructure wil l help combat soil erosion and land degradation and will help create natural buffers against 
floods and run -off.   Forests will be protected thanks to the anticipated decrease in fuel -wood needs, due to improved 
access to energy , namely biogas . Introducing  climate -smart agricultural practices will contribute to soil improvement  
and soil carbon sequestration  through more effective rotation and the use of nitrogen fixing cash crops, as well as 
using cash crops that extract nutrients from different soil depths . This will lead to an increase in biodiversity in the 
natural landscape surrounding agricultural lands, allowing for the maintenance of key ecological services crucia l for 
agricultural production.  The use of wastes for energy and compost production will also help reduce local source 
pollution and reduce the use of agro -chemicals on farm.  The climate proofing of water and post -harvest management 
infrastructure will improve the efficiency of at least 50 agribusiness units , reaching 5 -10% of water savings and 20% of 
energy savings , as well as a 10% reduction in post -harvest losses .  
Gender -sensitive development impact  
A detailed gender analysis and gender action plan (GAP) has been prepared  (see annex  6), which includes gender -
related actions, performance indicators and targets to promote women’s voice and active participation in all project 
activities. The project will promote gender equality and women’s empowerment through enhancing women’s capacity 
in climate smart agriculture production and processing, management and business, agricultural machinery use and 
maintenance, accessing and using financing, and through strengthening linkages between women -led enterprises and 
the agribusiness industry. Other a ctions include a gender analysis of the four selected agricultural value chains that 
will inform further refinement of the GAP at the start of the project and the development of a gender -responsive MAFF 
agribusiness policy.  
Women will be targeted for empl oyment and training in infrastructure related construction/rehabilitation and operation 
and maintenance, for uptake of bio -digesters, and as decision makers in selection of climate resilient crops varieties. 
Benefits from cooking with biogas will include reduced time for cooking, allowing women to do other tasks outside the 
household ( At least 40,000  women are beneficiaries of bio -digesters installed) . While at least 30% women trained in 
infrastructure related construction/rehabilitation (e.g. masonry skill s for bio -digesters construction), and operation and 
maintenance (e.g. local irrigation schemes), this will create at  least 25% of workdays filled by women disaggregated 
by skilled/unskilled and type of work related to infrastructure construction/rehabilit ation as well as operation and 
maintenance (point of reference: women’s current involvement in similar infrastructure related work varying between 
17% to 46%).  The project will work in close partnership and strengthen technical capacity of the newly formed  Women’s 
Farmers Network and the MAFF Gender and Children Project Support Unit in order to ensure sustainability of gender 
mainstreaming efforts in the agribusiness sector.  Increased awareness of gender equality may lead to improved 
sharing of household c hores and tasks.  
Other  benefits  
The project yields other benefits that could not be monetized, including (i) sound cooperative models for agribusiness 
operations, (ii) strengthened institutional and human capacity for climate smart agribusiness, and (iii) increased 
ownership and involvement of farmer groups in operations and maintenance of agribusiness infrastructure.  
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and  beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
As a least developed, agrarian country, Cambodia is one of the most climate vulnerable countries in the world. The 
Cambodian population is nearly 15 million in 2016 .  Despite recent economic progress, the country remains one of the 
most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.  This is mostly due to the geographical location and topography of 
the country, a continued heavy reliance on rainfed agriculture, and low  levels of technical capacity to apply adaptive 
approaches and technologies among smallholder farmers and rural institutions. The geographical incidence of extreme 
weather events such as droughts and floods varies, and while floods affect lowlands areas, t he geographical 
distribution of droughts is widespread. Storms occur more frequently, with significant impacts on infrastructure and


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
livelihood s36.   In general, the changing climate creates increased socio -economic costs, in terms of livelihoods loss, 
infrastructure degradation, increased costs of maintenance, and the maintenance of a high level of risk for vulnerable 
communities and the private sector.  
Poverty remains a serious issue in Cambodia, despite remarkable progress made in achieving MDG of reducin g by 
half the proportion of its people living below the poverty line. Given that the majority of the population derives livelihood s 
from agriculture, climate sensitivity is high. Cambodia’s agriculture is predominantly rain -fed and characterized by low 
input, and moderate or low fertility land, thus making it dependent on weather conditions and changing climate. Rice 
is Cambodia’s primary staple and provides approximately 70% of nutritional needs. Rice crops occupied 83% of the 
3.22 Mha of harvested area. F our other food crops, namely corn, cassava, soybean and mung bean, occupy 
approximately 13%. The remaining 4% is used for growing vegetables, sesame, peanut, sugarcane, potato, tobacco 
and jute.  Low yields, exacerbated by climate variability and climate e xtremes contribute to recurring food shortages.  
As Cambodia has a tropical monsoon climate with marked rainy and dry seasons, the impacts of climate on human 
health are significant. Malaria and dengue fever are the prevailing mosquito -borne diseases. Cambodia’s renewable 
energy sources are abundant, but they remain largely untapped for electricity production. Biomass, the main cooking 
fuel for households, accounts for more than 80% of total national energy consumption. Forests play a significant role 
in traditional rural livelihoods, providing constructi on wood, fuel wood, food and medicine, as well as ensuring 
ecosystem functions such as watersheds, storm and coastline protection. Firewood remains the main source of energy 
for cooking for 91% of rural people. Cambodia’s forest cover was estimated at 10.8  Mha or around 60% of the country’s 
land area in 2006 .  
Under future climate conditions (2025 and 2050), most of Cambodia’s agricultural areas will be exposed to higher 
drought risks. The growing period for most agricultural areas will be less than five mo nths (between two and three 
months); in these conditions, access to irrigation becomes imperative. Losses in production are mainly attributed to 
flooding (about 62%) and drought (about 36%). Under the high emission scenario (SRES -A2), wet season rice yield  
(rainfed) will continuously decrease until 2080, and could fall by up to 70% of current yield levels  – which are already 
under regional averages . Similarly for dry season rice (irrigated rice), yields for crops planted in November and 
December could decre ase by 40%. Under the low emission scenario (SRES -B1), the anticipated yield decrease ranges  
from 60% to about 20%. 37 
As noted in the Second National Communication  and supported in the Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 – 2023 , the 
Royal Government of Cambodia  intends to focus on increasing its capacity to cope with current climate risks by 
improving climate risk management and community livelihood s. Using climate information, increasing water use 
efficiency and creating additional sources of income for  farmers are among the measures identified  as priorities for 
adaptation . The government  also expects to direct its efforts towards the revitalization of long -term policies and 
planning that take into account climate change. Measures include information use , infrastructural interventions, 
expanding to other areas with lower risks, insurance, better varieties of crops and long -term research.  
The project preparation design team undertook a participatory assessment of socio -economic and climate change 
vulnerability in the four target provinces and four target commodity value chain s (Annex  7). For example, Tbong 
Khmum is projected to experience a temperature increase by 3.1°C in the wet season, and 2.7°C in the dry season by 
2050. Kampong Cham is also in  the top range for dry season increase with +2.6°C predicted. Takeo and Kamot are 
projected to experience a temperature rise of 2.3 -2.4°C by 2050 . In the wet season, the Kampong Cham and Tbong 
Khmum  provinces are expected to experience increased rainfall of more than 10% while Kampot and Takeo provinces 
are projected to have increased rainfall of more than 9%. During the dry season, Kampot and Takeo could see a 3.9% 
decrease in rainfall, with Kampong  Cham and Tbong Khmum projected to experience only a 0.5% decrease.   
One of the target provinces, Kampot, located in the south -western Cambodia, is one of the country’s four coastal 
provinces. However, target districts within the province may not be signif icantly affected by sea level rise.  Vulnerability 
analysis of value chains of four target commodities indicated that several links in the value chain are highly vulnerable 
to impacts of climate change. The target communities consider themselves to be increasingly poorer than urban areas, 
in provinces with limited productive resources and limited income generating opportunities. Households have land 
                                                             
36 Government of  Cambodia.  Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  to the UNFCCC. 2015.  
37 GSSD 2015. Cambodia’s Second National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
General Secretariat, National Council for Sustainable Development/Mini stry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia, Phnom Penh


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 80 
 
 E 
parcels ranging from 0.58 to 1.5 ha in size . The communities reported high levels of out -migration, leavi ng elderly to 
care for small children, resulting in less available hou sehold labor for agricultural activities, as well as gender issues 
related to domestic violence and secure land tenure. In addition, amongst the poor and vulnerable groups there are 
high rates of female illiteracy, particularly amongst older women. The priority demand in targeted areas was for 
affordable credit to alleviate the debt burden, and consistent supply of water . 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Improved macroeconomic stability and public financial management reforms have helped Cambodia’s economy grow 
during 2004 –2014. Gross domestic product grew by 7.0% in 2014 and was expected to increase by 7.4% during 2015 –
2016 .38 There has been a dramatic reduction in the national poverty rate (by 60.46%) in the rural areas from 2007 – 
2012 .39 However , 40% of the population is still vulnerable .40  Levels of investment into rural infrastructure remain 
insufficient to meet the needs, and significant losses have been incurred due to extreme climate events over the past  
few years.  Consequently, the infrastructure deficit is accentuated and the lack of adequate water systems restricts the 
most producers to a single rain -fed crop annually , constraining intensive and high value crop production and 
intensification.  This maintains rural populations in a state of vulnerability to climate and economic fluctuations.  The 
government is unable to meet demands for rural investment from available p ublic funds; there is a need to increase 
private sector participation in the agriculture  sector.  
To encourage more private sector participation, the sector must become more profitable.  Processors and buyers will 
need to form closer linkages with the raw m aterial supply base but this can only take place if farmers group together 
to produce a quality, uniform sample and are compliant with standards that are demanded by the market such as the 
SRP and good agricultural practice. More and more importers, trader s and processors are accessing the more mature 
export markets of People’s Republic of China , European Union, Japan,  Republic of Korea, and United States of 
America require such standards for traceability and transparency. Cambodia’s long -term growth prospects within 
ASEAN EC are hampered by its limited quality and non -compliant agricultural product export base.  
At the farm level, there are shortages of rural labor with migration from the rural areas an issue; labor costs have risen 
accordingly. It is projected that mechanization will also contribute to the anticipated decline in the role of women in 
agriculture, with harvest and post -harvest activities usually the tasks of women. However, the introduction and use of 
machinery is important means to achi eve increased productivity and to avoid over expansion. The repair and 
maintenance of the machinery is a major constraint and has substantial cost implications.  Other constraints include:  
(i) lack of financial resources to invest in farming  
(ii) shortage and lack of bargaining power to purchase inputs  
(iii) difficulties in marketing agricultural products  
(iv) low farm incomes  
(v) high energy costs, which reduces the competitiveness of agribusinesses , and   
(vi) lack of access and high costs of finance contribute to sub -optimal investments in agribusiness.  
 
The microfinance sector in Cambodia is relatively mature and effective compared to other developing countries, with 
low default rates of 0.7%.41 Ninety two percent of SMEs are not registered, they lack business records and are not able 
to produce financial statements, and they lack collateral such as hard/soft land titles and have little credit history, as 
75-90% of their funding is self -generated .42 Agribusiness do not have sufficient access to credit as commercial banks 
have risk aversion lending to such enterprises, as well as those enterprises that wish to invest in “green” or climate 
resilient technology, infrastructure and services . 
                                                             
38  ADB 2015,  Asian Development Outlook 2015: Financing Asia’s Future Growth. Manila.  
39  National Institute of Statistics/ Ministry of Planning 2013 . 
40  World Bank 2015: Cambodia Agriculture in Transition; Opportunities and Risks .  
41  The rate has increased from 0.3% to 0.7% in the last 12 months, Cambodia Microfinance Association, 2016.  
42   MEET -BIS Cambodia EU funded project supporting energy efficiency investments by SMEs .


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
At the institutional level, the current agricultural extension system is facing numerous problems, such as limited 
supporting system and regulations, and lack of human resources, funding, technique s and new technology, agricultural 
extension materials, and facili tation skills .43 The 2015 Agricultural Extension policy foresees a shift from supply -driven 
services towards demand -driven, extension -for-market, -competition, and – sustainability approach.   This will require 
developing more targeted extension services, wi th a more diverse set of partners and stakeholders, including for 
example development partners, NGOs, research and educational institutions, input suppliers, private companies, 
CBOs, or expert farmers, and financial institutions.  Re-training of current sta ff, and the provision of new skill sets 
focusing on the most up to date practices and technologies – adapted to the needs of the market in terms of production, 
quality, standards and climate resilience – is urgently needed.  A detailed institutional capaci ty building and training 
plan was prepared to assist the government in project implementation.  
E.5. Country Ownership  
Beneficiary Country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
The project is aligned with the government’s priorities on low -carbon and climate resilient development as outlined in the 
Government’s overarching Rectangular Strategy Pillar III, and the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2014 -
2018 . The NSDP ’s objective is to reach an annual eco nomic growth of 7% and achieve  more than 1% reduction in the 
poverty rate annually . Cambodia has developed the Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 – 2023, and associated action 
plans were developed by each relevant ministry. These plans are Cambodia’s first ever comprehensive national policy 
documents that illustrate not only the country’s  priority adaptation needs, but also provide roadmaps for the de -
carboni zation of key economic sectors and the enhancement of carbon sinks. Further, Cambodia has developed a Green 
Growth Policy and Roadmap which sets the path to stimulating the economy thr ough low carbon options, savings and 
creating jobs, protecting vulnerable groups, and improving environmental sustainability.  
The project is in line with the government’s Agriculture Sector Strategic Development Plan (2014 -2018) , which  aims to 
enhance com petitiveness of the agriculture sector through the increase of agricultural growth by approximately 5%, by 
enhancing  of agricultural productivity (intensification),  diversification and commercialization, through emphasis on the 
implementation of the strate gy and action plan for climate change adaptation and mitigation.  
Alignment with Cambodia’s Nationally Determined Contribution  and Sectoral Climate Change Action Plans : 
The project’s focus on climate friendly  agriculture value chain s is expected to significantly contribute towards achieving 
climate change policy objectives outlined in the National Adaptation Program of Action to Climate Change (NAPA)  of 
2006 , the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  (INDC)  of 2015, and the  individual climate change action plans 
for MAFF, Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) and Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRAM).  
The project directly contributes to several priority actions identified in section 2.2 (pages 4 -5) and Table A1 (page s 14-
16) of Cambodia’s INDC. They include (i) promoting and improving the adaptive capacity of communities, especially 
through community based adaptation actions, (ii) strengthening climate information dissemination, (iii) developing and 
rehabilitating the  flood protection dykes for agricultural development, (iv) developing climate -proof agriculture systems 
for adapting to changes in water variability to enhance crop yields, (v) promoting climate resilient agriculture and 
scaling -up of climate -smart farming  systems, (vi) developing crop varieties resilient to climate change, (vii) repairing 
and rehabilitating existing road infrastructure and ensuring effective operation and maintenance, taking into account 
climate change impacts, and (viii) strengthening tec hnical and institutional capacity to mainstream climate change into 
sector development plans.  
The project  supports the following key priorities for climate change as highlighted in the National Climate Change 
Action Plan as well as those of MAFF, MOWRAM and MRD:  
National CCAP 
(2016 -2018)  MAFF CCAP (2014 -2018)  MOWRAM CCAP 
(2014 -2018)  MRD CCAP (2014 -2018)  
                                                             
43  RGC, 2015, Agricu ltural Extension Policy in Cambodia – Unofficial translation .


---
*Page 54*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 80 
 
 E 
Priority Action 10. 
Engage and raise 
awareness of 
different target 
groups on CC and 
GG/sustainable 
consumption and 
production;  
Priority Action 11. 
Promote and improve 
the adaptive capacity 
of communities to 
respond to climate 
change  Priority Action 1. Promoting and up - 
scaling climate smart farming system 
that resilient to climate change.  
Priority Action 2. Promote post -harvest 
technology for cereal crop and tuber 
crop, and conduct the research and 
transfer appropriate post -harvest 
technology.  
Priority Action 3. Develop crop variety 
suitable to AEZ resilient to climate 
change (include coastal zone).  
Priority Action 7. Strengthening capacity 
of Agricu ltural and agro -industry 
development entrepreneur and the 
agricultural cooperative in low emission 
production   Priority Action 1. 
Strengthening 
climate 
information and 
EWS   
Priority Action 5. 
Climate risk 
management and 
upgrading of 
small, medium 
and larg e-scale 
irrigation 
infrastructure.  
 Priority Action 2. Develop 
adaptation options and 
guidelines to improve 
climate change resilience 
of rural infrastructure  
Priority  Action 4. Scale up 
microfinance to support 
GHG mitigation and 
reduce climate change 
impac t in vulnerable 
areas  
Priority  Action 6 . Build 
capacity on climate 
proofing rural 
infrastructure design, 
construction and 
maintenance for civil 
engineers  
The project is also in line with Cambodia’s Industrial Development Policy and ADB Country Partnership  Strategy for 
2014 -2018 , which focuses on agricultural commercialization, rural infrastructure, and climate change.  Furthermore, 
the project aims to promote resource use efficiency, renewable energy supply and biogas and bioenergy consumption; 
a priority in the government’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). The promotion of alternative energy is linked 
to reducing poverty by supplying energy and power to the poor, especially in remote area, which will also contribute to (i) 
the National Strategic D evelopment Plan 2014 –2018 (NSDP) ; (ii) Rural Electrification Master Plan ; (iii) the Cambodia 
Green Growth Roadmap and National Strategic Plan on Green Growth 2013 -2030 ; and ( iv) the policy on bio -digesters 
(2016 – 2025).  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited enti ties and executing entities to deliver  
ADB is a multilateral development finance institution providing loans, grant and technical assistance. ADB is composed 
of 67 members, 48 of which are from the Asia and the Pacific region. ADB clients are its member governments, who 
are also the ADB shareholders. In addition, ADB provides direct assistance to private enterprises of development 
member countries through equity investments and loans. In 201 7, ADB loan and grant approvals  from its own 
resources  to develop ing member countries amounted to $1 5.9 billion. Private sector operations amounted to an 
additional $ 3.2 billion. Further, ADB mobilized, with donor support, $ 9.8 billion in cofinancing, bring ing total operations 
for 201 7 to $2 8.9 billion. ADB was the firs t multilateral  development bank to be accredited to the GCF, and the first 
Accredited Entity to mobilize GCF funding to the Pacific region (Fiji). A highlight of ADB’s operational figures for 2017 
is climate financing, which reached a record $4.5 billion ( comprising $3.6 billion for mitigation and $0.9 billion for 
adaptation), a 21% increase from 2016. This puts ADB in a good position to achieve its $6 billion climate financing 
target by 2020.  
The executing entity  MAFF , and the other implementing entities such as MOWRAM and MRD,  have extensive 
experience to deal with projects funded by the development partners including ADB. Their experiences include program 
loans, investment loans and various technical assistance projects. They have adequate internal contr ol systems and 
financial reporting arrangements, not only for their regular budget and expenditure management, but also for other 
development partner -funded projects. Additional capacity development support particularly on financial management 
and procurem ent to properly implement and comply with ADB procedures will further improve their capacity in these 
areas. The capacity of executing and implementing agencies on procurement and financial management has been 
assessed in depth. See Annex 7 for details . 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
As the project meets national strategic priorities for climate resilient and low carbon development  and is aligned with 
Cambodia’s intended nationally determined contribution, the Ministry of Environment (NDA for Cambodia ), has 
expressed support for the project . The Ministry  has given  the no -objection letter for the project proposal , after 
conducting a review by the Secretariat of the National Council on Sustainable Development (NCSD) .  The Ministry of 
Environment and NCSD  will continue to be engaged during project implementation, especially in (i) monitoring and 
evaluation of climate change actions in t he project, (ii) building capacity and supporting policies and measures for 
mainstreaming climate change concerns in development planning in line ministries, (iii) upgrading the infrastructure 
and capacity of GMO testing facility of the NAL, and (iv) conse rving watersheds in proposed irrigation and water 
management subproject  areas.       
The project conducted extensive consultations with diverse stakeholders (national ministries, provincial departments, 
civil society organizations, development partners and the private sector) since July 2014. The project prepared a  
detailed stakeholder consultation and participation plan, which includes a stakeholder analysis that identifies the key 
actors, their interests, and strategies to maximize their participation in the project. Information was gathered from (i) 
the national institutions to be involved in project implementation ; (ii) public and private actors in the agribusiness sector ; 
and (iii) community members living in the target areas. During the project design,  members of the project preparatory 
technical assistance team comprising international and national social development specialists conducted broad 
consultations to solicit stakeholder input on the project design.  Participants included national and provinc ial 
government representatives from relevant sectors, NGOs and private sector as well as other development partners 
and projects. Special sessions focusing on each stakeholder group were held at least six times.  
The information and recommendations gathered  from the various stakeholder consultations have been incorporated 
into the design of the project to ensure that the investments align with local priorities and national development plans, 
and that they will deliver equitable socio -economic benefits to the  intended beneficiaries.  The results of the pre -
implementation consultations are also reflected in the summary poverty reduction and social strategy, gender action 
plan, and environmental assessments. There is broad community support for the project’s app roach to combine 
agribusiness -related infrastructure development with capacity building and agricultural enterprise support to create 
local employment and income generating opportunities.  
Coordination with relevant related initiatives has been sought durin g the preparation of this proposal. This includes, for 
example, building on work that is undertaken through the following key projects:  
- Agriculture Services Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension  (ASPIRE),  supported by IFAD 
until 2021.  The ob jective of this project is to support an improved model of extension services for Cambodia. 
The project supports evidence -based policy development; capacity development for extension services ; 
improved extension services; and infrastructure to support climate -resilient agriculture. It targets productive 
poor people and vulnerable smallholder farmers in the provinces of Battambang, Kampong Chhnang, Kratie, 
Preah Vihear Pursat,, Kampong, Kandal,  Prey Veng, Svay Rieng and Takeo . Among the key areas for 
synergies, the two projects will collaborate on methodologies for extension.  
- Scaling -up of Renewable  Energy Technologies in Rural Cambodia (S -RET),  financed by GEF and IFAD 
(under ASPIRE project abo ve) in Kampot, Kandal, Prey Veng Svay Rieng provinces  and Takeo.  The project 
seeks to promote the broader adoption of renewable energy technologies in Cambodia by lifting key policy 
and technical barriers.  It includes investment in the demonstration of biodigester technology in line with the 
NBP as well as roll out of non -biodigester technologies such as solar water pumping and efficient biomass 
cook  stoves.  Key areas of synergies between the two projects , especially in Takeo and Kampot provinces,  
include (i) sharing technologies on the design and roll out of biogas digesters , and (ii) support to the technical 
working group on climate change in agriculture, forestry and fisheries (TWG -CCAFF) to promote policies to 
facilitate the adoption of renewable energy technologies by farmers . 
- Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project (AIMS),  supported by IFAD until 2022.  This 
project seeks to develop public private partnerships for key crops, to the benefit of smallholders, using IFAD’s 
public -private -producer partnership (4Ps) model. The project seeks to promote links among b uyers, producers 
and service providers around local value chains, including through a value chain innovation fund, which will 
provide direct financial support to stimulate private investment. The initiative partners with microfinance


---
*Page 56*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 80 
 
 E 
institutions to increa se access to rural finance. Key area for synergies b etween the two projects include 
knowledge sharing on green finance methods and application through AIMS pilot projects.   
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
The cost -benefit analysis showed that the project is economically viable. The economic internal rates of returns (EIRRs) 
for the three representative subprojects between 14.0% and 33.7%. In addition, an economic assessment for the 
domestic bio -digester pro gram revealed an indicative EIRR of 26%. The viability of the sample irrigation subproject 
may be vulnerable to the average long -term cropping intensity that farmers are able to achieve, but the most important 
risk for all subprojects would be the lack of necessary skills to operate, maintain and manage the infrastructure and 
facilities properly. The project will mitigate this risk through provincial level training programs. The government has 
assured to provide necessary budget for operation and maintenanc e of infrastructure. The sensitivity analysis confirmed 
that the project benefits and returns are robust.  
A financial and sustainability analysis was conducted from the perspectives of the government and farmers. For the 
government, the financial sustainab ility of the project was assessed by comparing incremental recurrent costs 
(considered to be 2% of the capital cost per annum), with the budget allocation available to cover these costs. Since 
the MAFF has substantial capacity to cover these recurrent cost s, the project is considered financially viable. In addition, 
sustainability is assured through regulations, which secure payments for laboratory testing services to partially cover 
the recurrent costs of laboratory equipment and associated infrastructure.  Agricultural cooperatives may raise additional 
revenues to be channeled for operations and maintenance of cooperative infrastructure.  
The financial analyses of the representative subprojects show that the project will have significant benefits for rural 
households in the project areas. For the representative irrigation subproject, estimated net incremental income for 
households with an average holding of 0.54 ha in the command area is expected to be $550 per year. Members of 
cooperatives with drying and s torage facilities will benefit from the improved quality of their production, both directly 
from the cooperative activities and through incentives to improve on -farm practices. At current prices, members who 
process all or part of their crop into chips wil l receive $62 per ton for chips instead of about $17 for fresh cassava, as 
well as increased dividends from the trading operations of the storage unit. For average households with a new bio -
digester, annual cash benefits are about $230 from savings on fuel  and fertilizers and the impact of bio -slurry on crop 
yields. Owners of mango orchards in the project areas who adopt drip irrigation after seeing one of the project’s 
demonstration orchards can expect an annual benefit, once full production is reached, of  around $2,000 per ha. The 
project yields other benefits that could not be monetized, including (i) sound cooperative models for agribusiness 
operations, (ii) strengthened institutional and human capacity for climate smart agribusiness, and (iii) increased  
ownership and involvement of farmer groups in operations and maintenance of agribusiness infrastructure.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
The total cofinancing available for this project is $101.4 million, inclusive of $90 million loan from ADB,  $7.6 million from 
the RGC and $3.8 million from beneficiaries.  It represents a cofinancing ratio of 2.5.  The project has significant 
potential to catalyze long term investment into emissions reduction tec hnologies, including for example the upscaling 
of biogas and waste -to-energy technologies from household to small town levels, or the application of climate smart 
agricultural practices and precision farming practices that improve productivity and resilien ce, and reduce emissions.  
E.6.3. Financial viability   
The government contribution to the project will be 3% of total project cost or about $ 7.7 million over the course of the 
6-year project. This will be m ade up of waived taxes  (applicable to all sources of funding)  and the incremental costs of 
staff for the Project Management Unit and other government staff who will be involved in project implementation.  The 
fiscal impact of the project will be negligible.  In addition, t he ben eficiary contribution will be about $3 million over the 
course of the 6 -year project.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 80 
 
 
 E 
 
Infrastructure outputs from the project will include rehabilitated irrigation schemes, drip irrigation for mango plantations,  
on-farm ponds, storage and drying units for  cooperatives and new or rehabilitated training facilities in the four project 
provinces.  Post -implementation O&M for irrigation, ponds, drip irrigation and storage units will be the responsibility of 
the respective FWUCs, farmers, orchard owners and coop eratives.  The orchards and storage units are commercial 
units that will be self -funding. For the rehabilitated irrigation schemes, FWUCs will be expected to collect fees from 
farmers in the command areas to cover operation and maintenance costs. However , such fees may not cover all costs, 
such as major flood damage, should it occur.  Some government funding for these schemes may be required from time 
to time to ensure that they continue to generate the expected crop production benefits. Provided FWUCs are well 
established and members are committed to maintaining their systems, the level of sustainability of infrastructure 
investments under the project should be high.  Government’s main ongoing fiscal commitment arising from the project 
will be the project re lated activities of NAL, CARDI and the training activities of the PDAs in the four provinces.  Only a 
portion of this will be incremental to current budgetary commitments.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
The project design has incorporated  the best practices  from the previous  projects  in several ways. The lessons 
include the following:  
(i) Project design must consider  the multiple entry points in the value chain, including  lateral points of entry ;  
(ii) Access to credit is essential for all value chain players and overcoming risk aversion of the finance 
institutions particularly for “green” financing is particularly important ;  
(iii) Strategic, policy and regulatory issues related to the selected value chains  and the ir regional implications 
must  be understood ;  
(iv) Project design should consider O&M  and long -term sustainability of infrastructure by paying adequate 
attention to the four critical factors for O&M success : (a) organizational and institutional arrangements; ( b) 
capacity building (high -quality, timely training on O&M); ( c) financing (e.g., revenue collection and cost -
sharing mechanisms, and willingness and ability to pay) and ( d) technical considerations  (e.g., d esign and 
technology choices, and complexity ) – discussed in detail in section C7.  
(v) The priva te sector needs i ncentives to take ownership of value chains , with government concentrating on 
public -good initiatives ;  
(vi) The inclusion of small farmers is critical to transform  traditional production and supply p ractices into 
commercial demand -driven proce sses that the buyers and processors require w ithin the value chains ;  
(vii) Promoti on of  on and off -farm businesses  to improve rural incomes must be facilitated ;  
(viii) The trade -off between product specializa tion and diversification ;  
(ix) VC players need to trust each ot her and consolida te long term relationships ; and   
(x) Strengthening sector and producer associations and organizations for value chain  coordination and policy 
dialog with national and regional organizations can play important roles.  
 
In terms of agricultural best practice, the project intends to promote the following:  
(i) SRP practices: The SRP is a global multi -stakeholder alliance aiming to transform rice value chains to 
enhance resource use efficiency and minimize environmental, social , ecosystem and climate change 
impacts of rice production. In 2015 , SRP launched the world’s first rice sustainability standard, along with 
quantitative performance indicators. Taking a landscape -based approach, SRP works at both farm and 
policy levels to drive adoption of climate -smart sustainable best practice. Performance indicators include: 
productivity related indicators, nutrient and pesticide use indicators, food security and safety measures, 
socio -economic indicators, as well as GHG -related indicato rs;  
(ii) CSA standards:  Good CSA practices will be identified through cooperation with international research 
centers such as the CGIAR and the Global Alliance for Climate Smart Agriculture ; and  
(iii) Good Agricultural Practice standards:  The Cam -GAP is the regulatory tool for Cambodia’s Food Safety 
Assurance System monitored by MAFF.  It includes norms and standards related to Food Safety, Product 
Quality, Worker Health and Welfare and Environment Management in various value chains . 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators


---
*Page 58*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 80 
 
 E 
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
(a) Total project financin g 
(a1) Total amount spent on mitigation activities:  $ 141.4  million  
$ 13.6 million  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
(b1) GCF amount spent on mitigation activities:  $ 40 million   
$ 4.4 million  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  240,000  tCO 2eq (direct , from renewable 
energy ) 
3.25 million tCO 2eq (indirect, from 
agriculture, forestry and land use)  
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a1 / c)  $ 57/ tCO 2eq* 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq (e = b1 / c)  $ 19/ tCO 2eq 
 
The estimated cost per tCO2e q is calculated against the cost of project activities that expect to directly 
contribute to emissions reduction, meaning the installation of biodigesters, and agricultural cooperative  
facilities with solar energy sources.  Soil carbon sequestration from th e application of climate smart 
agriculture practices in the 4 value chains is considered an indirect contribution. Emission reductions 
attributed to displacement of chemical fertilizers and the use of bio -slurry as input to CSA and the 
introduction of clim ate-smart agricultural practices are not considered  due to methodological complexity in 
assessing these sources, but will contribute to the improvement of the management of land and forest 
areas, which will also reduce GHG emissions.  The emission reduction s resulting from the biodigesters 
were calculated based on (i ) the displacement of biomas s with biogas for cooking and (ii ) reduction of 
methane emissions through improving animal manure manage ment systems. The first source wa s 
calculated with the UNFCCC N on-Renewable Biomass  default fraction of 77% and links therefore directly 
with reducing deforestation. The emission reductions are based on the voluntary Gold Standard Biodigester 
Methodology used by the NBP Cambodia and are  certified on an annual basis. Emissions avoided from 
the use of solar energy in post -harvest infrastructure were calculated using standard CDM methodology.  
Emissions reduced through application of CSA practices were estimated using the  FAO ex-ante carbon 
assessment tool. The y were as high as 6.5 million tCO 2eq. Conservative estimates were considered at 
50% of this, yielding 3.25 million tCO 2eq.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
In addition to significant levels of cofinancing, the project expects to leverage funding from th e NBP, which 
expects to implement a further 2 million biodigesters, with funding of $800 million.  Additionally, the project 
leverages household level and NBP funding of $  400 per biodigester. While it is impossible at this stage to 
estimate the value of financing leveraged from private sector, the project expects that by setting the 
enabling conditions, significant funding flows from financing institutions and private secto rs will flow to the 
sector through green and climate finance.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -
benefit generated as a result of the project/  program ) Not applicable


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 80 
 F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
The project has two main parts. Firstly, investment in infrastructure focussed on enhancing value chains for key crops, 
either directly as for irrigation and drying and storage facilities or indirectly as in facilities  for household biogas production 
or fo r training that will help improve skills and efficiency along the value chains.  Secondly, the project will invest in 
training and policy development as well as in essential laboratory services and agricultural research aimed at providing 
farmers with more  climate resilient varieties.  
The rehabilitation of small scale irrigation infrastructure and roads clearly fall under the public sector. Project investmen t 
in drying and storage facilities for cooperatives will demonstrate the financial and economic viability and benefits of this 
type of investment to government, cooperatives and the private sector and will in turn attract future investment in similar 
facilities from cooperatives on their own account or in partnership with private sector players.  Project investments in 
drip irrigation for mangoes will serve the same purpose of demonstrating to mango orchard owners the benefits of such 
facilities and thereby encourage their investing in this technology for themselves.  
Investment in training for the agricult ural sector and in laboratory and agricultural research has traditionally been 
provided in Cambodia by the public sector. Investment in these activities by the private sector is not likely unless  the 
legal, institutional and economic conditions are in plac e to enable private sector participation and ensure the possibility 
of a return on investment.  For the time being, the responsibility for investment in these activities remains with the 
government.  
Feasibility  studies were conducted  for three representative subprojects, namely a reservoir and irrigation system 
rehabilitation, a mango drip irrigation system and a cooperative storage facility. No  economic  assessment was made 
for the training, institutional and policy related activities . The key assumptions  used for these  economic  analys es are:  
 
(i) The project life is 20 years, including construction; the salvage value at the end of the project life is zero ;  
(ii) Implementation of the subproject will be over two years with benefit flows expected to start from the year 
following the completion of construction ;  
(iii) Costs and benefits are expressed in constant third quarter 2016 in dollars and are valued using the domestic 
price numéraire ; 
(iv) Taxes and duties, interest and price contingencies are excluded from the economic cost; and physical 
contingencies are included ;  
(v) For tradable goods and services, economic costs and benefits are derived by adjusting their values by the 
shadow exchange rate factor of 1.1 and removing taxes ;44  
(vi) A shadow wage rate factor of 0.9 has  been used for unskilled labor ;45 and 
(vii) The opportunity cost of capital adopted in the analysis is 12%, which  represents the opportunity cost of capital 
in Cambodia.  
 
The following is a summary of the economic and financial analysis (EFA) of the three subprojects. The detailed EFA 
report is provided in  Annex  3. While the assessment did not attempt to quantify the benefits of climate resiliency 
strengthening made possible by GCF  financing, it can be expected that the subprojects’ economic and financial v iability 
will be further strengthened. Climate resilient design reduces the subprojects’ vulnerability to extreme weather 
conditions, thereby reducing routine maintenance requirement and reducing the magnitude of crop losses.   
Trapaing Run Irrigation Rehab ilitation  
Trapaing Run Reservoir and irrigation system is located in Tani commune of Angkor Chey district of Kampot  province. 
The reservoir and its command area of 100 ha are shared among three villages with 185 households with 832 family 
members of which 708 are expected to benefit directly from the rehabilitation of the system. The system was constructed 
during the K hmer Rouge regime between 1975 and 1978 and since then has had very little maintenance. The works to 
be undertaken by the project will be rehabilitation of the embankment, deepening of the silted reservoir, renewal of the 
                                                             
44 The data required to estimate the SERF (and SCF) has not been available. A SERF of 1.1 has therefore been used, with variatio ns in 
this value tested in the sensitivity analysis to check the impact on the results of the assessment.  
45 Variations in the SWRF are tested in the sensitivity analysis.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 80 F 
control structures and the constru ction of new main and secondary canals and the main drain. Training and support will 
also be provided for the establishment of a FWUC to take over O&M of the system.  The subproject has an EIRR of 
16.1%.  The project is robust against a range of adverse sce narios.  
 
Trapaing Run Irrigation – EIRR   
 ENPV  
(USD)   EIRR 
(%)  SI   SV (%)  
Base Case  133,543  16.13%    
-10% With project yields  3,930  12.13%  9.71 -10.30%  
+10% Capital costs  85,289  14.44%  -3.61 27.67%  
+10% O&M costs  130,469  16.04%  -0.23 434.34%  
+10% Capital, +10% O&M costsa) 82,214  14.35%  -3.84 26.02%  
+10% Crop input costs  106,522  15.30%  -2.02 49.42%  
+20% Crop input costs  79,502  14.47%  - - 
-10% With project crop area  58,066  13.80%  5.65 -17.69%  
Source:  ADB Consultants’ estimates  
Mango Drip Irrigation Demonstration  
 
The mango orchard for the pilot is located in Trapang Kranhoung commune and Tram Kok district of Takeo province. 
The orchard is 2.5 ha in area, is in its fifth season and has produced fruit in the last two years. The farm is owned and 
managed by a local farmer who lives in the community where the farm is located. With only a single crop per year, 
orchard production is likely to increase to about 7 tons per ha from the sixth or seventh year after planting.  Floral 
manipulation results in the trees producing two crops of mangoes per year, almost doubling output. This is easier to 
manage successfully in orchards with irrigation, which, if properly managed, will give yields for both crops about 30% 
higher than w ithout irrigation. The s ubproject benefits have been estimated with a crop budget for mangoes that 
compares production with floral manipulation and without and with irrigation. The crop budget includes orchard 
establishment costs of $1,905 per ha with the first crop in the third year.  Full production is from year 6. The results of 
the economic assessment and sensitivity analysis are given in  Table 3 . The EIRR for the subproject is 23.3%, reflecting 
the significant benefits that drip irrigation provide s to both the quantity and quality of mangoes produced.  
Mango Drip Irrigation – EIRR  
   ENPV  ($)  EIRR (%)   SI   SV (%)  
Base Case  12,142  23.25%    
-10% With project yields  10,043  21.46%  1.73 -57.86%  
+10% Capital costs  10,539  21.07%  -1.32 75.73%  
-10% Capital costs  13,745  25.83%  - - 
+10% Orchard operating costs  12,028  23.15%  -0.09 1064.58%  
-10% Orchard operating costs  12,256  23.35%  - - 
+25% Grade A % with project (50% of grade 
composition)  18,903  28.75%  2.23 -44.90%  
+50% Grade A % with project (60% of grade 
composition)  25,664  33.97%  - - 
-10% Mango prices  9,152  20.69%  2.46 -40.61%  
-10% Mango prices, -10% with project yieldsa) 7,263  19.02%  4.02 -24.89%  
+10% Capital costs, -10% with project yieldsa) 8,440  19.39%  3.05 -32.80%  
Source:  ADB Consultants’ estimates  
 
Seda Seanchey Cooperative Storage Facility


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 80 
 F 
The market price for cassava in Cambodia is strongly influenced by the demand from neighboring countries. 
Approximately 90% of the cassava produced in Cambodia is exported to Thailand and Viet Nam with the remaining 
10% sold for domestic starch processing and the export of cassava chips to China. The exports of chips to Thailand 
and Viet  Nam in 2015 were 1.79 million tons and 330,874 tons, and exports of fresh roots were 106,500 tons an d 
464,020 tons respectively.  The subproject will provide a 200 -ton capacity cassava storage facility and associated drying 
floor. The store will allow the cooperative to consolidate the product in sufficient quantities to facilitate closer linkages  
with pr ocessors and traders. The drying area will provide for uniform product through the introduction of sound selection, 
processing, drying and storage techniques. Cooperative members will also participate in project supported training and 
capacity building in accounting, agribusiness, cooperative management and O&M of the storage units as well as for 
improving on -farm production.   
 
The direct, quantified benefits of the subproject are the trading margins from the management and operation of the 
storage facility . This benefit accrues from the service of buying cassava chips from members and other growers, storing 
up to 200 tons at any time until they are needed by (mainly) Vietnamese traders and processors further down the value 
chain.  The storage unit provides selling power that will enable the cooperative to benefit from higher prices for their 
product than they would otherwise obtain. Only these benefits are included in the economic analysis. Indirectly, 
cooperative members who grow cassava, and other cassava growers in their immediate area, will benefit from the 
incentive to improve cassava cultivation and increase yields and to undertake the cutting and drying of some of their 
own production to take advantage of the greater returns on the sale of chips compar ed with fresh cassava.  
 
Since cassava can be harvested throughout much of the year, the facility will operate for most of the year, once 
management skills and markets are developed. The average storage period is assumed to be 3 to 4 months with, once 
the m anagement is fully operational, 3.5 complete “cycles” per year (i.e. total throughput of 700 tons of cassava chips). 
However, if this level is not achieved and the volume handled in year 5 reaches only 600 tons (3 cycles equivalent) 
then the EIRR would be 16.7%. The eventual volume handled will depend on  efficient management and well -
established linkages to growers and to buyers. Since management of the facility will entail a learning curve and time to 
establish up and downstream market linkages, it is assu med that this level of activity is only achieved in year 5, after 
starting with a volume of 100 tons in the first 12 -month period.  
 
The EIRR for the subproject is 1 8.8%, which is robust against adverse risks .  
 
Seda Seanchey Cooperative  Cassava  Storage Facility  - EIRR   
ENPV  
(USD)  EIRR  
(%) SI SV 
 (%) 
Base Case  58,007  18.76%  -   -   
+10% Storage costs  52,999  18.19%  -0.86 115.85%  
+10% Capital costs  49,114  17.42%  -1.53 65.23%  
-10% Capital costs  66,899  20.29%  - - 
+100% O&M (2% of the capital costs per year)  53,626  18.31%  -0.08 1324.32%  
Benefits delayed one year  9,101  12.99%  - - 
+14.3% No. of storage cycles in year 5 (+0.5 cycle)  80,050  20.83%  2.66 -37.63%  
-10% Cassava chip prices  34,010  16.05%  4.14 -24.17%  
-10% Cassava chip prices, +14.3% No. of storage cycle 
in yr 5  53,534  18.03%  - - 
Source:  ADB Consultants’ estimates  
 
Notes:   1)  Purchase and sale price of chips varying by same percentage  
 2) Capital excluding training and project management costs   
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 80 F 
Technical evaluation was conducted for technologies introduced in the project, and the following technical 
considerations were established, as conditions for implementation. A detailed technical feasibility assessment was 
completed for three representative subprojects. Please refer to Annex 2 Feasibility Studies.   
Rehabilitation of Irrigation Infrastructure. The project involves rehabilitation and modernization of at least 27  
irrigation and water management systems to become climate resilient. Considerations for this work include choice of 
appropriate technologies such as lining of canals to reduce water losses, balance between water demand and raw 
water availability, storage capacity, regulation of flow rates, including adequate flow capacity of regulators and other 
structures to prevent or reduce scour, water allocation within the command area, flood resilience, drainage and salinity 
control.  
Drip Irrigation technology .  The  project involves the implementation of 10 drip irrigation systems to enhance quality 
and quantity of mango production.  Considerati ons for this work will include  availability and quality of groundwater, 
particularly to assess arsenic levels . Specific capa city building material will incorporated in the implementation of these 
subproject s to draw farmer attention to the need for care in the application, storage and disposal of containers used 
for the flower/fruit enhancement .    
Water Harvesting  Ponds.   The project includes the construction or rehabilitation of 800 on -farm surface water 
catchment ponds.  These ponds will be used for supplementary  irrigation and will be sited to collect surface run -off. 
The construction will incorporate clay lining and s ediment traps to avoid excessive sedimentation.  
For all water infrastructure activities (irrigation, drip irrigation, catchment ponds), access to a sustainable and reliable 
water source is included as a key sub -project selection criterion.  Access to wate r under climate change scenarios is 
also considered . Several studies confirmed that :  
• Cambodia is a “water rich” country with a renewable water resource amounting to 32,695 m3/person/year . 
FAO Aquastat estimates suggest that total renewable water resources  are about 476,000 million m3/year 
while withdrawals are about 2.184 million m3/year, of which 94% are for agriculture. 46  
• ADB conducted a detailed water accounting study covering river basins of the entire country. Kampot  
province is in Basin group 1 while the other three target provinces (Kampong Cham, Tbong Khmum, and 
Takeo) are in basin group 3. In all target provinces, estimated withdrawals in proposed irrigation sub -projects 
are much less than the available resources.  
• Under climate change scenario, the combined effects of decreasing rainfall, increased evapotranspiration and 
runoff and sea level rise are expected to result in modified river flows in the major watersheds and river 
basins.  For example, Cambodia is likel y to experience changes in the flows of the Mekong River, “altering 
the area’s unique flood pulse system and therefore also the high aquatic productivity of the lake -floodplain 
system”47. Under climate change scenario, flows in the major watersheds and rive r basins are expected to be 
modified, with an anticipated maximal decrease of 6% by 2030. The most significant impact will be a 
modification of the flooding regimes and hydrological systems rather than an anticipated decrease in absolute 
water quantity.   
Given these studies , it is anticipated that within the short -term, and up to 2100, there will be no significant constraints 
related to water availability. The measures proposed in this project constitute no -regrets adaptation options, in that they 
will also  promote increased water conservation (in improved reservoirs), reduced run -off (catchment ponds and 
watershed management), and increased water use efficiency (drip irrigation, laser land leveling, climate smart 
agricultural practices, and improved varieti es). 
Cooperative Stores.  Project activities include the construction of an estimated 50 Cooperative Stores, and it is 
important that planning and design considerations ensure that these stores conform with the following requirements: (i) 
proposed buildings/stores be positioned such that they are not in flood prone areas; and/or (ii) specified to ensure that 
the structure and contents will be above any anticipated 1:100 year flood zones.  
                                                             
46 FAO Aquastat, available at  : http://www.fao.o rg/nr/water/aquastat/countries_regions/Profile_segments/KHM -WU_eng.stm   
47 Water and Climate Change in the Lower Mekong Basin: Diagnosis and recommendations for adaptation, Helsinki University of 
Technology and Southeast Asia START Regional Center, 2009.


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 80 
 F 
Biodigester Screening.   The project aims to install  about 12,0 00 biodigesters  and 6,000 compost huts in target 
provinces, and harness  the fertilization potential of bio -slurry for households.  This collaboration will see training in both 
the construction and use of the biodigesters, part icularly the handling of recyc led slurry as an alternative fertilizer .  
There are currently no national standards associated with the use of domestic biogas and the project administrative 
manual details the terms of reference for consultancies to develop them.  
Rural access roads and c ommune tracks.   The project proposes the improvement of rural roads and tracks within 
communes (km to be defined) , which will focus on linking some of the proposed 50 cooperative storage and drying 
units to be supported by MAFF, in two ways : (i) linking fa rm units and the production zones to the storage units; and 
(ii) connectivity of the stores to all -weather and or climate resilient roads, the latter being more durable structures to 
tolerate heavy transport and delivery trucks.   
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Environmental  Assessment.  The initial environmental examination  (IEE)  was prepared following the ADB Safeguard 
Policy Statement (2009), and relevant environmental policies and guidelines of the government. The project is classified 
under ADB guidelines/rules as a Category B project. Such projects are judged to have some adv erse environmental 
impacts, most of which is occurring during the construction phase, but to a lesser degree and/or significance than those 
for category A projects. An IEE is required to determine whether or not there are significant environmental impact, which 
will warrant an environmental impact assessment (EIA). If an EIA is not needed, the IEE is regarded as the final 
environmental assessment report.  (please refer to Annex  6 for detailed Environmental and social safeguards 
assessment)  
The initial rapid environmental assessment (REA) for the project identified a medium climate risk, however the AWARE 
classification is that of High risk. The project preparation technical assistance team  prepar ed a climate change  
assessment document, included in due diligen ce. In addition, there is a need to undertake a climate risk and vulnerability 
assessment for subproject s, including construction and operational ( post construction) periods. This work has been 
included in the terms of reference  for an international climat e change  and environmental specialist to complete during 
Implementation, and to be site specific.  
The environmental impacts will be measured to mitigate through good design of infrastructure. Mitigation of 
construction -phase impacts relies heavily on respo nsibility of works contractors, to follow specification clauses 
specifically designed to minimize noise nuisance, road accident, pollution of air and water and soil erosion, illegal solid 
waste disposal and waste water discharge, conflict between up -dream and downstream water users, worker safety and 
sanitation. This mitigation will in turn rely on enforcement by the PMU environmental and social management officer 
and also by construction supervision consultants. Post -construction mitigation will benefit fr om capacity building and 
training under the project  for each subproject ’s activity.  
The IEE includes an environmental management plan, which will be implemented by a contractor to avoid or minimize 
negative environmental effects by following th e IEE documents. To ensure that  the contracting company are able to 
implement the mitigation measures effectively, the PMU will put in place the following arrangements: (i) environmental 
specifications will be included in the bidding documents to contractors; (i i) an appropriate environment section 
describing standards and responsibilities will be included in the terms of reference for bidders; and (iii) clauses 
referencing the EMP mitigation provisions and monitoring plans will be written into the construction c ontracts. Following 
the award of contracts, the successful contractor will prepare a Site Environmental Management and Supervision 
Manual, including an emergency preparedness and response plan for construction emergencies and site environmental 
health and safety plan, for approval by the PMU. The contractor will prepare quarterly report on environmental 
management to the PMU. The PMU's safeguard officer will be active in site supervision, management and appraisal, 
particularly during construction, so as to identify problems and solve them timely .  
Involuntary resettlement (category B) .  During project preparation, some irrigation subprojects were identified that 
would require acquisition small strips of land to accommodate improvement of distribution canals.  These small strips of 
land may be acquired through (i) voluntary donation, or (ii) negotiated settlement, or (iii) involuntary land acquisition 
and resettlement for those not willing to donate land voluntarily. If there is no involuntary settlement, there  will be no 
need to prepare resettlement plans.  A rigorous due diligence procedure to verify voluntary donation bona fides was 
included in the Resettlement Framework, which was uploaded to the ADB website, will be used to further screen and 
select subproje cts during implementation.  The cassava drying and storage facility involves an agricultural cooperative


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 80 F 
that will purchase its own land if needed under a private commercial transaction independent of the project and using 
the cooperative’s own resources. F or drip irrigation, a selected small holder will receive drip irrigation infrastructure 
installed on his/her own land in exchange for allowing the technology to be tested and act as a working example. The 
smallholder will receive the infrastructure free of  charge and no land is acquired by the project. The project will not 
finance any category A subprojects. Adequate resources have been allocated for social safeguards preparation, 
implementation, monitoring, and reporting.  
Indigenous peoples (category B).  There were no indigenous peoples or ethnic minorities in areas of representative 
subprojects. However, there are some ethnic minorities living in project provinces and districts who could be impacted 
by subprojects identified during project implementation.  An ethnic minority development framework, which will ensure 
inclusion, full consultation and participation of ethnic minority households and communities was prepared and uploaded 
to the ADB website.  
Adequate resources have been allocated for environmental  and social safeguards preparation, implementation, 
monitoring, and reporting. The institutional capacity of MAFF to manage environmental and social impacts is considered 
adequate, based on prior experience in implementing the ADB projects. Training of sta ff at both national and provincial 
levels on social and environmental safeguards will continue during project implementation, as needed.  
 
Gender considerations . The subproject  areas have between 11% and 25% ID Poor rates, between 7 and 16% female -
headed household rates, and 7 to 9% outmigration rates. Women and men differ in their roles and in their economic, 
educational, and health status. Heavy physical work is almost always men’s responsibility. Women are exclusively 
responsible for managing household budgets. The health status of rural women is likely to be worse than men’s and 
their workload is traditionally greater.  
Findings from the participatory assessments indicate that there is joint access and control to productive resources such 
as land. The la nd title they possess is in both their names and joint agreement is necessary before land can be sold 
off. There is joint access to and control over capital, i.e. money. For accessing a loan, the bank requires both signatures 
on the loan agreements. Women usually take care  of identifying different sources of loans . The access to information, 
knowledge and education is still limited for both men and women. Women are less likely to be functionally literate. In 
general, invitations to commune -level extension t raining activities are made to the head of household, who is the 
husband. Women are only allowed to participate in organized extension training when the husband is absent and he 
has given his permission – by telephone if he has out -migrated from the villag e. Women have expressed keen interest 
in receiving practical information on rice variety selection and they also would like to visit field crop demonstrations. The  
use of visual teaching aids to enhance understanding has also been specified.  
There is equal  access of men and women to markets. Both husband and wife jointly agree when, where and to whom 
to sell the crop, but it is the wife who contacts the local (usually female) collector by telephone. There is a low level of 
knowledge of market information am ongst households and the price is set by the local collector. It was recommended 
that subprojects should disseminate market information to local farmers , particularly women , who interact with the 
collectors.  Regarding the beneficiaries’ absorptive capacity  for the proposed subprojects, the different ways men and 
women will participate was assessed. There is a good fit for the subprojects in the local society and culture. Both men 
and women were motivated to take part and gain benefits from the three subproj ects. However, their knowledge, skills, 
and organizational resources differ. Women are aware of their own technical shortcomings but express an eagerness 
to learn new techniques, and they are aware that they have had fewer opportunities than their husbands  to receive 
agricultural training. Women appear more eager to learn about the potential for income -generating activities and 
increasing household income. This is driven by the fact that household debt is a constant worry. Since husband and 
wife jointly con trol land and capital, the subprojects are unlikely to adversely affect women’s access to and control of 
resources.  
Regarding the capacity of institutions to address gender issues, anecdotal evidence from interviews and meetings held 
in subproject areas su ggest that the provinc ial level of Department of Agriculture has been less than effective in ensuring 
that services and ca pacity building are adequately delivered to women who now make up the majority of rural 
populations. This should be investigated furth er both at national level (MAFF -GCPSU) and at sub -national levels 
through the gender focal points. There are very few female ex tension agents, and invitations to agricultural training are 
rarely extended to household members other than the (male) head of h ousehold. Building capacity of female staff and 
female extension workers both at national and provincial levels is therefore considered essential. Low productivity in 
the target areas stems from weak extension services and farmers’ lack of knowledge of opt imal techniques and input


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 80 
 F 
use. Focus group discussions in the three subproject areas explained that because only heads of households are 
invited to meetings held by extension staff, women farmers have less access to extension services than men.  
The Women F armer Network  (WFN) might be able to contribute to project outcomes by sharing information on 
appropriate activities and offering support to women farmers. The network could also be a more substantive partner in 
implementation and monitoring as it is is a good fit for the CFAVC P and can act as a vector for reaching women for all 
the technical training and cooperative organization and management. The network is also linked to the Savings for 
Change Groups , which facilitate financial literacy, savings and small -scale lending at community level. At commune 
level, the presence of Commune Women and Children Focal Points, should ensure follow -up and feedback of women’s 
concerns regarding project activities.    
Gender Action Plan (GAP)  
The project is categorized as ‘effective gender mainstreaming’ and will involve activities that will contribute to gender 
equality and women’s empowerment. The main activities contained in the GAP are described in this section. The  GAP 
mirrors the design and monitoring framework  and has links to MAFF Gender Policy, particularly Objective 4 - increasing 
the ability of rural women to access and manage resources. The design features consider  local aspirations as identified 
by women dur ing participatory consultation as well as government representatives during the national consultations. 
Women expressed the desire to be trained, to be updated with agriculture developments, to participate in planning, 
demonstrations, decision -making and t o be consulted on infrastructure design related to community -based subprojects.    
In subproject s where there are civil works related to infrastructure (such as subproject 1), community -based 
construction committees will be established to provide a mechanis m for community input to the planning, survey and 
design of that infrastructure, particularly with respect to canal alignments. Community representatives will disseminate 
information from construction engineers to their communities. Women’s meetings at vil lage level will be held to discuss 
designs, and feedback will be given to subproject planners and engineers. It is important that the community sign -off 
on the final design before it is submitted to the EA and ADB for approval.  
Women will represent at lea st 40% of all participants in con sultations, and planning workshops.  Efforts will be made to 
bring meetings and trainings to the village level at appropriate times and to organi ze community based child supervision 
will be organi zed in order to facilitate w omen’s participation in public events.  
Contractors will target 25% women for skilled and unskilled labor, and regularly report on labor days disaggregated by 
sex. Contractors will uphold the core labor standards, including not employing child labor. Men and women will re ceive 
equal pay for equal work. Women will represent at least 30% of the total trained in infrastructure related construction/ 
rehabilitation (e.g. masonry skills for bio -digesters construction), and operation and maintenance (e.g. local i rrigation 
schemes). Women will participate in all promotional campaigns in all subproject areas will be implemented related to 
introducing energy -saving, clean (renewable) power supplies for households s uch as bio -digester units.  
Stronger links between sma ll farms operated by women in subprojects 1, 2 and 3 and the agro -processing and 
agribusiness industry are to be facilitated through productive partnerships (e.g., contract farming), training in business 
and other skills, and provision of market informatio n. Priority will be given to women led or owned enterprises and 
cooperatives that meet at least one of the following criteria (i) at least 50% of senior managers are women, and/or (ii) 
at least 50% of enterprise ownership is controlled by women, and/or (ii i) at least 50% staffs are women.  
At inception, the project will conduct a gender analysis for each of the four targeted value chains and develop a set of 
clear policy and program recommendations to strengthen women farmers’ involvement along the different  value chains. 
This activity will also ensure that capacity is built within MAFF/ Gender & Children Project Support Unit  (GCPSU) for 
gender responsive value chain analysis and develop methodology/guidelines that can be used in future analysis. The 
gender f ocals will participate in policy dialogue and integrate key recommendations from the gender analysis of value 
chains and key features of the MAFF Gender Policy into the agribusiness policy and other related documents prepared 
under the project. Gender stak eholders (MAFF GCPSU representatives, gender focal points, and WFN) will actively 
participate in policy committees and meetings.  
The project will involve women farmers and WFN representatives actively and meaningfully in each  individual event for 
all capac ity-building activities (trainings, demonstrations, study tours) supported by the project:  
(i) agricultural extension and technical capacity -building activities including those related to climate 
change adaptation and mitigation;


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 80 F 
(ii) trainings on how to operate an d maintain a range of agricultural machinery; and,  
(iii) management (incl. leadership, negotiation) and business skills trainings.  
 
Women will have the opportunity to be trained to operate a range of agricultural machinery, representing at least 40% 
of the incre ased labor pool over baseline by end of project.  In all subproject areas  women’s ability to prepare for climate -
related disasters and build resilience to impacts will be developed. All women in target areas will have access to 
information on climate change mitigation, improving climate resilience and resource efficiency.   
Agricultural extension activities related to irrigated rice production (subproject 1), mango production (subproj ect 2) and 
cassava production, processing and trading (subproject 3) in project intervention areas will work with the agricultural 
cooperatives and through the WFN to increase training of more female farmers and extension workers, the use of visual 
aids, v aried information and communication technologies to improve extension outreach, and promotion of more active 
participation of women in farmer extension groups, as well as making child supervision services accessible, are 
measures to empower women and bring  economic benefits.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
The loan  and grant  proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2015, as 
amended from time to time), and detailed arrangements agreed upon between the government and ADB.   The PMU is 
required to prepare budgets for significant activities a s stated in the loan agreement and PAM with sufficient details to 
allow meaningful monitoring of the subsequent performance. The fund flow is arranged and disbursed based on the 
government’s standard operating procedures and FMM and ADB’s procedures with f urther discussions among 
concerned parties, such as MAFF, MEF, and ADB.  Financial management risk assessment was conducted and 
presented in Annex 7.  
All consulting services will be procured by MAFF -PMU. Procurement of civil works contracts for the subprojects will be 
carried out by the PMU and in conjunction with MRD and MOWRAM national technical departments, where appropriate, 
within the PMU will prov ide national technical support (NTS) of the concerned ministry following NCB procedures. A 
bid evaluation committee will be formed and the PIC will assist the committee in the opening and evaluation of tenders. 
Recommendations which bid to accept will be p assed on to the PMU for contract award. The procurement of goods, 
works, and consulting services will be procured in accordance with the government’s procurement manual for externally 
financed projects in Cambodia updated version May 2012 and the ADB’s Pro curement Guidelines (2015, as amended 
from time to time) and consulting services guidelines (March 2013, as amended from time to time) in case of consulting 
services. Within the four provinces, a number of subproject s have been identified by the design con sultants, primarily 
related to (i) irrigation and water management  systems; (ii) drying and storage units; (iii) surface water catchment ponds; 
and (iv) pilot drip irrigation systems . 
 
Several  subprojects have been pre -screened to ensure consistency with e ligibility criteria including ADB and the 
government’s social and environmental safeguards. The eligibility criteria are Section C of the proposal . Procurement 
plan is in Annex 11.


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 80 
 G 
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
The area of detailed risk assessment and identification include:  (i) governance, (ii) administrative, (iii) fiduciary, and 
(iv) technical. The main challenge arises in managing complex nature of multifaceted sector development p roject 
involving multiple stake holders. The implementation large -scale project involving large volume of procurement and 
mobilization of big fund within the constraints of relatively weak institutional capacity po ssess additional challenge. 
Already limited capacity to operate and maintain small infrastructures will be further exacerbated by the effects of 
climate change.  
However, the risks are manageable and if the mitigation measures and procedures outlined below are implemented.  
Overall the project’s benefits are expected to outweigh the potential risks  (please refer to Annex 7 for detail s). 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Governance  
The complex ity of managing a multi -sector value chain 
development project may be an issue.  
The capacity of Project Management Unit ( PMU) on infrastructure 
design and procurement can be a weakness when considering the 
volume of procurement and its monitoring requirement.  
Lack of interagency coordination  
 
The implementing agencie s (IAs) in the provinces have capacity 
weaknesses to oversee and m onitor the infrastructure subprojects, 
capacity building support and report progress  
 Technical and 
operational  High 
(>20% of 
project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Already there are other Asian Development Bank (ADB) sector loan projects and lessons learned from those projects 
will be assessed and the issues highlighted will be addressed, through regular Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
meetings.  The MAFF PMU will be able to utilize a range of international experts and advisors that have the c apacity 
to provide support in reviewing design, elaborating tender documents and managing contractors. Furthermore, 
consultants have been designated to not only assist in infrastructure establishment but also to support operations and 
maintenance (O&M) act ivities, with resultant transfer of responsibilities  to the concerned stakeholders.  
Focal points from the Departments of Technical Affairs of the main participating ministries; MAFF, MOWRAM and 
MRD will be identified to actively par ticipate in support of t he PMU. Furthermore, training will be provided to the PMU 
staff on procurement, contracting and monitoring subproject investments.  The Project will address interagency 
coordination issues by nominating technical focal points from the main implementing agencies; General Department 
of Agriculture (GDA), MOWRAM and MRD who will be part of the PSC that will sit tw ice yearly. The mobilization of 
implementation consultants and the use of GDA (MAFF), MOWRAM and MRD technical focal points will address that 
issue. The IA staff will through formal and on -the-job training have the capability to overcome weakness in subproject 
monitoring and progress reporting . 
Selected Risk Factor 2


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 80 G 
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Procurement  
Heavy workload for the PMU staff  
The slow response of ADB to endorse procurement documentation 
or request further clarification  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The design consultants have kept to a minimum the number of procurement packages.  
Within the MAFF establishment there exists a cadre of experience from officers within ongoing and those from the 
previously implemented ADB projects that can provide g uidance and support to the PMU.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Public Financial Management  
Shortfall or delays in counterpart funding  
 Financial  Low (<5% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The fiscal obligations of the participating line agencies and provincial implementing agencies (IAs) have been 
minimized by nominated selected government staff officials. Arrangements to pay supplementary incentives out of 
loan funds have been made.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Anti-corruption  
Collusion in issuing tenders and the potential for corrupt practices  Technical and 
operational  Medium 
(5.1-20% of 
project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Experienced and impartial officials will be selected in the tender evaluation committees and the PSC will have oversight 
on major contracts. Bidding evaluation and selection will be monitored fully including reviews by consulting engineers.  
Potential contractors will be issued with strict instructions on bidding process in line with ADB procurement procedures . 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Implement ation of Subproject investments  
The O&M of the irrigation schemes, drip irrigation pilot project 
projects, ponds and the cooperative drying and storage units may 
be inadequate  Technical and 
operational  Medium 
(5.1-20% of 
project 
value)  Medium


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 80 
 G 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Ministry of Economics and Finance  (MEF) has made commitments to release funds to support irrigation scheme 
operation of maintenance to MOWRAM ($1 5 million in 201 7). Within the design, the project will have private 
contractors operating drip irrigation demonstrations and will also have capacity building interventions for Farmer Water 
User Communit ies (FWUCs) and agricultural cooperative members in the management and  operation of infrastructure 
provided as part of management and agribusiness initiatives.  For sustainability, FWUC and agricultural cooperatives 
will be made aware and have in the cooperation agreements that O&M costs have to be covered by service fees or 
as part of agribusiness recurrent expenditure . Further details on infrastructure O&M arrangements are given in section 
C7. 
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of 
impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
The effects of climate change may damage project investments  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The infrastructure supported by the project considers  climate resilience and has adaptation measures incorporated 
in the design. The project implementation consultants will review the designs at the start of the project prior to calling 
for proposals and tenders  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
N-A


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 80 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .  
 H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level48 
 Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased 
climate -resilient 
sustainable 
development  • Climate change adaptation measures introduced in the project will support sustainable and 
competitive agricultural value chains, through provision of climate resilient infrastructure (water 
management systems, farm roads, agricultural cooperatives, post -harvest facilities),  deployment of 
climate resilien t varieties,  introduction of climate -friendly agricultural production practices and 
technologies, and formulation of climate -smart agribusiness policies and standards.  
• The project will build an enabling environment for effective adaptation by strengthenin g capacity of 
financial institutions on green finance for agribusiness, enhancing the role of private sector in climate 
change adaptation through public private partnerships, and raising awareness of farming 
communitie s on climate risk sharing instruments such as crop insurance using ICT, thereby 
contributing to increased trust between farming communities and the private sector.  
• The project will enhance adaptive capacity o f vulnerable communities in target provinces by improving 
rural household  incomes thro ugh increased crop yields, reduced costs of inputs and efficient use of 
agricultural inputs . The project will promote  on-farm and off -farm value addition    which in turn will 
generate additional employment and contribute to building social capital.    
Shift to low -
emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathways  • Through providing support for introduction and expansion of biodigesters, the project will reduce the 
drudgery of local communities, especially women, in collecting fuelwood for cooking. It will in tur n 
reduce land degradation and deforestation, and increase carbon sinks, while also contributing to an 
integrated sustainable crop -livestock system by using bio -slurry as fertilizers for crops.  
• The project will strengthen the agricultural cooperatives and provincial agricultural development 
centers to serve as catalysts in promoting the use of solar energy with a view to reduce fossil fuel 
dependence in agricultural operations along the value chain.  
Expected 
Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-Term  Final   
Fund -level impacts (Adaptation)  
A1.0 Increased  
resilience and  
enhanced  
livelihoods of  
the most  
vulnerable  
people, 
communities, 
and regions  Total number of 
direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries;  
 
 
 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
relative to total 
population  MAFF 
census;  
Gender -
sensitive 
household 
surveys  0 110,000 direct 
beneficiaries, of 
which at least 40% 
are women  
321,000 indirect 
beneficiaries  
 
Total number 
represent 3% and 
13% of national 
population and 
population of the 
four target 
provinces, 
respectively  390,000 direct 
beneficiaries, of 
which at least 40% 
are women  
975,000 indirect 
beneficiaries  
 
Total beneficiaries: 
1,365,000 direc t 
and indirect 
beneficiaries 
represent 9% and 
42% of national 
popula tion and 
population of the 
four target 
provinces, 
respectively  Farmers are 
willing to 
participate 
the project’s 
interventions 
and up -scale 
climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
practices and 
engage in 
climate -
resilient value 
chain 
development  
                                                             
48  GCF  Performance Measurement: http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 80 
 H 
 A1.2 Number of 
males and 
females 
benefiting from 
the adoption of 
diversified, 
climate resilient 
livelihood 
options  MAFF 
census;  
Gender -
sensitive 
household 
surveys  0 20,000 farmers, of 
which at least 40% 
are women  40,000 farmers, of 
which at least 40% 
are women  Willingness 
of farmers to 
participate 
and up -scale 
climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
practices and 
climate - 
friendly value 
chain 
development  
A2.0  Increased 
resilience of 
health and 
well-being, 
and food and 
water security 
(e.g. climate -
resilient crops, 
efficient 
irrigation 
systems , etc.)  A2.2 Number of 
food-secure 
households (in 
areas/periods 
at risk of 
climate change 
impacts)  MAFF 
census;  
Gender -
sensitive 
household 
surveys  0 100,000 direct 
beneficiaries, among 
which at least 40% 
are women, 
representing about 
33,300 households.  
 
 
 
 
321,000 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(approximately 
63,000 households  390,000 direct 
beneficiaries, 
among which at 
least 40% are 
women, 
representing 
approximately 
80,000 
households.  
 
975,000 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(approxima tely 
190,000 
households)  Market 
demand for 
the four 
targeted 
crops 
continue to 
increase at 
national and 
regional level  
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
infrastructure 
and the built 
environment 
to climate 
change threats  A3.1 Number 
and 
value of 
physical assets  
made more 
resilient to  
climate 
variability and  
change, 
considering  
human benefits  Project 
reports; 
MAFF 
assessment
s 0 10 water 
management 
systems constructed 
and upgraded to 
climate standards;  
 
10 post -harvest 
storage facilities 
built or upgraded to 
climate st andards;  
 
100km of farm roads 
upgraded to climate 
standards.  
 
4 provincial 
agricultural 
development 
centers and 1 
national Agriculture 
Testing Lab (NAL) 
rehabilitated;  27 water 
management 
systems 
constructed and 
upgrade d to 
climate standards; 
33 post -harvest 
storage facilities 
built or upgraded to 
climate standards;  
 
250km of roads 
upgraded to 
climate standards;  
 
4 provincial 
agricultural 
development 
centers and 1 
national Agriculture 
Testing Lab (NAL) 
rehabilitated;  
Total value of 
assets : USD 111 
million Government 
contribution 
and 
communities ’ 
contributions 
materialize in 
the form of 
operations 
and 
maintenance;


---
*Page 72*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 80 H 
Fund Level Impacts (Mitigation)  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions 
through waste 
management 
and increased 
low emission 
energy access 
and power 
generation  Tons of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent  
(t CO 2eq) 
reduced or 
avoided  Monitoring 
emissions 
using Gold 
Standard 
Biodigester 
Methodology 
(NBP)  0 A reduction of 
100,00 tons of CO 2-
eq by mid -term  A reduction of 240,000  
tons of CO 2-eq by 
2024  Willingness of 
households to 
participate 
and switch to 
biodigesters  
and using 
bio-slurry as 
fertilizer  
 Volume of 
Finance 
leveraged by  
Fund funding  Project 
financial 
reports  N-A 8 million  in direct co -
financing leveraged  13.6 million in direct 
co-financing leveraged  n-a 
 
 H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected 
Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline   Target  
Assumptions  Mid-Term  Final  
Project outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems for 
climate - 
responsive 
planning and 
development  
 A5.1 Number of 
gender – friendly 
policies, institutions, 
coordination 
mechanisms and 
regulatory frameworks 
that improve 
incentives for climate 
resilience and their 
effective 
implementation.  PPMS 
reports  
Mekong 
Business 
Forum 
reports  0 One c limate -
smart and 
gender -
responsive 
agribusiness 
policy for target 
commodities is 
formulated;  
 
PPP framework 
focusing on 
agribusinesses 
is being 
formulated;  
 
Modalities for 
enforcement of 
CAMGAP are 
adopted for fruit 
and organic 
fertilizers  One c limate -
smart and 
gender -
responsive 
agribusiness 
policy is approved  
at the national 
level 
 
One PPP 
framew ork 
focusing on 
agribusinesses is 
formulated  
 
Two CAMGAP 
are enforced as 
national 
standard s for 
tropical fruit and 
organic fertilizers  Stakeholders 
are willing to 
participate in 
policy 
development.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 80 
 H 
 A7.0 
Strengthened 
adaptive 
capacity and 
reduced 
exposure  to 
climate risks  A7.1 Use by 
vulnerable households 
(including number of 
female beneficiaries), 
communities, 
businesses and 
public‐ sector services 
of Fund‐ 
supported/developed 
tools, instruments, 
strategies, and 
activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability  
  
 
 
 
 
National Climate M&E 
Indicator: Number of 
households affected 
by floods, storms and 
droughts  (National 
M&E Framework for 
Climate Change)  Household 
surveys  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline: 
2014 
baseline 
at 
national 
level: 
18/1000 
househol
ds  15,00 0 farmers, 
including 40% 
women trained 
in CSA and 
agribusiness 
development 
skills  
10,000 
households, 
including 5,000 
women , are 
provided with 
information on 
climate risk 
sharing 
instruments  40,000 farmers, 
including at least 
16,000 women 
trained in CSA 
and agribusiness 
development 
skills;  
20,000 
households, 
including 10,000 
women, use 
information on 
climate risk 
sharing 
instruments such 
as crop insurance  
 
National Climate 
M&E Target: A 
reduction of 50% 
in number of 
families affected 
by floods, storms 
and droughts in 
project areas  by 
end of project.  Farmers are 
willing to 
participate in 
value chain 
business and 
in learning 
about climate -
smart practices  
 A7.2 Number of males 
and females reached 
by climate related 
early warning systems 
and other risk 
reduction measures 
established/  
strengthened  Household 
surveys  
ICT platform 
reports  0 10,000 
households, 
including 5,000 
women  are 
provided with 
information on 
climate risk 
reduction and 
sharing 
instruments  20,000 
households, 
including 10,000 
women, use 
information on 
climate risk 
reduction and 
sharing 
instruments such 
as crop insurance  The regulatory 
and enabling 
framework for 
climate risk 
reduction and 
climate risk 
sharing 
instruments is 
improved  
A8.0 
Strengthened 
awareness of 
climate threat 
and risk 
reduction 
processes  A8.1 Number of males 
and females made 
aware of climate 
threats and related 
appropriate responses  Household 
surveys  
ICT platform 
reports  0 100,000 people, 
among which at 
least 40% are 
women, are 
made aware of 
climate threats 
and risk 
reduction 
processes.  
 390,000 people, 
among which at 
least 40% are 
women, are made 
aware of climate 
threats and risk 
reduction 
processes  Information 
and user -
friendly data 
about localized 
climate change 
impacts and 
risk reduction 
measures is 
made available


---
*Page 74*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 80 H 
  M9.0 
Improved 
management 
of land or 
forest areas 
contributing 
to emissions 
reductions  
 M9.1 Hectares of land or 
forests areas  under 
sustainable management 
of improved protection 
and management 
leading to reduced GHG 
emissions and/or 
enhancement of carbon 
stocks.  Field 
surveys 
undertaken 
at the target 
sub-
catchment 
areas.  0 25,000 ha under 
climate friendly 
agriculture 
practices  
 
2,000 ha of 
laser land 
leveled  40,000 ha under 
climate friendly 
agriculture 
practices  
 
4,000 ha of land 
laser levelled  Extreme 
weather events 
do not occur at 
the time of 
young seedlings 
are planted  
Cross -cutting  Number of technologies 
and innovative solutions 
(including gender – 
friendly technologies and 
solutions) transferred or 
licensed to support low ‐
emission development  Household 
surveys  
 0 5,000 
Biodigesters 
and 3000 
compost huts 
introduced  12,000 
biodigesters and 
6000 compost 
huts introduced  Communities 
are willing to 
participate and 
switch to using 
biodigesters as 
part of their 
crop’s value 
chain (using bio -
slurry as 
fertilizers as 
well)


---
*Page 75*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 80 
 H 
Project 
outputs   
Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
Output 1: 
Critical 
agribusiness 
value chain 
infrastructure 
improved  and 
made climate 
resilient  1a. Number of climate 
resilient water 
management systems 
rehabilitated and/or built  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1b. Number of on -farm 
rainwater harvesting 
ponds commissioned  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1c. Number of hectares 
of land laser leveled  
 
 
1d. Expected increase 
in the number of 
agricultural 
cooperatives integrating 
climate change actions  
 
 
 
 
1e. Length of farm road 
networks upgraded to 
climate resilient 
condition  
 
 
1f. Number of samples 
tested in upgraded 
laboratory facilities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Field 
observations  
Household 
surveys  
MAFF 
reports  
 1a-1e.  
2017 
baseline
: 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1f. (2016 
baseline
: 700 
samples 
and 0$)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1a. 12 climate 
resilient water 
management 
systems 
targeting 
rehabilitated  
 
 
 
 
1b. 250 on -farm 
ponds 
commissioned 
and 12 FWUCs 
trained to 
operate and 
maintain 
irrigation 
schemes  
 
1c. 2,000 ha of 
land laser 
leveled  
 
1d. 20 farm 
cooperatives 
integrate 
adaptation 
measures in 
post-harvest 
infrastructure 
investments  
 
1e. At least 100 
km of farm road 
networks 
improved  
 
 
1f.  Quality and 
safety testing 
infrastructure in 
National 
Agricultural 
Laboratory 
being upgraded 
and modalities 
for income 
generation 
established  
 
 1a. 27 climate 
resilient water 
management 
systems targeting at 
least 15,000 ha and 
25,000 households 
(with 50,000 
women) 
rehabilitated  
 
1b. 800 on -farm 
rainwater 
harvesting ponds  
commissioned and 
27 FWUCs 
developed capacity 
to operate and 
maintain their 
irrigation schemes  
 
1c. 4,000 ha of land 
laser levelled  
 
 
1d. 50 agricultural 
cooperatives 
integrate adaptation 
measures in post -
harvest 
infrastructure 
investments  
 
 
1e. At least 250 km 
of farm road 
networks improved  
to climate resilient 
condition  
 
1f. Quality and 
safety testing 
infrastructure in 
National Agricultural 
Laboratory 
upgraded to test 
1,500 samples and 
generate service 
income in excess of 
$75,000  
 
 
 Extreme 
weather 
events do not 
occur during 
the 
construction 
and 
rehabilitation 
of water 
management 
systems.  
 
Community 
members are 
willing to 
participate in 
adopting 
biodigesters at 
the household 
level, but also 
within their 
value chain 
(use of bio -
slurry as crop 
fertilizers).


---
*Page 76*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 80 H 
1g. Number of people 
with access to energy 
from biodigesters  
 1g. 
(2016 
baseline
: 11,468 
persons, 
including 
5,721 
women)  1g. 4,000 bio-
digesters made 
operational  1g. 12,000 
additional bio -
digesters made 
operational 
benefitting health 
and productivity of 
90,000 persons, 
including 43,353 
women, due to 
improved 
household air 
quality  
Output 2: 
Climate 
Smart 
Agriculture 
and 
Agribusiness 
promoted   2a. Number of climate 
resilient varieties 
released  
 
 
2b. Number of farmers 
trained in CSA 
practices; on standard 
compliance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2c. Number of 
agricultural 
development centers 
established  
 PPMS 
reports  
Household 
Surveys  
 
 
 
 2a. 2017 
baseline
: 0 
 
 
2b. 
(2017  
baseline 
for SRP 
complia
nce: 0)  
 
 
 
 
 
2c. 2017 
baseline
: 0 
 2a. One 
additional 
climate resilient 
variety  released  
 
2b. 20,000 
farmers, 
including at 
least 5,000 
women trained 
in CSA 
practices  
 
 
 
 
2c. 2   provincial 
agricultural 
development 
centers and 
engineering 
workshops 
made fully 
operational to 
provide 
agribusiness 
services  2a. Three additional 
climate resilient 
varieties of rice and 
maize released  
 
2b. 40,000 farmers, 
including at least 
16,000 women 
trained in CSA 
practices, of which 
50% are SRP 
compliant, with 
direct links to 
millers and 
exporters  
 
2c. 4 provincial 
agricultural 
development 
centers and 
engineering 
workshops made 
fully operational to 
provide 
agribusiness 
services and 
strengthen farmer 
value chain 
linkages  Farmers are 
willing to 
participate in 
value chain 
business and 
in learning 
about climate -
smart 
practices.  
 
Output 3: 
Enabling 
environment 
for climate 
friendly  
agribusiness 
enhanced  3a. Number of climate -
friendly  and gender -
responsive agribusiness 
policy formulated  
 
 
 
 
 
3b. Number of 
standards enforced as 
national standard  
 
 
 PPMS 
reports  
Policy 
documents  
 3a. 
(2017 
baseline
: n.a.)  
 
 
 
 
 
3b. 
(2017 
baseline
: 0) 
 
 3a. One 
Climate -friendly  
and gender -
responsive 
agribusiness 
policy is 
formulated;   
 
 
3b. CAMGAP is 
formulated and 
approved  
 
 
 3a. One Climate -
friendly  and gender -
responsive 
agribusiness policy, 
including a PPP 
framework focusing  
on agribusinesses 
formulated  
 
3b. CAMGAP 
enforced as 
national standard 
for tropical fruit and 
organic fertilizers


---
*Page 77*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 80 
 H 
 
  3c. Number of staff from 
banks and MFI trained 
on green financing  
 
 
 
 
 
3d. Number of 
enterprises trained on 
green finance and 
number of households 
benefitting from 
information on risk 
sharing instruments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3e. Number of public 
private partnerships and 
agribusinesses 
established  
 
 
 
 
3f. Expected increase in 
generation and use of 
climate information in 
decision -making  3c. 
(2017 
baseline
: 0) 
 
 
 
 
3d. 2017 
baseline
: 0 3c. 20 staff, 
including 30% 
women are 
trained in CSA 
lending  and 
green finance  
 
 
3d. 10 privately -
owned 
enterprises, at 
least 30% 
women -led 
and/or owned**, 
are trained on 
green finance 
and 10,000 
hous eholds, 
including 10,000 
women provided 
with information 
on climate risk 
sharing 
instruments 
such as crop 
insurance  
 
3e. 15 
agricultural 
coopera tives 
entered into a 
profitable 
agribusiness or 
trading venture  
 
3f. Modalities for 
establishing a 
ICT platform are 
approved  3c. 50 staff, 
including 30% 
women, from 
financial institutions 
trained in CSA 
lending and green 
finance  
 
3d. 30 privately -
owned enterprises, 
at least 30% 
women -led and/or 
owned**, are 
trained on green 
finance and 20,000 
households, 
including 20,000 
women, provided 
with information on 
climate risk sharing 
instruments such as 
crop insurance  
 
 
 
 
 
3e. 40 agricultural 
cooperatives* 
entered into a 
profitable 
agribusiness or 
trading venture  
 
 
3f. ICT platform for 
climate smart 
agribusiness 
established in 
Kampong Cham 
province


---
*Page 78*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 80 H 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Activity  1.1 
Rehabilitating water 
management 
infrastructure to 
climate resilient 
condition  This Activity  will rehabilitate and build 
small -scale irrigation systems, on -farm 
water catchment  ponds , drip irrigation 
systems and introduce land laser -leveling, 
to increase water availability for crop 
production, making farmers more resilient 
to climate shocks or slow onset climate 
changes.  $34.04 million from 
ADB loan, $5.28 
million from GCF 
Loan  and $4.61 
million from GCF 
Grant. Support to 
investment and civil 
works.  Cost o f rehabilitation of 
water management systems 
and land laser leveling.  
Activity  1.2 Upgrading 
agricultural 
cooperative value 
chain infrastructure  This Activity  will support 80 selected 
agricultural cooperatives to integrate 
adaptation measures in post -harvest 
infrastructure investments in undertaking 
the construction of post -harvest units for 
cleaning, drying and storage  $9.04 million from 
ADB.  Support to 
inves tment and civil 
works.  Cost of c limate -proofing 
agricultural cooperatives’ 
infrastructure and energy 
efficient technologies (solar 
powered driers)  
Activity  1.3 Improving 
connectivity to 
cooperatives and 
markets through 
climate resilient farm 
road networks  This Activity  will support the construction to 
climate standards of 250 Km of rural 
connector roads.  $30.00 million from 
ADB, and $4.69 
million from GCF 
Loan, and $3.61 
million from GCF 
Grant. Support to 
investment and civil 
works.  Cost of climate proofin g the 
design and execution (incl. 
upgraded materials) for rural 
connector roads to withstand 
climate extremes.  
Activity  1.4  
Strengthening 
infrastructure for 
agricultural quality and 
safety testing  This Activity  will support the establishment 
of four Provincial Agricultural Development 
Centers (PADC) and four Provincial 
Agricultural Engineering Workshops to 
create resource and training centers for 
service provision, agribusinesses and 
farmer value chain linkages.  $4.30 million from 
ADB. Support for 
technical assistance.  Cost of establishing the 
centers and technical 
assistance for 
operationalization.  
Activity  1.5 Promoting 
renewable energy for 
value chain 
improvement  Under this Activity , the project will develop 
rural renewable energy infrastructure by 
installing about 12,000 biodigesters and 
6,000 compost huts at household level in 
the area of target cooperatives, while 
harnessing the fertilization potential of bio -
slurry in target prov inces, benefitting health 
and productivity.  $2.05 million from 
ADB and $4.88 
million from GCF 
Grant, and $3.78 
million from 
beneficiaries.  
Support to material 
and technical 
assistance costs  Cost of biodigesters and 
training on how to use 
biogas at the hou sehold 
level and bio -slurry as crop 
fertilizers.  
Activity  2.1 Deploying 
climate resilient 
varieties  Under this Activity , the project will support 
the development and dissemination of 
climate resilient varieties of target crops.  $0.79 million from 
ADB, with $2.79 
million in GCF 
Grant.  Costs of training, 
participatory variety 
selection, procurement of 
biological materials  
Activity  2.2 
Strengthening capacity 
in climate friendly 
production practices 
and technologies  Under this Activity , the project will provide 
training on climate -smart agriculture to 
40,000 farmers,  $1.48 million from 
ADB and $7.09 
million from GCF 
Grant. Support to 
technical assistance.  Cost of training on climate 
friendly agricultural 
technologies and production 
practices.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 80 
 H 
 
 
 
  Activity  2.3 Promoting 
farm mechanization 
and extension  Under this Activity  the project will support 
the construction and operationalization of 4 
provincial level ag ricultural training centers 
and workshops to ensure maintenance and 
repair for mechanization equipment  $545,000 from ADB.  Cost of construction and 
equipment acquisition for the 
centers.  
Activity  3.1 
Formulating climate 
friendly agribusiness 
policies and standards  Under this Activity , the project will support 
the development of i) climate -smart 
agribusiness policy; ii) climate -conscious 
product standards;  $410,000 from ADB 
and $722,000 from 
GCF Grant. Support 
to technical 
assistance  Cost of trainings for 
government staff, farmers, 
and FWUC.    
Activity  3.2 Promoting 
green finance and risk 
sharing mechanisms  This Activity  will: (i) create an enabling 
environment for PPPs in agribusiness; (ii) 
the identification of incentives for private 
sector participation in agribusiness to 
improve the private sector’s access to 
finance, particularly to green finance and 
ways to reduce t he risk aversion of 
commercial banks; and (iii) reducing the 
financial risks associated with impacts of 
climate change on the raw material base 
such as the use of crop insurance.  $507,000 from ADB 
and $1.44 million 
from GCF Grant.  
Support to technical 
assistance.  Cost of training on PPP, on 
climate -friendly agribusiness 
investments, and of crop 
insurance awareness 
raising.  
Activity  3.3 Supporting 
climate risk 
management through 
information and 
communication 
technologies (ICT)  The project will contribute to the production 
of climate information services as well as 
an ICT platform to disseminate soil, crop, 
climate and market information and in order 
to create  an enabling environment.  $183,000 from ADB, 
with $3.52 million 
from GC F Grant.  Cost of technical assistance 
for production of climate 
information services and 
acquisition/of corresponding 
weather infrastructures for 
setting up an ICT platform.  
Project Management  Project management activities, including 
Monitoring and evaluation.  $4.54 million from 
ADB, and $1.34 
million from GCF 
Grant.  Costs of personnel, 
consultancies, equipment 
and trainings for project 
coordination unit, including 
climate change related 
technical advisors.


---
*Page 80*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 80 H 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
The IAs will be responsible for monitoring project progress and evaluating project outputs. Monitoring and evaluation shall 
be in accordance with the project design and monitoring framework (DMF) and each IA will be responsible fo r regular 
reporting, with the PMU producing a consolidated report, for MEF and ADB.  
Review mission. ADB will conduct an inception mission within three months of loan signing to assess project readiness 
and implementation arrangements including establishme nt of PMU, IAs, opening of an advance  account, status of the 
development of the PPMS, and progress of advance procurement actions including recruitment of the PIC firm and the 
contractor for the first three representative subprojects.  
ADB will conduct reg ular (i.e. at least twice per year) reviews throughout project implementation to (i) assess the progress 
of project activities and outputs and effectiveness of implementation arrangements; (ii) monitor safeguard compliance 
with ADB Safeguard Policy Stateme nt (2009); (iii) review compliance with loan agreements and related matters; (iv) follow 
up on decisions and actions agreed during previous review missions; and (v) resolve any project implementation issues 
that may arise.  
Midterm review mission. A midter m review will also be undertaken within 30 months of loan effectiveness. This review 
will include a comprehensive evaluation of project implementation arrangements, detailed evaluation of the scope and 
implementation process and progress of subprojects, fe edback from the stakeholders, performance of consultants, 
capacity building progress, and possible reallocation of loan proceeds. During this more significant review, the impact 
from the pro -poor and gender initiatives linked to infrastructure development will be assessed as will the allocation by 
local administrations for the maintenance of the infrastructure developed under the Project. Attention  will be given  to the 
(i) assessment of project performance and achievement against targets and indicators in t he DMF; (ii) review the initial 
outcomes, benefits, and impact of the project; and (iii) identify gaps, if any, and recommend necessary changes to 
strengthen implementation arrangements or modify project design.   
Project completion review mission. Within 6 months of physical completion of the project, ADB will field a project 
completion review mission to commence preparation of ADB’s project completion report (PCR). The mission will (i) assess 
the project performance against all targets, indicators, and be nchmarks (including any revised at the midterm review); (ii) 
evaluate initial benefits and outcome of the project across outputs ; and (iii) identify any incomplete activities and agree 
on the necessary actions, as well as to review compliance with ADB requ irements and loan covenants.   
Reporting  
The MAFF PMU will provide ADB with (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with ADB's project performance 
reporting system (an outline of the progress report is in Annex 6); (ii) consolidated annual reports including (a) progress 
achieved by output as measured through the indicator's performance targets, (b) key implementation issues and 
solutions, (c) updated procurement plan, and (d) updated implementation plan for the next  12 months; and (iii) a project 
completion report within six months of physical completion of the project. To ensure that projects will continue to be both 
viable and sustainable, project accounts and the executing entity  audited financial statement together with the associated 
auditor's report  should be adequately reviewe d.  ADB will ensure consistency in the timing of submission of annual 
performance reports , and mid -term and final evaluation reports to GCF.  
Project performance monitoring:  A project performance monitoring system (PPMS), has been developed based on the 
key indicators and targets outl ined in the DMF. In particular, the PPMS will assess the (i) progress of planned activities 
according to the targets and indicators; (ii) progress in achieving each project output and project outcome according to 
the performance  targets and indicators indicated in the DMF; and (iii) highlighting any risk seen and unforeseen that are 
detrimental to achieving the project outputs. It shall be implemented by the PMU in conjunction with the implementing 
agencies and support from the P IC in accordance with ADB's Project Performance Monitoring System Handbook within 
six months of loan effectiveness. The PPMS procedures, performance indicators, and their targets will be reviewed and 
approved by ADB. Benchmark review mainly focusing on sec ondary data will be conducted. With the help of PIC, the 
PMU will then undertake every six months quantitative and qualitative project -performance monitoring for each project 
activity to evaluate the delivery of planned facilities and the project benefits that accrued.   A covenant will be included in


---
*Page 81*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 80 H 
the Financing Agreement (covering GCF loan and GCF grant) with the government of Cambodia (represented by MEF) 
on the need for arranging project’s implementation in compliance with GCF policies.
Safeguards monitoring – Environment.  Based on the ADB’s rapid environment assessment checklist the project overall 
is classified as Category B. Subsequently, there has been the need for an IEE along with an EMP. the environmental 
assessment and review framework ( EARF ) describes the measures required to ensure that potential environmental 
impacts are identified, avoided, reduced, and mitigated in accordance with ADB SPS (2009) and the laws and regulations 
of the government. The EARF covers subproject screening, categor ization, and preparation of IEEs for each Category  B 
subproject. Each IEE will include impact assessment and mitigation, public consultation, information disclosure, and an 
environmental management plan (EMP). EMPs consist of plans for mitigation, monitori ng, reporting, and stakeholder 
communication during pre -construction, construction, and operation phases.  
Out of the three representative subproject s, only one require d the preparation of IEE. The IEE prepared - Supplementary 
Documents 2 -4 describe screen ing, categorization, assessment, public consultation, anticipated environmental adverse 
impacts, required mitigation and monitoring measures, and roles and responsibilities of implementing entity  staff, 
consultants, and contractors. The IEE concluded that the impacts of the implementation of representative subprojects 
with EMP will be environmentally acceptable. Representative su bproject proposal request for no -objection to implement 
will be submitted to the Project Steering Committee (PSC) by the PMU prior  to works contracts being signed; EMP 
measures have been incorporated into civil works designs (in the case of physical measures) and contracts.  
Subprojects prepared during project implementation will follow the safeguard procedures set forth in the EARF. 
Responsibility for supervision of EARF implementation rests with the PMU. The environment specialist(s) of the feasibility 
study and design team contracted by PMU and the Safeguards Specialist within the PIC will screen and classify the future 
subproject p roposals as Category  A, B, or C. They will then prepare an IEE with EMP for each Category  B subproject 
and a summary of environmental implications for each Category  C subproject. The PMU and the provincial implementers 
will ensure that (i) IEE findi ngs are  locally disclosed;  (ii) IEEs are submitted to ADB for review and clearance unless 
exempt; (iii) no objections to implement will be sought from the PSC; and (iv) EMP measures are incorporated into civil 
works designs and contracts, and that their IAs will undertake the required environmental monitoring and reporting, and 
perform their assigned roles in the grievance redress mechanism.  
Safeguards monitoring – Involuntary Resettlement Category B.  The project is classified as category B for involuntary 
resettl ement and/or involuntary land acquisition. For the subproject screening and selection criteria, it will identify and 
reject any Category A subprojects that involve significant involuntary resettlement, economic displacement or involuntary 
land acquisition.  Acceptable subprojects will either be Category B or C, with insignificant or no resettlement impacts. 
During project preparation, some irrigation subprojects were identified that would require small strips of land to 
accommodate distribution canal improve ment. These small strips of land may be acquired through voluntary donation, in 
the case of non -productive land, or through negotiated settlement for productive land and where the negotiated settlement 
is based upon market values. Negotiated settlement may  also be required where affected people are unwilling to 
voluntarily donate. A rigorous due diligence procedure to verify voluntary donation bona fides has been included in the 
Resettlement Framework that will be used to further screen and select subprojec ts during implementation.  
Safeguards monitoring – Indigenous Peoples (IP) Category B.  Although no IPs or ethnic minority were found in the 
subproject areas, or impacted by the subprojects selected for feasibility during project preparation, there are some Cham 
and ethnic Vietnamese people, who are not recognize by the government as ethnic minority, living in project provinces 
and districts who could be impacted by further subprojects identified during implementation. An ethnic minority 
development framework  has been prepared that will ensure inclusion and full consultation and participation of ethnic 
minority households and communities.   Should any subproject  pose a risk of involuntary resettlement on ethnic minorities, 
a resettlement plan/ethnic minority pl an will be prepared.  
Climate Change (Risk Category Medium ). The assessment of climate change risk for the overall project, as per the 
AWARE screening tool , gives a category of High Risk. However, further detailed analysis revealed that the risk is medium. 
It is therefore important that the PIC that have responsibilities for infrastructure development and capacity building have 
sufficient climate change experience and capability to ensure and maximize adaptation possibilities, promote Climate 
Smart Agricultu ral practices, and ensure that the project satisfactorily ensures that farmers are aware of the risks and the 
steps they can take to adapt.  In addition to monitoring safeguards and project indicators, the project will also include


---
*Page 82*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 80 H
some monitoring, reporting and verification of climate change specific indicators, including carbon monitoring and 
adaptive capacity assessments.  
Climate change focal points from the respective ministries (MAFF, MOWRAM, MRD and MOE) will be involved in the 
climate change action monitoring and review process.  Both institutional readiness indicators (e.g., status of climate policy 
and strategy, status of climate information) and impact indicators (e.g., GHG emissions) of the national M&E framework 
are relevant to the projec t and they have been mentioned under the section E.1.2. Additional efforts will be made during 
project implementation to monitor the number of vulnerable communities and households in target provinces.  
Gender and social dimensions monitoring.  The provincia l IAs with assistance from PMU will be responsible for 
implementing and monitoring the GAP, land acquisition resettlement framework (LARF) and EMDF in their respective 
provinces. The safeguards and social development/gender specialists from PMU will assist  in the preparation, updating 
and implementation of the GAP,  LARF and IPEMDF, and will support the provincial IAs in the monitoring of their 
implementation. The project will partner closely with the WFN and the MAFF Gender & Children Project Support Unit f or 
the GAP implementation and monitoring. Sex -disaggregated data will be collected wherever relevant and gender specific 
and sensitive indicators (from the DMF and the GAP) will be integrated as part of the program performance monitoring 
system.  
Sex-disagg regated data will particularly relate to activities that are linked to specific GAP actions/targets and for which 
verifiable sources of data for monitoring will be available at subproject level from commune and village authorities. Value 
chain -related indi cators for each new approved subproject will be elaborated together with stakeholders and MAFF 
GCPSU during the lifetime of the project.


---
*Page 83*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 80 I 
I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal
☒ Annex 1: NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Annex 2: Feasibility Stud ies 
☒ Annex 3: Economic and Financial analysis based on Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of 
critical elements  
☒ Annex 4: Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment   
☒ Annex 5: Project  Term Sheet  (including cost/budget bre akdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) 
☒ Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  including (i) Environmental Assessment 
and Review Framework, (ii) Initial Environmental Examination for a representative subproject, (iii) Ethnic 
Minority and Indigenous Peoples Development Framework; (iv) Land Acquisition and Resettlement 
Framework; (v) Gender Action Plan; (vi) Detailed Gender Analysis; (vii) Summary of Poverty Reduction 
and Social Strategy; and (viii) Detailed Poverty and Social Impact Analysis  
☒ Annex 7: Due Diligence Re port with recommendations  including (i) Risk Assessment and Management 
Plan; (ii) Procurement Risk Assessment; (iii) Financial Management Risk Assessment and (iv) Climate 
Change Assessment  
☒ Annex 8: Map indicating the location of the project  
☒ Annex 9: Timetable of project implementation  
☒ Annex 10: Stakeholder consultation and participation plan, Stakeholder communications strategy  and 
Institutional Capacity and Training Plan  
☒ Annex 11: Procurement plan


---
*Page 85*
---

Env ironmental and social report s disclosure  
Basic project information  
Project title  Climate -friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project  (Cambodia)  
Accredited entity  Asian Development Bank  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Languages of disclosure  English and Khmer  
Link to disclosure  (English)  IEE: https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/cam -48409 -002 -iee 
EARF: https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/cam -48409- 002-earf 
A simplified ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B project is 
contained in the Environmental Assessment and Review Framework (EARF)  
and Initial Environmental Examination (IEE)  
Othe r link  (Khmer)  https://www.adb.org/km/projects/documents/cam -48409 -002 -earf 
https://www.adb.org/km/projects/documents/cam -48409 -002 -iee 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Languages of disclosure  English and Khmer  
Link to disclosure  (English)  EARF: https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/cam -48409- 002-earf 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B project  is 
contained in the Environmental Assessment and Review Framework (EARF) . 
Other link  (Khmer)  https://www.adb.org/km/projects/documents/cam -48409 -002 -earf 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework  (LARF)  
Date  of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Khmer  
Link to disclosure  (English)  https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/cam -48409- 002-rf 
Other link  (Khmer)  https://www.adb.org/km/projects/documents/cam -48409 -002- rf 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclos ures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Ethnic Minority Development Framework (EMDF)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Khmer 
Link to disclosure  (English)  https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/cam -48409- 002-ippf 
Other link  (Khmer)  https://www.adb.org/km/projec ts/documents/cam -48409 -002 -ippf  GCF/B.19/22/Add.18
Page 82


---
*Page 86*
---

GCF/B.19/22/Add.18
Page 83  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Gender Action Plan (GAP)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Khmer 
Link to disclosure  (English)  https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/cam -48409 -002 -gap 
Other link  (Khmer)  https://www.adb.org/km/projects/documents/cam -48409 -002 -gap