=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/CreationDate: D:20180206110133+09'00'
/ModDate: D:20180206110133+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
Meeting of the Board  
27 February – 1 March 2018 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 15  GCF/B.19/22/Add .15 
6 February 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum XV 
Funding proposal package for FP073  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Strengthening climate resilience of 
rural communities in Northern  Rwanda”;  
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or  focal  
point(s); and  
c) Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Title: Strengthening climate resilience of rural communities in 
Northern Rwanda  
 
Country/Region: Rwanda, East Africa  
 
 
Accredited Entity: MOE  
 
Date of Submission: Jan 2018 VERSION 8  – Revision following with GHG 
Methodology and revised emission savings


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section  A PROJECT  SUMMARY  
 
Section  B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
Section  C PROJECT DESCRIPTION - SUMMARY 
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
Section  E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section  F APPRAISAL  SUMMARY  
Section  G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section  H RESULTS MONITORING AND  REPORTING  
Section  I ANNEXES  
ANNEX 1: PREPARATORY STUDIES 
ANNEX 2: WORKPLAN AND BUDGET 
ANNEX 3: LETTERS OF CO -FINANCING 
ANNEX 4: MAP OF TARGET AREA  
ANNEX 5: PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL  
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
 
• Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all other sections, 
including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they wish to present the information . 
Accredited  entities  can either  directly  incorporate  information  into this proposal,  or provide  summary  information  in the proposal 
with cross -reference to other project documents such as project appraisal  document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expecte d not to exceed  50. 
 
Please submit the completed form to: fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 4*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 93  
 
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Project Information  
A.1.1. Project title  Strengthening climate resilience of rural 
communities in Northern Rwanda (SCRNRP)  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  Rwanda  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Rwanda Environment Management Authority 
(REMA)  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  Ministry of Environment (MOE)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☒ Direct  ☐ International  
 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity: FONERWA  
Beneficiary: Communities and Civil Society, District 
Authorities, National Ministries  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐ Micro  (≤10)  
☐ Medium  (50<x≤250)  ☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐ Large  (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☐ Mitigation  ☐ Adaptation  ☒ Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  31 July 2015 (Initial version) previously Rural Green 
Economy and climate Resilient Development Project.  
 
 
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Alex Mulisa  
Organization  FONERWA  
Email address  a.mulisa@fonerwa.org  
Telephone number  +250 788302107  
 
Mailing address  Fund Management Team for FONERWA 
REMA Building, Gasabo District  
Kigali City, Rwanda  
B.P 7436 Kacyiru  
 
Infrastructure and built environment (E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services (E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☒ 
 
☒ Most vulnerable  people and communities (E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply 
sources and supply chain management, relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
Health and well -being, and food and wa ter security (E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  ☒ 
 
☒ Increased resilience of:  Energy access and power generation (E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
Low emission transport (E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances (E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for  
companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
Forestry and land use (E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, 
etc.) ☒ 
☐ 
 
☒ 
 
☒ Reduced emissions from:  A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)


---
*Page 5*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 93  
 
 
A.2. Project Executive Summary (max 300  words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project, including the objectives and primary measurable benefits (see inv estment criteria in section E). 
The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
The Government of Rwanda (GOR), through it s accredited entity MOE, is submitting a proposal to the Green 
Climate Fund (GCF) to increase the resilience of vulnerable communities to climate change in Gicumbi District in 
Northern Rwanda. The project seeks a total of USD 32,794,442 of GCF grant resour ces over six years. The project 
will restore and enhance ecosystem services in one of the sub -catchments of the degraded Muvumba watershed, 
increase the capacity of communities to renew and sustainably manage forest resources and support smallholders 
to ad opt climate resilient agriculture. The project will also invest in climate resilient settlements for vulnerable 
families currently living in areas prone to landslides and floods and support community based adaptation planning 
and livelihoods diversificatio n. Knowledge and capacity developed during implementation will be mainstreamed at 
the local and national level.  
The project will specifically target the most vulnerable groups who have less resources to mitigate and adapt to 
climate change. This includes t he extreme poor, as more than a quarter of households in the target area fall into 
this category and women headed households who tend to be poor and are particularly vulnerable to climate 
change. Many of the project’s interventions target those who farm ma rginal land and are highly vulnerable to 
landslides, flooding and droughts. A key focus will be on developing the adaptive capacity of farmers and local 
institutions to ensure that the developed resilience becomes embedded within communities and local stru ctures 
enabling them to continue adapting to future climate variability beyond the lifetime of the project.  
The project comprises four interlinked outputs:  
1. Sub-catchment B of the Muvumba watershed restored and small scale farmers supported to adopt climate  resilient  practices;  
2. Communities supported to implement sustainable forest management and adopt fuel -efficient cooking  methods;  
3. Human settlements developed and/or modified to increase climate resilience;  and 
4. Successful adaptation and mitigation approaches  communicated and mainstreamed at the national  level.  
There are two expected outcomes from the project, linked to both mitigation and adaptation:  
1. improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions (M9.0);  and 
2. strengthened adap tive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks  (A7.0).  
The scalable project will make a significant contribution in taking forward the implementation of Rwanda’s Green 
Growth and Climate Resilient Strategy (2011) as part of GoR’s commitment to address ing the risks of climate 
change. The executing entity of the project will be the Rwanda National Climate Fund, FONERWA which is an 
agency of the accredited agency, MOE. FONERWA will manage the project on behalf of MOE.  
The interventions have been analysed and demonstrate high effectiveness and efficiency (with high benefit to cost 
ratios for adaptation measures, and high cost -effectiveness for CO 2 reductions for mitigation measures). The 
project will reach at least 150,000 highly vulnerable beneficiaries, a s well as providing wider benefits to more than 
380,000 people through mainstreaming interventions.  
 
 
A.3. Project Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)   
February 2018  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  dd/mm/yyyy  
 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 1st May 2018 
End: 31st April 2024  
Project lifespan  6 years  
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Project  
Please provide an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from financial closing through final 
maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a sensitivity analysis of critical elemen ts of the project  
The Government of R wanda is seeking to use GCF grant finance to support highly vulnerable 
communities in Northern Rwanda. The target area is characterised by pervasive poverty and livelihood 
insecurity due to the high dependence of the local population on rainfed, subsistenc e agriculture which is already


---
*Page 6*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 93  
 
 
significantly affected by rising temperatures and unpredictable rainfall patterns. The majority of the project 
interventions target climate change risks  and impacts, and are targeted towards vulnerable small -holder farmers, 
technical assistance and public goods. As such, there is little scope for end users to contribute to the investment 
and there is limited potential to attract private sector finance. As  an LDC, Rwanda’s domestic financing is not 
sufficient to cover project investments - Official Development Assistance still finances approximately 40% of the 
country’s annual budget. While GoR can provide co -financing, funding support from GCF is critical to enable this 
project to go ahead.  
MOE is requesting USD 32,794,442 from GCF as grant finance (excludes AE fee). Public sector grant - 
financed activities will be executed directly by FONERWA and implemented by GoR agencies either at District or 
Sector lev el through a combination of grants and contracts with partner organisations and contractors. These 
investments are not -for-profit adaptation, mitigation, capacity building and mainstreaming interventions to 
mitigate emissions and build climate resilience o f landscapes and communities through support for watershed 
protection, forest management, climate resilient agriculture and the construction of low carbon social housing for 
highly vulnerable households.  
A full financial and economic analysis has been unde rtaken for each of the components and an economic 
analysis has been made of the overall project. See also the Economic and Financial Analysis provided in Section  
F.1. and in Annex 1 (Report No. 4).  
Description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) w ill overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, and leverage public and/or private 
finance  
The financial instruments available to MOE to use in delivering the project are limited due to its 
accreditation status. The Ministry of Environment (MOE) is a ccredited (direct access, national) for small 
projects (above USD10 million and up to USD 50 million) with fiduciary functions for: (i) Basic fiduciary 
standards; and (ii) Specialized fiduciary standard for project management. As such, direct grants are th e only 
option as MINRENA’s current accreditation status does not allow on -granting and lending. However, while the 
accreditation status means a focus on direct grants, the project has been designed to maximise the use of these 
grants. For mitigation, grant  elements have been tailored to address the incremental cost or the risk premium 
required to make investment viable, or to cover specific activities such as technical assistance. Mitigation 
components have also leveraged public and private co -finance. For adaptation, grant elements have been 
targeted to provide technical assistance, provide support for public goods, and create the enabling environment 
to address barriers, leveraging on public – and where possible – private finance.  
See Economic and Financia l Analysis provided in Section F.1. and in Annex to the proposal  
A breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub -component in local and foreign currency and a currency hedging 
mechanism: for example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal exploration project, sub -components would include civil engineering 
works, drilling services, drilling equipment and inspection test.  
 
A breakdown of the total project costs and GCF financing by sub -component are shown be low. A full detailed 
project costing, showing all subcomponents is presented in Annex 2. All costs are presented in USD. In line with 
advice from the GCF, the fee for the Accredited Entity (MOE) is not included in this total. The total project value, 
including GCF funding and co -financing, but excluding the AE fee, is within the accreditation level of MOE.  
 Component  Sub-component (if applicable)  Amount (for  Currency  Local currency  GCF funding  Currency of   
  entire project)    amount  disbursement to  
      recipient  
Component 1  Sub-component 1.1 Strengthen community based  570,728  Options  467,426,437  423,728  USD  
Watershed  adaptation       
protection and 
climate resilient  
agriculture        
Sub-component 1.2 Reduce slope erosion to 
sustainable levels  2,443,221   2,000,998,100  2,443,221   
 Sub-component 1.3 Stabilise rivers, roadsides and   Options  1,243,368,126  1,518,154  USD  
 steep slopes with protective forestry  1,518,154      
 Sub-component 1.4 Integrate agro -forestry into farming  1,779,496  Options  1,457,406,985  1,779,496  USD  
 systems on 9790 ha of the watershed       
 Sub-component 1.5 Support 1800 smallholder crop - 1,805,299  Options  1,478,540,000  1,805,299  USD  
 livestock farmers to adopt agro -ecological approaches       
 to increase climate resilience       
 Sub-component 1.6 Increase climate resilient farming  2,045,235  Options  1,675,047,835  2,045,235  USD  
 practices with tea cooperatives in Mulindi (with planting       
 for future climate change) - targets 5000 smallholders       
 Sub-component 1.7 Integrate climate resilient practices  461,846   378,251,685  461,846  USD  
 into local extension services      
 Sub-component 1.8 Provide weather and climate   Options  491,732,719  600,406  USD  
 services for tea and coffee farmers to increase  600,406      
 productivity and reduce losses from weather and       
 climate variability


---
*Page 7*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 93  
 
 
  Sub-component 1.9 Increase capacity for pest  
monitoring, surveillance and IPM to address current 
and future climate change  606,964   497,103,329  606,964  USD   
Sub-component 1.10 Increase climate resilient 
practices with 1000 coffee growers to reduce  
susceptibility to climate change and protect slopes in 
the watershed (planting for future climate change)   
727,184   595,563,358  727,184  USD  
Component 2 
Sustainable 
forest 
management  Sub-component 2.1 Increase forest productivity and 
sustainable forest management  1,128,336  Options  924,107,184  1,128,336  USD  
Sub-component 2.2 Strengthen forest management  
skills to sustain investments in forestry and watershed 
management  457,448  Options  374,649,912  457,448  USD  
Sub-component 2.3 Establish, restore and manage  
degraded woodlots across 297 ha of the watershed  766,418  Options  627,696,342  766,418  USD  
Sub-component 2.4 Strengthen community capacity to 
provide forest products and services  1,417,245  Options  1,160,723,655  1,417,245  USD  
Sub-component 2.5 Increase the use of biogas and 
efficient cookstoves to reduce deforestation of the 
watershed  1,151,579   943,143,379  1,151,579  USD  
Sub-component 2.6 Reduce the demand for fuelwood 
and GHG emissions at Mulindi tea factory through 
energy efficiency measures   
347,195   284,352,705  241,231  USD  
Component 3 
Climate 
resilient 
settlements  Sub-component 3.1 Manage surface water run -off from 
settlements to reduce gully formation, floods and 
landslides  2,431,136  Options  1,991,100,056  2,431,136  USD  
Sub-component 3.2 Increase rainwater  capture and 
storage to counter inter -annual rainfall variability  2,116,346  Options  1,733,287,508  2,116,346  USD  
Sub-component 3.3 Construct a green social housing 
development in Kabeza to reduce the number of  
vulnerable households living in high risk zones (100 
houses + green infrastructure)  2,067,508  Options  1,693,288,885  2,003,121  USD  
Sub-component 3.4 Construct a green social housing 
development in Kaniga to reduce the number of 
vulnerable households living in high risk zones (100  
houses + green  infrastructure)  2,671,544  Options  2,187,994,246  2,628,904  USD  
Component 4 
Knowledge 
transfer and 
mainstreaming  Sub-component 4.1 Communicate project results and 
lessons learned  832,500   681,817,500  832,500  USD  
Sub-component 4.2 Awareness building, promotion and 
advocacy to support replication and scale up in other 
districts  623,806   510,897,084  623,806  USD  
Sub-component 4.3 Increase capacity of local 
institutions and communities to sustain investments in 
watershed protection and climate resilient settlements  532,712   436,291,128  532,712  USD  
Sub-component 4.4 Mainstream climate resilient 
approaches into existing forestry programmes and 
practices to support scale up and replication  175,500   143,734,500  175,500  USD  
Sub-component 4.5 Mainstream approaches to climate 
resilient agriculture for smallholders into existing plans 
and programmes to support scale up and replication  152,500   124,897,500  152,500  USD  
Sub-component 4.6 Mainstream climate resilient 
approaches into existing agriculture extension  
programmes to support scale up and replication  635,463   520,443,810  635,463  USD  
Sub-component 4.7 Mainstream energy efficiency into 
the tea industry to support scale up and replication  291,528   238,761,294  291,528  USD  
Project 
Management  Project execution costs  2,797,137  Options  2,290,854,875  2,797,137  USD  
Total project financing  33,154,432   27,153,480,136  32,794,442  USD  
 
* Please expand the table if needed.  
• a breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, works, services, etc.) and disbursement schedule in 
project confirmation (term sheet) as included in section I,  Annexes.  
A full detailed project cost breakdown, by expenditure type, and the disbursement schedule, is presented in  Annex 2.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 
Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing   
(a) = (b) + (c)    
Options


---
*Page 8*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 93  
 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (i) Senior  Loans  
(ii) Subordinated  Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable grants  * 
(vi) Grants *  - 
- 
- Options  
Options  
Options    
 - 
- Options  
Options  
  
32,794,442  Options  
 * Please provide economic and financial justification in  section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to provide, 
particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and that of accredited 
entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the project’s expected performance against 
the investment criteria indicated in  section E . 
 Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  32,794,442  Options   
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Co - 
financing to 
recipient  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Grant  
Grant  
Grant  147,000  
107,026  
105,964  USD  
USD  
USD  FONERWA  
Gicumbi District  
TWF     
Lead financing institution: FONERWA 
Total co-finance = USD 359,900  
Note: There is an additional USD 2,858,483 contribution by communities in terms of labour 
provided (USD 1,318,831) and payment for subsidised biogas and efficient cookstoves (USD 
1,539,652) but this has not been included in the bud get 
 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
 
 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and  AE 
(if 
applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing passes directly 
from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed financial instrument and terms as 
described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial terms 
separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument and terms be tween 
the GCF and the AE . 
 Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by the AE  to the 
recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non -concessional) determined? Please provide an overview of the size of total banking 
assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which could be tapped to finance the propose d project. Please provide an overview of market 
rates (i.e. 1 -year T -Bill, 5 -year government bond, 5 -year corporate bond (specify credit rating) and 5 -year syndicate loan. Provide examples or 
information on comparable transactions.  
Not applicable.  
 
 
C.1. Strategic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub -national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to contextualize the proposal, including existing 
national and sector policies and strategies.  
 Social, economic and  political  context   
Despite being among Africa’s poorest countries, Rwanda has achieved impressive growth and poverty 
reduction over the last decade. The 1994 genocide decimated Rwanda's fragile economic base,  severely  
impoverished the population, particula rly women, and temporarily stalled the country's ability to attract private and 
external investment. However, Rwanda has made substantial progress in stabilising and rehabilitating its economy  
Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
Choose an item.  ………………….  Options  ( ) years  ( ) %


---
*Page 9*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 93  
 
 
to pre -1994 levels. Although Rwanda is still dependent on aid with Official Development Assistance financing 
approximately 40% of the country’s annual budget, Rwanda’s economy has grown at 8% per year since 2001 with 
GDP per capita more than trip ling from USD 211 in 2001 to USD 718 in 2014 and inflation has been reduced to 
single digits. Poverty has fallen from 44.9% in 2011 to 39.1% in 2014 and extreme poverty from 24.1% to 16.3%1. 
Inequality has reduced as well with the Gini coefficient dropping  from 0.49 in 2011 to 0.45 in 2014 and the ratio of 
the wealthiest 10% to the poorest 10% dropping from 6.36 to 6.01 during the same period2. Rwanda is on course to 
achieve most of its 2015 MDG targets and the OECD has consistently rated Rwanda as one of t he countries that 
uses aid most effectively.  
Although the economy is growing and poverty levels are falling, Rwanda faces significant challenges in 
adapting to climate change, meeting food demands and in developing sustainably. As a small, hilly, 
landlocke d country with the highest population density in Africa and a predominantly poor, rural population3 highly 
dependent on rain -fed agriculture, climate change presents a major threat to Rwanda’s development. The 
population of over 11 million people (half of which is under 19) is projected to rise to around 16 million by 2020, and 
26 million by 2050 and this places increasing demands on natural resources.  
Much of Rwanda’s economy depends directly upon its land, water and biodiversity resources. The majority of  
the country’s population directly depend on ecosystem goods and services to maintain food security, livelihood and 
health, especially marginalised groups such as women who often do not have equal access to other sources of 
sustenance. Agriculture provides  around 33% of GDP and 72% of employment4 and around 50% of power 
generation comes from (small -scale) hydropower. There is a very high dependence on biomass for fuel and rain -fed 
subsistence agriculture for livelihoods. However, most of Rwanda’s landscape is dominated by steep terrain, more 
than 70% of the cultivated land surface has slopes greater than 10% which results in high levels of erosion and 
surface run off into waterways equivalent to an annual economic loss of almost 2% of GDP equivalent5. These are 
the underlying factors which make Rwanda’s rural population so vulnerable to climate change.  
 Climate  change  context   
Current climate variability and early climate change lead to major impacts in Rwanda. Rwanda experiences 
high levels of climatic variability and natural hazards due to the influence of El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
events. It is particularly affected by heavy rainfall, frequent floods and landslides in the West and North, and periodic 
droughts in the East. Major floods occur red in 1997, 2001, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2016 and these 
had major livelihood and economic impacts: the flood in 2007, for example, had direct economic costs equivalent to 
1% of GDP6. Rwanda also experiences periodic droughts, with major ev ents in 1998 -2000, 2005 -2006 and 2012 - 
2013 and 2016 -2017. These also have major impacts, for example, the drought in 2012 reduced GDP growth by 4% 
the following year7. Further analysis of Rwanda’s climate variability is included in the Climate change asse ssment 
report in Annex  1. 
The climate of Rwanda is already changing and impacts are increasing . Recent meteorological observations 
show that the temperature of Rwanda has increased strongly over recent decades, with higher warming than the 
global average ( at 0.35°C per decade since the 1980s), and there are strong indications of increasing rainfall 
variability8. This is already affecting rural areas.  
The future economic cost of climate change in Rwanda will be large – estimated at an additional impact of 
1% of GDP each year by 20309. Analysis of the global climate models – across the range of future representative 
concentration pathways RCPs10 and climate models – shows further increases in temperatures and increases in the 
number of hot days. The changes in  rainfall (and rainfall variability) are more uncertain, but an increase in heavy 
rainfall in Rwanda is projected as well as increases in rainfall variability. All of these changes are likely to exacerbate 
the impacts of current climate variability in Rwan da, as well as lead to new risks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Poverty based on a total consumption level below RWF 159,375 (January 2014 prices), Extreme poverty based on a total consum ption level below RWF 105,064 (January 2014 prices) – EICV 4 data 
2 NISR (2014). EICV 4: Results of Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey. Aug 2015.  
3 83% of the population still live in rural areas, Fourth population and housing census, Rwanda 2012. National Institute of S tatistics, Rwanda 
4 EICV 4  
5 REMA (2009) State of Environment and  Outlook Report 2009.  
6 SEI (2009). The Economics of Climate Change in Rwanda. Report to the GoR and  DFID.  
7 MINAGRI (2013). Annual Report 2012 -2013 Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resource.  Kigali.  
8 GoR (2012). Republic of Rwanda. Second National Communicat ion under the UNFCCC. 
9 Stockholm Environment Institute (2009). Economics of climate change in  Rwanda  
10 Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) are four greenhouse gas concentration trajectories adopted by the IPCC for its f ifth Assessment Report in  2014.


---
*Page 10*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 93  
 
 
Rwanda’s sensitivity11 to climate change was assessed as high and its adaptive capacity12 low in a national 
study on climate vulnerability. The rising rural population is increa sing demands for settlement expansion and the 
provision of associated services, in particular water and energy. Climate change is expected to exacerbate existing 
stresses including poverty, land degradation, food insecurity, rising epidemics and natural di sasters. Expected 
impacts of climate change include the high degradation of arable land (erosion) of forests. A national household 
baseline survey on household vulnerability to climate change found high levels of climate vulnerability13 throughout 
Rwanda a ttributed to the high number of poor rural households dependent on rainfed agriculture, the hilly 
topography, low access to climate information, depletion of forest stocks and dependence on biomass for fuel, its 
high age dependency ratio14 of 93.2% and its  high dependency on fuel imports among others.  
Climatic factors, exacerbated by the loss of forest and vegetation cover, steep slopes and high dependence 
on traditional rain -fed agriculture, are causing a variety of impacts. The high number of poor people engaged in 
subsistence agriculture makes Rwanda particularly susceptible to climate change. The area under agricultural 
production has been increasing over time at the expense of pastures, natural forests and fallows. Over -exploitation of 
land, a high depe ndence on biomass for household energy needs (98% of the population EICV4 table A.7) and 
increasing urbanisation (at 4.4% per year) create significant pressure on natural resources, notably land, water and 
forests. Land scarcity is a major constraint to ra ising agricultural productivity. The predicted variable rates of 
precipitation and rising temperatures are expected to adversely impact on agricultural productivity which is already 
constrained by over -cultivation, land degradation, insufficient investment s in soil and water conservation, the 
topography, intense pressure on natural resources (due to high population density) and a lack of irrigation. Reducing 
the dependency of people on farming is difficult due to a lack of alternative livelihood options in rural areas, a limited 
skills base, inadequate infrastructure (transport, electricity etc.) and low usage of formal financial services.  
 Policy and institutional  context   
Environmental degradation and climate change have been recognised, at the highest political level, as 
major barriers to realising Rwanda’s medium and long -term development aspirations. The need to 
mainstream adequate responses to climate change is a consis tent priority throughout national policies and 
strategies, and becoming a climate -resilient low -carbon economy is a national priority. Rwanda’s collective vision for 
development is embodied in Vision 2020 , which seeks to transform the country from a subsis tence agriculture 
economy to a knowledge -based, middle -income economy by 2020. A major focus concerns the development 
implications of population pressure and a high reliance on natural resources in the current economy. It calls for 
increased contribution f rom forestry to the national economy, increased private sector participation within the sector, 
protection and enhancement of biodiversity and ecosystem services and reduction in fuelwood demand pressure on 
the forest resource. Rwanda’s seven year, Nationa l Strategy for Transformation, 2017 -2024, (NST115) sets out the 
Rwanda’s development targets and integrates a number of long -range global and regional commitments including: 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs16); the Africa Union Agenda 2063 and its F irst 10 -Year Implementation 
Plan 2014 -2023; The East African Community (EAC) Vision 2050; and obligations from the COP 21 Paris 
Agreement on Climate Change. Increasing climate resilience in agriculture and human settlements and targeting 
public works schem es to areas most at risk from climate change are key areas of focus in the strategy. Sustainably 
exploiting natural resources and protecting the environment and reducing the dependence on fuel wood are also 
priorities.  
The Green Growth and Climate Resilien ce Strategy (GGCRS)  provides the country’s roadmap for becoming 
a climate resilient, low carbon economy by 2050. The GGCRS developed in 2011 is central in directing the 
achievement of Rwanda’s development targets through low carbon and climate resilient pa thways and has high - 
level commitment from GoR. GGCRS’ strategic objectives include the achievement of sustainable land use and 
water resource management and reduced vulnerability to climate change. The strategy contains 14 Programmes of 
Action towards its  achievement, including Sustainable Land Use Management and Planning and Sustainable 
forestry, agroforestry and biomass energy. The GoR has successfully mainstreamed climate change into its national  
strategies and many of its sectoral strategies. Environme nt and climate change issues are also included in the  
 
 
11 the degree to which a system is adversely or beneficially affected by a given climate change exposure, typically shaped by na tural and/or physical attributes of the system including topography, the capacity of 
different soil types to resist erosion, land cover type as well as human activities which affect the physical constitution of  a system, such as tillage systems, water management, resource depletion and population 
pressure including historic and  recent  adaptation.  
12 ‘the ability of a  system to  adjust  to climate  change  (including  climate  variability and  extremes) to  moderate  potential  damages, to  take advantage  of opportunities, or  to cope  with the consequences’  (Parry et al,  
2007 in the VI study, May 2015). The combination of the strengths, attributes, and resources available to an individual, community, society, or org anization that can be used to prepare for and undertake actions to 
reduce adverse impacts, moderate harm, or exploit beneficial opp ortunities (IPCC).  
13 According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) definition: vulnerability is the degree, to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including 
climate variability and  extremes  
14 an EICV indicator; NISR defines ADR as the proportion (%) of people in Rwanda under 16 and over 64 years (dependent, not of w orking age), to those 16 -64 years (economically productive ages). 
15 The strategy is still in the draft  stage  
16 Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts; and Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable


---
*Page 11*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 93  
 
 
Budget Call Circular (BCC). However, limited capacity to tackling climate change issues particularly in productive 
sectors such as agriculture reduces national capacity to adopt and implement the GGCRS.  
Rwanda’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  (INDC) includes a number of actions that will be 
supported by this project . Specifically these include: mainstreaming agro ecology techniques (agro forestry, 
kitchen gardens, nutrient recycling, and water conservation); organic waste composting; mainstreaming sustainable 
pest managem ent techniques ; improving soil conservation and land husbandry (terraces and agroforestry); 
increasing irrigation and water management including rainwater harvesting; afforestation through enhanced 
germplasm and technical practices in planting and post -planting processes; Improved Forest Management for 
degraded forest resources; and sustainable use of biomass fuels through the increased uptake of improved 
cookstoves and biogas.  
Rwanda’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA ) articulates Rwanda’s strateg y to reduce vulnerability 
to climate change particularly from the main climatic hazards including intense rainfall, flash flooding, 
landslides, drought and low flows, extreme temperatures and heat waves. The six NAPA priorities are: 1) 
Integrated Water Res ource Management; 2) Setting up information systems to early warning of hydro -agro 
meteorological system and rapid intervention mechanisms; 3) Promotion of non -agricultural income generating 
activities; 4) Promotion of intensive agro -pastoral activities; 5 ) Introduction of species resisting to environmental 
conditions; and 6) Development of firewood alternative sources of energy.  
Rwanda has identified Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions  (NAMAs) across seven priority sectors: 
agriculture, buildings, energy, industry, land use, land change and forestry, transport, and waste. Within this, 
increasing the basic productivity of Rwanda’s forests is a priority. As land for afforestation is a ver y scarce resource 
in Rwanda, the NAMA has prioritised forest management for multiple purposes and advocates for the creation of 
new plantations to achieve a national tree/forest cover of 30%, with particular attention to steep slopes in order to 
combine pr otective and productive functions. Tea was also considered a high priority for NAMA development due to 
the historical importance of the sector and the economic potential for value addition, job creation and the potential 
emission reduction through the adop tion of energy saving measures in tea processing. Within the Housing / Building 
Sector the NAMA highlights the use of efficient cookstoves, LED lighting and solar water heaters along with Off -Gird 
Solar PV Mini -Grids.  
Rwanda has closed 80% of its gender ga p—edging out many countries in the Global North, including the United 
Kingdom,  Canada  and the United  States.  Rwanda  is the only country  in sub-Saharan  Africa  to be in the top 10 of the 
Index17, with the next sub -Saharan African country, Burundi, ranking 12 th. Since 2008, Rwanda has had a female - 
majority in Parliament, and remains today the country with the highest share of female parliamentarians in the world 
at 64% representation. In recent years, the GoR has made concerted efforts to connect gender equal ity and climate 
change considerations in tandem with poverty reduction and resilience -building efforts in national policies, plans and 
measures, from identifying gender as a cross -cutting issue to including specific goals and targets for women’s 
involvemen t in climate change solutions. Rwanda has also made significant global commitments to recognising 
women’s important roles in sustainable development and climate change adaptation, mitigation and resilience 
building, as well as furthering gender equality in  policies across all sectors. This commitment is strengthened by a 
wide network of stakeholders in civil society and the private sector that consider gender a cross -cutting issue and an 
integral addition in sustainable development. A comprehensive list and  description of policies, commitments, 
strategies, institutions, women’s groups, and more with details on the inclusion of gender, or lack of, can be found in 
the Gender Analysis provide in Annex 1. See individual study reports under Annex 1 for specific d etails on all 
policies and strategies relevant to each  component.  
Rwanda has a comprehensive and progressive institutional framework , and has established agencies to work 
cross -sectorally to support natural resource management, notably REMA and the Rwanda Water and Forests 
Authority (RWFA) within the Ministry of Environment (MOE). In addition, a National Fund for Environment and 
Climate Change (FONERWA) has been established to address cross - sector financing needs. Rwanda also 
recognises the importance of e ngaging multiple stakeholders and has established mechanisms including regular 
cross -sectoral planning meetings and the Joint Action Development Forums (JADF), consultative platforms used for 
promoting cooperation between the private sector, civil society and the public sector.   
 C.2. Project Objective against Baseline   
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary depending on the nature of the 
project.   
 Objectives   
 
17 Global  Gender Gap Index 2016 published by the World Economic Forum


---
*Page 12*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 93  
 
 
The proposed project will increase the resilience of vulnerable communities to climate change in Gicumbi 
District in Northern Rwanda . This will be achieved by restoring and enhancing ecosystem services of one of the 
sub-catchment s of the Muvumba watershed, increasing the capacity of communities to renew and sustainably 
manage forest resources and supporting smallholders to adopt climate resilient agriculture. The project will also 
invest in green settlements for vulnerable familie s currently living in areas prone to landslides and floods and 
support community based adaptation planning and livelihoods diversification. Knowledge and capacity developed 
during implementation will be mainstreamed at the sector and national level. The pr oposed interventions will target 
nine sectors in Gicumbi18 - Kaniga, Rubaya, Cyumba, Rushaki, Shangasha, Mukarange, Manyagiro, Byumba19 and 
Bwisige20. Most of this area falls into sub -catchment B of the Muvumba river catchment between 1446 and 2431 
metres above sea level. A map of the target area is shown in Annex 4 and detailed maps of the watershed and sub - 
watersheds are included in the Watershed Protection Plan that was prepared as part of the design (see Annex 1).  
The project will specifically target t he most vulnerable groups who have less resources to mitigate and 
adapt to climate change . This includes the extreme poor, as more than a quarter of households in the target area 
fall into this category and women headed households (who tend to be poor and are particularly vulnerable to climate 
change).  In particular,  many  of the project’s  interventions  target  those  who farm on  marginal  land and who are highly 
vulnerable to landslides, flooding and droughts. A key focus will be on developing the adaptive cap acity of farmers 
and local institutions to ensure that the developed resilience becomes embedded within communities enabling them 
to continue adapting to future climate variability beyond the lifetime of the project. Baseline conditions and existing 
invest ments are described for the four areas of intervention: 1) Watershed protection and climate resilient 
agriculture; 2) Sustainable forest management; 3) Climate resilient settlements; and 4) Knowledge development and 
transfer.  
 
 
Gicumbi district is the source for the Muvumba and Nyabugogo river catchments and 60% of its land area is 
situated in the degraded Muvumba watershed. Gicumbi extends north from Kigali to the Uganda border and has 
a population of 395,60621 (or 22.9% of the total population of Northern Province) spread over 867 km2 most of which 
(91.3%) live in rural areas22. The Muvumba River is trans -boundary with Uganda and located in the Buberuka 
Highlands of Rwanda. Originally forested with Afromontane rainforest, natural forest is now almost totally absent.  
The basin is on the boundary of the Albertine Rift Biodiversity Hot Spot which is one of the most important regions 
for biodiversity conservation in Africa. It contains more endemic species of vertebrate than an y other region on 
mainland Africa. In particular, a significant portion of wetlands in the Muvumba (which play an important role in flood 
attenuation, ground water recharge, nutrient absorption and water purification) has been degraded or converted to 
agricultural use. As small -holder farming predominates, the local population is highly dependent on the ecosystem 
services provided by the Muvumba watershed which is also critical to the country’s hydropower generation.  
Projected water demand up to 2040 shows that water requirements for all sectors will increase to 83% of the 
average renewable resources and the urgent need for increased storage infrastructure to cope with deficits during 
the dry season23. 
The target area is characterised by steep topography and  shallow soils with limited integration of trees and 
shrubs within the landscape, with intense rainfall leading to high soil erosion and floods and landslides.  
Current climate variability has a major impact on the area and it has some of the highest soil e rosion rates in 
Rwanda. Soil erosion, deforestation and lack of water storage were ranked among the highest priorities by the 
Muvumba Catchment Task Force. Field and GIS analysis in the district estimate that the Gicumbi district 
experiences soil erosion r ates between 150 -300 tonnes/hectare/year. This leads to major economic damage, with 
the average revenue loss per plot of land estimated at between USD14 -62 per hectare per year, equivalent to up to  
5.2 million USD per year. The projected variability in rai nfall combined with high levels of erosion and intense 
pressure from over -cultivation and deforestation causes extensive sedimentation and degradation of rivers, lakes 
and wetlands with more than 5000 tonnes of soil leaving the catchment every day 24 which  impacts on downstream 
water abstraction and hydro -power potential. Soil sedimentation loading in Gicumbi is estimated to occur at a rate of  
1.13 tonnes per hectare per year and (at a sediment load removal cost of USD 14 per tonne) results in an estimated  
total annual economic cost of USD 1.4 million per year. As well as the ongoing problem of soil erosion, the area 
experiences frequent floods and landslides during the rainy season. The mountainous topography and steep ravines  
 
 
18 The information  gathering  for this report was  undertaken  in Rwanda  during  October  - November 2016  through  a combination  of interviews, site  visits  and literature  reviews.  
19 Byumba is the District capital where the District administration is based and is included within the project area plus it also houses a campus of the University of Rwanda (UTAB). 
20 There  are 21 sectors  in Gicumbi hence  these  10 sectors  account  for the  northern  half of the  District but  excluding  the 2 western  sectors  of Miyove  and Nyankenke.  
21 4th Rwanda Population and Housing Census 
22 NISR, 2012  
23 Muvumba catchment plan, 2017  
24 Total Suspended Solids > 4000 mg/l in Water Quality Monitoring report, RWFA,  2016  
Baseline 1: the degradation of the Muvumba watershed is being accelerated by climate change and local 
communities have low adaptive capacity


---
*Page 13*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 93  
 
 
(90% of the land comprises slopes between 25 -55%) make the area prone to landslides that cause the destruction 
of physical infrastructure downhill and downstream.  
Climatic variability interacts with anthropogenic factors to accelerate watershed degradation. Forest, land 
and water resources are under high pressure from a large population almost entirely reliant on agrarian livelihoods 
and on wood for fuel, with deman d far exceeding supply. The poor quality of existing forest resources and the 
deforestation of upper catchments contributes to high rates of soil erosion lead to declining soil fertility, falling 
agricultural yields and increased food insecurity. Existing terraces are often in poor condition with insufficient 
incorporation of soil conservation measures and practices. River banks and roadsides lack tree cover and soil 
stabilization measures and are subject to erosion and landslides. Human population densitie s are very high in the 
watershed, especially around Byumba25, the Gicumbi district capital which exerts significant pressure on water and 
land resources resulting in the high rate of land and wetland degradation and pollution of water sources.  
The adverse impacts of rising temperatures and increasingly variable precipitation combined with the 
ongoing degradation of natural resources is most evident in rural communities . Agricultural yields are very 
low, food insecurity affects 20%26 of the households in the  catchment and 44% of children in Gicumbi have chronic 
malnutrition. Poverty rates within Gicumbi are also very high compared to national levels, with 55.3% and 24.7% of 
the population living below the poverty line or in extreme poverty respectively (EICV 4) making it the second poorest 
district in Rwanda after Nyamasheke. The high levels of poverty limit the adaptive capacity of communities to invest 
in sustainable practices and take on other income -generating opportunities to supplement household and live lihood 
needs27. This particularly affects female -headed households, which make up 27% of households in Gicumbi,28 as 
women have limited access to and control over resources compared to men because of cultural and social 
stigmas/barriers and traditional rol es and responsibilities. There are also a large number of orphans as well as high 
morbidity and mortality among young children.  
Small -scale farmers are particularly vulnerable to climate variability. Agriculture is the main occupation for 
94.8% of the dist rict’s population. The main crops are tea (Gicumbi hosts one of the largest tea plantations in 
Rwanda), wheat, sorghum and maize and many households (66%) own farm animals, mostly cattle. The average 
size of land holding per household is approximately 0.7 ha and productivity levels are very low due to low soil 
fertility, a predominance of very shallow soils, especially on the slopes, resulting in limited soil moisture holding 
capacity, the limited use of inputs and mechanisation, erosion on steep slopes, a lack of irrigation and post -harvest 
facilities as well as under -developed agricultural value chains and a lack of private investment. Smallholders often 
lack the knowledge, inputs and technology to transition to more climate resilience farming systems that  would help 
them to generate a marketable surplus for food, nutrition and income security. They have neither the financial nor 
physical access to quality feed for livestock29 and have limited knowledge of improved feeding, fodder establishment 
and crop -livestock integration approaches. At the same time, extension services lack the technical capacity to 
effectively mainstream climate concerns into advice services. These two factors result in low crop and milk 
productivity, inefficient use of resources (time,  space and money) and high GHG emissions per unit of meat 
produced. Numerically smallholders therefore contribute most to, and suffer most from, GHG  emissions.  
Smallholders growing tea and coffee in Gicumbi are particularly at risk from climate change. As perennial 
plants, tea and coffee play an important role in stabilising Rwanda’s hilly topography and reducing soil erosion that 
would otherwise occur as a result of pre -planting tillage for annuals. However, both crops are highly sensitive to 
rising temper atures and changing rainfall patterns. Adverse impacts are already occurring, from heavy precipitation 
events and associated floods, landslides and soil erosion, as well as the impacts of periodic dry years reducing 
production. The Mulindi tea plantation h as an output of over 15 million tonnes annually, which is over 20% of 
national production, all of which is produced by 4940 smallholder farmers. There are also 11,783 coffee farmers30 in 
Gicumbi working on very small plots of land (0.1 - 0.2 ha). As well as  providing livelihoods for very large numbers of 
small -holder farmers, national tea and coffee production comprise 25% of all exports by value and generate around 
USD 60 and 62 million respectively in exports per year31. However, climate variability is alr eady impacting on tea 
and coffee yields. The Mulindi tea plantation has suffered major losses in recent years, with production areas lost to 
landslides, major damage due to floods, and periodic droughts (dry conditions in 2013 reduced production by 22%).  
The estimated annual loss of production from climate variability at the Mulindi tea plantation (2300 ha) in Gicumbi 
over the last six years ranges from 2.0 to 3.3 million tonnes of green leaf per year, with an equivalent market loss of  
 
25 The sectors of Byumba, Rubaya, Cyumba, Munyangiro, Nyankenke have more than 500  people/km2.  
26 Water for Growth  2016  
27 National Institute of Statistics of the Republic of Rwanda. (2010). EICV3 District Profile: Gicumbi. Kigali, Rwanda  
28 National Institute of Statistics of the R epublic of Rwanda. (2012). Rwanda 4th Population and Housing Census, 2012. Kigali,  Rwanda  
29 The majority of smallholders rely on natural grasses to feed livestock, have little income for feeding supplements, lack acce ss to disease/drought resilient forage se eds and have limited knowledge on improved feeding 
practices and/or fodder establishment techniques. This results in hours spent searching for animal fodder in the dry  season.  
30 The Republic Of Rwanda. Ministry Of Agriculture And Animal Resources. Rwanda Coffee Development Strategy 2016 -2020 
31 NISR,  2014


---
*Page 14*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 93  
 
 
USD2.5 - 4.1 million per year, directly reducing the incomes of smallholders. Similarly, dry years and rising 
temperatures are affecting coffee production, both in relation to the direct production but also from the increased 
prevalence of pests and diseases. Coffee is important for the national economy (providing over 10% of total exports 
by value) and supports the livelihoods of  several hundred thousand small -holder farmers across the country (30% of 
which are women). As highlighted by recent studies globally and in East Africa (see introduction), these coffee 
livelihoods are at risk from climate change, with major parts of curre nt production areas (~50%) expected to be 
unsuitable for Arabica production by 2050 (Davis et al , 2012; The Climate Institute, 201632). 
Future climate projections indicate critical risks to smallholders involved in tea and coffee production. In the 
short -term, early climate change will detrimentally affect the productivity and quality of tea and coffee in Rwanda. In 
the medium term, it poses a critical threat. Recent analysis has estimated that climate change is projected to cut the 
global area suitable fo r coffee production by as much as 50% by 205033 and analysis in East Africa has shown 
similar reductions in the areas suitable for growing tea34. These future effects of climate change on tea and coffee 
are particularly important because they are long -lived crops, much more so than cereals, and thus land -use under 
cultivation (and smallholder investment) is locked into longer cycles that will be exposed to major climate change.  
This issue is important because Rwanda is currently expanding the area under tea  and coffee cultivation, as part of 
national agricultural growth and export expansion (in the ASIP -II35), and these new investments will be directly 
exposed to the climate of the future. Climate change will also lead to additional impacts from pests and di sease 
including the Red spider mite (tea) which is an increasing problem, coffee leaf rust prevalence and coffee berry 
borer, which are correlated to temperature (with higher levels in warmer areas). Future climate change will affect 
range and incidence, a nd is likely to open up the risks of other pests and diseases. Given the lead in times and 
longevity  of tea and coffee  plants,  the window  of opportunity  for making  the tea and coffee  sectors  resilient  is urgent, 
as decisions are being made now that will lock Rwanda into plans that last decades. Of particular importance is that 
Rwanda’s comparative advantage is in the production of quality tea and coffee, which command higher prices, and 
thus lead to higher incomes to small -holders and greater national exp orts. This is exacerbated because the two 
sectors are dominated by smallholders – there are around 42,000 tea smallholders and 357,000 coffee small -holder 
farmers in Rwanda – thus those most affected by climate change will be those least likely to be able to adapt on 
their own.  
Baseline investments  
 Project  Implementing 
organisation  Timeframe  Expected results   
 W4G  MOE/RWFA/IWR 
MD 
Embassy of the 
Kingdom of the 
Netherlands  2014 -19 Integrated Water Resources Management Programme (35.4 
million Euro) in four catchments across Rwanda including 
Muvumba. W4G prepared a catchment plan for Muvumba 
which this project will help to finance.   
 Land Husbandry, 
Water Harvesting and 
Hillside Irrigation 
(LWH) Project  MINAGRI funded 
by the World Bank  2009 - 2017  Established to increase productivity and promote commercial 
farming on the hillsides of Rwanda. Land husbandry practices 
on hillsides depends on slope categories i.e. soil bunds on 6 - 
16% slope, terraces on 16 -40%, narrow -bench terraces on 40 - 
60%, more th an 60% slope afforestation. Includes Radical 
terracing and Agroforestry on 2,500 ha in Rushaki, 
Mukarange, Shangasha and Kaniga sectors. Terraces were 
constructed in conjunction with agro -forestry, fodder crops on 
the risers and other biological measures a nd farmed using 
compost, lime, moisture retention measures and other soil 
erosion control measures. The LWH Project has improved 
land-husbandry and productivity on 20,601 ha lands in 34 pilot 
watersheds which has resulted in a 79% and 84% reduction  in 
sediment loads and soil erosion respectively. LWH is ending 
soon. This project will draw lessons from LWH.   
 Reducing vulnerability 
to climate change in 
North West Rwanda  
through community 
based adaptation  RWFA (funded by 
the Adaptation 
Fund) USD 10  
million over 4 
years  2014 -18 Aims to increase the adaptive capacity of natural systems and 
rural communities living in exposed areas of North Western 
Rwanda to climate change impacts. This project operates in a  
different part of Rwanda but many of its successful 
interventions will be replicated in Gicumbi.   
 
 
32 http://www.climateinstitute.org.au/verve/_resources/TCI_A_Brewing_Storm_FINAL_WEB270916.pdf ). 
33 Bunn, C., Läderach, P., Ovalle Rivera, O., & Kirschke, D. 2014. A bitter cup: climate change profile of global production of Arabica and Robusta coffee. Climatic Change, 129, 89 -101 
Climate Institute (2016). A Brewing Storm: The climate change risks to  coffee  
34 CIAT (2011) Future climate scenarios for Kenya’s tea growing areas. International Center for Tropical Agriculture. CIAT Repor t. 
35 Agriculture Sector Investment Plan – Phase  II


---
*Page 15*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 93  
 
 
 The Gishwati Water 
and Land Management 
Project  MINAGRI and 
RWFA USD  
25.7m over 3 
years (funded by 
GoR)  2010 -2013  In the degraded landscape of Gishwati in Rwanda’s western 
province, the GWLM project worked closely with communities 
in northern Rwanda (Nyab ihu and Rubavu districts) to 
rehabilitate hillsides and optimise land use. This mountainous 
area is affected by intense rainfall, erosion, poor soil fertility, 
landslides and flooding. The GWLM project undertook detailed 
site surveys, mapping and analyses to develop site -specific 
land husbandry interventions. Steep hillsides were protected 
with permanent vegetative cover and left for forest 
regeneration while graded terraces and cut off drains were 
constructed on slopes 0 -16% with soil depths between 50 - 
100cm to improve the flow of surface water and reduce 
erosion. These measures were combined with biological 
measures such as grasses, trees and herbaceous legumes 
planting. For slopes ranging from 16 -40% and a soil depth of 
greater than 100cm, rangeland was developed with pasture 
grass (Kikuyu grass, Phalaris aquatica, etc), forage legumes 
and live fencing for livestock management. For 40 - 60% 
slopes with greater than 100 cm in soil depth, the potential for 
commercial tree growth is high so these areas were replanted  
with trees. In total, 2972 ha were restored. The project has 
ended.   
Note: The Muvumba catchment plan also proposes a flood early warning system in Mulindi in Gicumbi district to increase 
capacity to detect climate change patterns including disseminating information to prepare for foreseen extreme events and 
manage them better. It would also enable climate change risk to be incorporated into district development planning.  
Expected outcomes and impact that the project will aim to achieve in im proving baseline scenario 1  
Watershed restored and agricultural practices resilient to climate change  
• The aim is to restore ecosystem functions and services in the Muvumba watershed to reduce the risk of 
landslides and flooding and to enhance the resilience of small holder tea and coffee producers to climate 
change. Investments in protective forests and agro -forestry approaches and erosion control measures will 
improve the stability of hillsides and increase carbon sequestration with 17,895 ha of l and or forests under 
improved and effective management. It will also improve the hydrological function of the watershed and build 
climate resilience by ensuring optimal flow rates, reducing sedimentation and related costs to downstream water 
infrastructure  and fisheries and adsorb water during heavy rainfall events to buffer against floods and landslides. 
These essential ecosystem services are needed to support sustainable, resilient  livelihoods.  
• Increasing vegetative cover and enhancing soil conservation will reduce erosion, increase soil fertility and 
diversify and increase the productivity of the land and natural -resource -based livelihoods. 1,800 smallholder 
farmers will be supported to implement agro -ecological approaches to increase climate resilience.  These 
vulnerable smallholders will see improvements in farm production, food security and income levels contributing 
to rural poverty reduction. Farmer promoters and government extension workers will also be supported to 
disseminate their knowledge via co mmunity meetings and further sensitisation using mass media such as radio 
will reach a total of 35,000 farmers by the end of the project. Support to small scale tea and coffee producers to 
adapt to climate change will increase resilience and avoid the conv ersion of land use to annual crops that 
exposes the slopes to tillage and soil erosion. In all, climate resilient agriculture will be rolled out over 4225 ha of 
land. Adaptation measures will increase production, deliver climate resilience, and lead to wid er co -benefits to 
poor small -holder farmers. Adaptation planning with communities and investment in a community adaptation 
fund36 will enable communities to finance diversified livelihoods in return for restricting agriculture in the most 
vulnerable lands and establishing protective forests. This will strengthen the linkage between watershed 
protection measures land and livelihood interventions to resilience, as well as helping to target vulnerable 
groups.  
 Baseline 2: Productive forest resources are degrad ed and poorly  managed   
Forest productivity is around 25 – 33% of potential because silviculture practice is almost universally sub - 
optimal and affected by variable rainfall and low quality seed and seedlings. Forests in Rwanda provide wood 
fuel, food, con struction materials and medicinal herbs to local communities. Forests also support a series of  
economic activities in the agriculture, tourism and energy industries. Their ecological roles include acting as 
biodiversity repositories, groundwater and stream  recharge, flood control and regulators of regional and  
 
36 Community grants for the CAF will be provided by FONERWA (no GCF finance will be used for the grants, GCF finance will 
only be used to provide the TA to support the set up and operation of the fund)


---
*Page 16*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 93  
 
 
microclimates. Forest cover in the target area is characterised by small, disparate, scattered blocks of varying size 
across the hilly landscape. Shallow soils predominate, the available phosphorus levels are very low and soil 
moisture holding capacity is limited. As a result, many forest areas are subject to drought, despite the reasonable 
average rainfall37. The predominance of genetically degraded Eucalyptus species which are not well suited to 
Gicumbi’s soil conditions increases vulnerability to pests, diseases and drought conditions. It also reduces the range 
of forests good and services available for livelihoods, household and economic opportunities, increasing vulnerability  
to climatic and other changes and shocks. Nursery management is poor and there is weak matching of species to 
site conditions, poor site preparation and establishment practice, late planting and little or no tending. This combined 
with the uneven rainfall  distribution, has led to many stands showing signs of drought stress. Drought stress, 
combined with too densely spaced young plantations provides a repository for pest build up and attack. Adoption of 
agroforestry is low and where practiced often  poor.  
Coppicing and harvesting is undertaken with axes and pangas, damaging stools and compromising 
regrowth. Very few people (mostly men) are employed in wood processing and there is a lack of drying and storage 
facilities in Gicumbi. Most of the wood is sawn man ually over pits (pit sawing) or using chainsaws leading to high 
wood wastage. Moreover, harvesting, especially within small private woodlots, is undertaken early, often after only  
2-3 years of coppice regrowth, to meet immediate demand and provide capital.  The declining revenue and income 
from forest resources in Gicumbi inevitably erodes the household asset base needed to cope with climate change.  
Projected climate change indicates that drought risk will increase in future because Gicumbi’s forests are 
being over cut (legally and illegally) resulting in a sparsely covered degraded forest estate. This is likely to 
continue because biomass in the form of firewood, charcoal and crop waste is the primary cooking fuel for over 98% 
of households, with 97% using f irewood38, by far the most used energy source in rural areas. The vast majority of 
rural households use open fires which are inefficient and cause indoor pollution with an estimated 5,680 deaths a 
year in Rwanda related to household air pollution, and 94% of these are children.  
In Gicumbi, there is also a high demand for wood to fire the boilers of the Mulindi Tea Factory to dry tea. Tea 
factories are heavy users of energy, using wood fuel to power the boilers for factory processes, and are the largest 
industrial source of greenhouse gas emissions in the country. Wood for the boilers is typically grown in large 
managed forests nearby (though often supplemented by additional suppliers) and 1 hectare of forest is needed to 
produce sufficient wood fuel for ever y 3 to 4 hectares of planted tea. Currently, the supply of eucalyptus from the 
factory’s 280 Ha eucalyptus plantation to dry tea is inadequate and there is an urgent need to improve the efficiency 
of the drying process as well as improve the productivity o f existing stands and expand and diversify forest 
resources over hilly terrain to cope with current and future demand for biomass and construction materials. A 
detailed technical audit and study39 concluded that the factory performs well against best pract ice in the tea industry 
internationally, but that significant improvements can still be made, some making use of best practice in other 
sectors.  
Annual wood consumption by the factory is in the region of 12 - 14,200 m3 per year, almost entirely from 
eucaly ptus and annual grid electricity consumption was 1,800 MWh over 2015 -6, and 42 MWh generated on site. 
The factory has recently invested in various items of new plant that has brought the ‘tea out to wood in’ ratio down. 
The energy on site comprises steam g enerated from wood combustion, and electricity from either the grid or on site 
generation. Heat is provided by a steam system with 3 wood fired boilers. All 3 boilers have single stage combustion 
and none have any controls based on flue gas quality measure ment (oxygen or CO). Wood logs are fed in manually 
to fill the furnace. Wood is brought to site as cord wood in nominal 1m lengths, and is stored in stacks externally for 
several months before being transferred to covered sheds. Lab analysis showed that th e moisture content was 
around 30%40 although it is possible to dry Eucalyptus below 20%. Reducing moisture from 30% to 20% would lead 
to an increase in NCV41 of 17.8%. Aside from the 3 boilers, the other primary energy consuming item are generators 
which a re used to provide continuity of supply due to frequent power outages from the grid which affects the 
processing lines. The main secondary energy using items are the 3 fluidised bed dryers and the larger electrical 
motors42 associated with them, the physic al withering machine and the CTC machines. The analysis highlights that: 
the total system efficiency is around 32%; boiler efficiency at high fire is around 75%; and the older dryers are 13% 
less efficient than the new one. The annual CO 2E emissions from t he factory are estimated to be 10,600 t43, 
equivalent to 2.7 kg CO 2E /kg tea. Information and results gained from the energy audit show that there is room for 
significant reduction in GWP emissions, which could prove to be a model for the other factories i n country.  
 
37 Sustainable Forest Management: Feasibility Assessment Report. Prepared Feb  2017  
38 NISR (2014). EICV 4: Results of Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey. Aug  2015.  
39 Report 2c -Technical -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017  Mulindi  Tea Factory Energy  Audit &  Recommendations:  Technical  Report on  Improving  the Energy  Efficiency and  Reducing  the Emissions  from the  Mulindi  Tea Factory  
 
40 Although this  is acceptable for combustion, it reduces the net energy content due to loss of energy in the water vapour. T he target should be 20%.  
41 Net Calorific value - energy content with no allowance for recovery of latent heat in water content in combustion gases 
42 The largest motor is 45 kW, and there are 17 motors rated at 15 kW or greater.  
43 Comprises 10,000 t.p.a. thermal, plus 32 t from on site generation, plus 567 t from grid supplied  electricity


---
*Page 17*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 93  
 
 
Baseline investments  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expected outcomes and impact that the project will aim to achieve in improving baseline scenario 2  
Increased productivity of forest resources and reduced deforestation  
• The project  will assist  forest  owners  and users  to improve  forest  productivity  and timber  quality  to support 
diversified sustainable livelihoods while at the same time introducing measures that will reduce the 
harvesting of wood for household cooking and Mulindi tea factory to reduce pressure on forest and wood 
resources, reducing vulnerabilities associated with deforestation and degraded forest  cover.  
• The project will increase the uptake of sustainable forest management practices on woodlots, forests and 
plantations to increase the volume of timber sustainably available for meeting fuelwood and other timber 
needs.  2261  ha of forest  will be renewed  with high quality  plants  and best practice  establishment  and 200 ha 
of trial plots will demonstrate best pract ice forest management. Improved forest planning, seed quality and 
availability and silviculture techniques will result in improved forest productivity and quality and minimise 
waste during harvesting and processing. Benefits will accrue not only in terms o f products harvested but 
also to the public in terms of environmental services such as soil conservation, water catchment, carbon 
sequestration and biodiversity values emerging from the presence of forests. Proposed forestry 
interventions are expected to g enerate off -farm employment and increase incomes (for 26,760 women 
24,552 men) with 37 new cooperatives active in managing tree nurseries and  beekeeping.  
• Forestry interventions will build social and economic resilience to climate change, as well as having a 
positive impact on climate change mitigation with 140,04644 t CO 2eq in reduced emissions over the project  
lifetime from the sustainable management of forests and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon 
stocks over the lifetime of the  project.  
• The project will also reduce the pressure on Gicumbi’s forests from reducing biomass use in energy by 
introducing 23,400 tier 1 and 2 efficient stoves installed and operating across Gicumbi, 3900 tier 3 stoves, 
an additional 900 households and 40 large public buildings using biogas, and 5 wood chip producing 
facilities  in operation.  Improved  efficiencies  for tea processing  at the Mulindi  tea factory  will lead to reduced  
greenhouse gas emissions of 59,261t CO 2eq over the lifetime of the  project.  
 
 
The return and  unplanned resettlement of more than 3 million people from neighbouring countries to 
Rwanda following the 1994 genocide created an immediate impact on natural resources . While most of the 2 
million people displaced between 1990 and ‘94 were able to return to their previous homes, around 800,000 
returnees who had fled during the earlier 1959 massacres were resettled on public and state owned land in 
settlements known as imidugudu . 
The scarcity of land, population growth and the increasing intensity of extrem e weather events mean that 
significant numbers of people live in areas at risk from flooding and landslides. Many areas of Rwanda are 
prone to localised landslides and floods due to the hilly topography and high annual precipitation rates. Around 40%  
of the country’s population is exposed to landslide risk and an estimated 28% of Gicumbi’s land area has moderate 
to high susceptibility to landslides45. There are around 281,250 people still living in high risk areas across Rwanda  
 
44 Includes reductions from Agroforestry 70,060 t CO2eq; Forestry 69,986t  CO2eq  
45 MIDIMAR (2015). The National Risk Atlas of Rwanda. Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs  
Project  Implementing organisation  Timeframe  Expected results  
Project d’Appui à la 
Reforestation au Rwanda 
(PAREF Phase 2)  PAREF is funded by the 
Belgian Development 
Agency (BTC) and the 
Netherlands government and 
implemented by  RWFA  2009 -2016  Implementation of the National Forestry Policy 
in Rwanda to reverse degradation of forest 
resources and restore Rwanda’s forestry cover 
to a target of 30% for est cover by 2018.  
PAREF covers all the districts of the Eastern, 
Western and Northern Provinces. 884.3 ha of 
forest plantation were completed in Gicumbi in 
2014. This project has now ended but 
produced a number of technical manuals and 
guidelines which wi ll be used by the project.  
Forest plantation  MINERENA/IUCN, Gicumbi 
District  2017 -2018   
 
Baseline 3: Rural population living in houses and areas susceptible to landslides and flooding with limited 
access to water and other essential services


---
*Page 18*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 93  
 
 
(who are affected by landsli des and floods) including 14,724 in Gicumbi district (one of the highest in the country). 
Households living on slopes are affected by landslides because people have been practicing intensive farming with 
no anti -erosion measures such as terracing or planti ng of trees and shrubs, therefore when the rains come there is 
nothing to prevent soil erosion. Households living in valleys or near lakes and rivers are also at risk from flooding 
which results in the loss of crops, trees, destruction of stables for anima ls, and damage to homes.  
The risks of landslides and floods are exacerbated by poorly constructed housing made using weak 
materials. Around 60% of vulnerable houses in the country constructed with sundried bricks while 29% use wood 
and mud. This contributes to the large number of fatalities and injuries associated with landslides. Other key 
challenges for inhabitants of Gicumbi district include an inadequate water supply and poor sanitation, poor waste 
management and high unemployment rates (72% a re engaged as small scale farmers). Only 9% of households in 
Gicumbi have access to electricity.  
Many households in the target area are unable to withstand climatic shocks. The worst affected are the 
extreme poor households46 that are landless and have no livestock or other assets to sell during a disaster. These 
households include the chronically ill, the elderly with no family support and people with disabilities. They rely on 
neighbours or the community and government to provide labour and materials to r ebuild homes if destroyed. Others 
who are physically able to work but lack land, livestock or other assets47 can provide labour during reconstruction 
but struggle to obtain the finances to rebuild homes, and rely on the government to provide roofing and ho using 
materials when their houses are destroyed. Even those who have assets including land, shelter, some livestock and 
who are self -sufficient48 cannot withstand continued climatic shocks as these will deplete the asset base. Women 
headed households (Rwan da has a high proportion of women headed households as a result of the 1994 genocide) 
are also considered highly vulnerable as they are often from poorer segments of Rwandan society, therefore have 
less assets and less alternative income opportunities to e nable them to cope with climate shocks. Children are also 
at risk as they more easily get sick or hurt due to the instability of the home or land (landslides or flowing water or 
flooding), and are often pulled out of school as families struggle to get mone y to pay for damaged school materials.  
The GoR has a programme of support to help vulnerable and poor families to relocate to safe areas where 
the GoR provides access to services and utilities (schools, water, electricity etc.). The Rwanda Housing Authorit y’s 
Integrated Development Programme (IDP) provides housing for families whose dwellings or livelihoods have been 
impacted by slope destabilisation, soil erosion or other factors, many of which are either directly caused by, or 
exacerbated by, climate chan ge. Under the IDP programme, the Rwanda Defence Force’s Corps of Engineers build 
new houses in rural settlements on safe ground which are then donated to the poorest and most vulnerable families 
at risk. However, public resources are insufficient to fund t he cost of moving everyone who needs to be relocated. 
Currently, each province has a ‘model IDP village’ with roads, four in one houses that maximise land with durable 
construction materials, water, electricity, a market, a school, cowsheds and playgrounds . The GoR is planning to 
construct two ‘model villages’ in each of Rwanda’s thirty districts in the first phase of the programme.  
The increasing intensity of rainfall events results in flood and landslide damage to settlements in the rainy 
season. Many set tlements are located on top of hills and have inadequate drainage and water management, 
collection channels, rainwater harvesting and storage, and insufficient soil protection vegetation, leading to run -off of 
storm water and causing soil erosion. Run -off following intense precipitation is exacerbated by rapid discharge from 
roofs, roads and other hard surfaces causing gullies and landslides at the crest of the slope and flooding and 
siltation lower in the valley. A number of major gullies have opened up es pecially around Byumba.  
Conversely, many areas experience water shortages during the dry season. Despite being among the districts 
with the highest rainfall in the country and with quite a dense hydrological network, many inhabitants have 
insufficient acce ss to clean water and often experience water shortages during the dry season with only a small 
proportion of the population having access to piped water. Access to safe water varies between 40 – 50%. Women 
and children, who are primarily responsible for ho usehold water collection and spend a significant amount of time 
per day to complete this task, are especially impacted by water shortages as this significantly increases their work 
burden (especially given the steep slopes) and reduces time they have for l ivelihood opportunities and household 
tasks.  Water  demand  from the Muvumba  watershed  is projected  to almost  quadruple  by 2023  and water  use in 2050 
is expected be more than 10 times the demand in 2015. By 2023 there is expected to be shortage of water for 6 
months of the year49. This calls for collective action to improve water storage and management to avert shortages in 
the future.  
Baseline investments  
 
46 Ubudehe Category 1: Umutindi nyakujya  
47 Ubudehe Category 2: Umitindi  
48 Ubudehe Category 3: Umekene  
49 W4G (2016). Catchment plan summary for Muvumba  watershed.


---
*Page 19*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 93  
 
 
 Project  Implementing 
organisation  Timeframe  Expected results   
 IDP MINALOC/RHA  ongoing  Integrated Development Approach Model Village (IDP) 
whereby people living in high risk zones can relocate to 
villages with improved access to services and main 
transportation routes. The project will help to finance two IDP 
villages in Gicumbi.   
 
Expected outcomes and impact that the project will aim to achieve in improving baseline scenario 3  
Reduced exposure of human settlements to flooding and landslides  
 Management  of water  around  settlements  will be improved  to prevent  the accumulation  of water  by reducing 
run-off and increase infiltration  on ridges and the upper slope and increase water storage capacity to reduce 
the burden on women and girls from carrying water up very steep hills. This will prevent downhill and 
lowland flooding, siltation and silt damage as well as reduce sediment loads in water courses. This 
investment will result in an additional 10,000 gully plugs, 13,875 soak -away/infiltration ditches, 2120 houses 
installed with rainwater harvesting and storage systems and run -off control measures (vegetation, diversion 
ditches etc.) constructed along 100km of roads and  pathways. 
• 200 families will be relocated from high risk areas affected by landslides and flooding to two villages in 
Gicumbi: Kabeza and Kaniga. Currently, there are 43 existing dwellings in Kabeza that were constructed  in 
2008 by a government initiative with funding from UNDP/UNEP/REMA -PEI and Gicumbi District to 
demonstrate low carbon and climate resilient rural villages. The project will support the construction of 100 
new houses in Kabeza and 100 new houses and commu nity buildings in Kaniga. The settlements will 
include housing typologies and “green infrastructure” that utilise renewable energy, water and waste 
recycling  strategies  designed  to work  with the Rwandan  topography  to reduce  emissions,  increase  resilience 
to climate change and protect the surrounding environment. As well as providing shelter and access to 
services for 200 vulnerable families, the expanded housing development will create 580 construction jobs  
over 2 years and avoid 4308 tonnes of carbon dioxi de equivalent (t CO 2eq) over the project  lifetime.
 Baseline  4: Limited  capacity  to mainstream  climate  concerns  into policies,  plans  and programmes   
Access to accurate information and capacity to assess and mainstream climate risk into policies, plans and 
programmes is limited which weakens Rwanda’s capacity to plan for and adapt to current and future climate 
change. While there is awareness of climate  change issues across government at most levels, there is limited 
understanding of how best to manage climate risks and plan for future climate variability. Moreover, information and 
knowledge on climate change vulnerability, including future scenarios of climate change, are not routinely used in 
planning processes. Planners are often not aware of the potential long term impact of climate change and lack clear 
technical guidance to effectively build climate resilience into sector plans, budgets and programm es. Decision 
making tends to be driven by short term development goals rather than longer term climate considerations.  
Increased technical capacity is needed in order to take climate risks into account and guide GoR investments. There 
is also a lack of tec hnical capacity at local and national level on climate change risks, vulnerabilities and impacts to 
support evidence informed policy and decision making.  
Expected outcomes and impact that the project will aim to achieve in improving baseline scenario 4  
Successful adaptation and mitigation approaches communicated and mainstreamed at the national level  
 The project will generate a series of knowledge products to inform planning decisions and enhance 
evidence -based  decision  making  processes.  It will also build awareness  of climate  threats  and risk-reduction 
processes and strengthen capacity to adopt rural resilience and adaptation measures in other  districts.
 Knowledge and capacity building at the national level will increase understanding of climate risks and 
enhance technical competencies. This will improve planning and decision making in the management of 
watersheds and forest resources as well as in the agriculture sector especially with regard to tea and coffee 
production. Mainstreaming of Climate Resil ient Agriculture (CRA) practices into rural extension programmes 
will increase the uptake of successful climate resilient approaches. This will strengthen adaptive capacity 
and reduce exposure to climate  risks.
 Activities  to communicate  results  and develop  national  capacity  will also support  the replication  of adaption 
measures  implemented  in Gicumbi  at the national  level to boost  resilience  to climate  change  and increase 
agricultural productivity. The expected impacts on knowledge and technological transfer are large, through 
the increased productivity the interventions offer, as well as the climate information that will be generated.


---
*Page 20*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 93  
 
 
This will improve decision -making and project interventions to increase capacity to assess, manage and 
monitor risks and will result in more comprehensive adaptation planning at the national level. In the 
agriculture sector, knowledge and transfer investments (including the promotion of an ite rative climate risk 
management approach to develop a range of adaptation options) will help to expand and transform 
production using a climate resilient approach, and start early planning for long -term climate change.  
 
 
1. The upfront investment costs needed  to shift Rwanda toward more climate resilient green growth are a 
significant barrier for pursuing these development pathways. The total additional capital costs of shifting to 
climate  resilient  and low carbon  development  pathways  outlined  in the GGCRS  are estimated  to be in the region 
of USD 2.7 bn (cumulative to 2030) compared to business as usual across three key sectors (water, agriculture, 
energy)50. In order for Rwanda to be able proceed with the investments required to adapt to climate change and 
pursue green development pathways, additional sources of finance will be needed that are able to bear these 
larger capital requirements taking into account additional technical risks associated with the ‘High’ green growth 
scenario.  
2. The high population densit y and the country’s reliance on agriculture for livelihoods is a key barrier to the 
conservation and protection of natural resources that are critical for ensuring climate resilience. Reducing 
pressure on natural resources is a tall order when a significan t part of the population largely lacks other assets. 
Unsustainable  farming  practices  on steep  slopes  and deforestation  have  resulted  in extensive  erosion,  declining 
agricultural productivity and siltation of water resources compromising the ecosystem servi ces critical for 
Rwanda’s food and energy  security.  
3. At the same time, pervasive poverty means that communities don’t have the means to invest in long term 
solutions to climate threats. Instead, day -to-day survival leads them to deplete and degrade the natural resource 
base at a rate faster than it is being replenished. These families need short to medium term livelihood support if 
they are to turn part of their land over to agro -forestry and switch to efficient cooking  methods.  
4. Lack of technical know -how that cuts across the proposed areas of intervention including: sustainable forest 
management, climate resilient agriculture, climate risk mitigation, and in technologies used in sustainable low 
carbon building and in reducing the carbon footprint of cook stoves and tea factories. These skills are either 
absent or not widely available in Rwanda and limits its capacity to adopt new technologies and practices that 
support low carbon, climate resilient development. Currently, farmers are not able to make infor med choices to 
optimise crop planning and varietal selection because they lack knowledge about climate resilient production 
systems and practices. At the community level there is also low awareness of climate change issues and a low 
capacity to adopt risk reduction and adaptation  measures.  
5. Traditional gender roles and patriarchal attitudes towards women in rural Rwanda mean that women have 
limited control over assets and decision making at the household and community level. This weakens their 
adaptive  capac ity and makes  them  more  vulnerable  to shocks  and stresses  linked  to climate  change.  Women’s 
involvement in certain livelihoods is also limited by gender relations which limits the ability of women to take up 
certain off -farm livelihoods.  
6. Inadequate support  for farmers switching to different crops and land management for example, for farmers 
switching  to tea production  (under  District  Land  Use Plans)  there  is no support  for the first 3 years  before  it is 
productive; for coffee farmers it is 5 years before th ere is a harvest; families who implement radical terracing 
lose income for 1 year.  
7. Low levels  of financial  literacy  among  poorer  categories  of people  restricts  their ability  to save  and access  loans 
from formal financial services for IGAs. Savings would also help to mitigate people against shocks from climate 
change. Improving access to loans is also important for people trying to move into productive off -farm income 
opportunities.  
8. Climate change considerations are not systematically integrated in policy development and investment 
decisions. There is limited coordination of climate data which means that key decision makers in the public and 
private sector often don’t have access to climate data that might be useful in guiding investment, policy and local 
planning  decisions.  Financial  resources,  knowledge  and capacity  building  are needed  so that GoR can create  an 
enabling framework for investment in LCCR development. This requires a well -informed public sector, civil 
society and private sector with better ac cess to relevant data and  analysis.  
 
 
50 Policy Brief: Costing the Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy.  AFDB  C.3. Project Description


---
*Page 21*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 93  
 
 
Describe the main activities and  the planned measures of the project according to each of its components.  
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project intends to achieve.  The objectives, outputs and 
outcomes should be consisten t with the information reported in the logic framework in section H.  
C.3.1  Summary of proposed  interventions  
The project will increase the resilience of vulnerable communities to climate change in Gicumbi District in 
Northern Rwanda . The project will restore and  enhance ecosystem services in a major sub -catchment of the 
Muvumba watershed, increase the capacity of communities to renew and sustainably manage forest resources and 
support smallholders to adopt climate resilient agriculture. The project will also inve st in green settlements for 
vulnerable families currently living in areas prone to climate related disasters and support community based 
adaptation planning and livelihoods diversification. These investments will lead to enhanced resilience to climate 
chan ge impacts and will make a major (and long -lasting) contribution to delivering Rwanda’s Green Growth and 
Climate Resilience Strategy (GGCRS, 2011). Knowledge and capacity developed during implementation will be 
mainstreamed at the sector and national level . A theory of change, shown in Figure 2, captures the key areas of 
intervention, the main drivers of climate vulnerability and GHG emissions and the expected outcomes and impacts.


---
*Page 22*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 93  
 
 
Figure 2: Theory of change  
The project will focus on one of Rwanda’s most climate vulnerable districts, Gicumbi. Interventions will particularly 
target poor, climate vulnerable households located in nine sectors of Gicumbi district (Rubaya, Cyumba, Kanig a, 
Mukarange, Rushaki and Shangasha, Manyagiro, Byumba, and Bwisige) where around 248,907 people (63% of the 
district’s population) live. There are three underlying principles to the project: 1) supporting climate resilient and 
sustainable rural livelihood s; 2) developing practical approaches that are cost effective, technologically viable and 
transferable to other areas of Rwanda; and 3) increasing knowledge and understanding of climate risk among key 
decision makers in government and business leaders.  
The project comprises four interlinked components: (1) watershed protection and climate resilient agriculture; (2) 
sustainable forest management and more efficient use of wood for fuel; (3) climate resilient settlements; and 4) 
Knowledge transfer and mainstre aming. The corresponding project outputs are:  
1. Sub-catchment B of the Muvumba watershed restored and small scale tea and coffee farmers supported to adopt climate resilient 
practices;  
2. Communities supported to implement sustainable forest management and adopt fuel -efficient cooking  methods;  
3. Human settlements developed and/or modified to increase climate resilience;  and 
4. Successful adaptation and mitigation approaches communicated and mainstreamed at the national  level.  
There are two expected outcomes from the project, linked to both mitigation and adaptation: 1) improved 
management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions (M9.0); and 2) strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks (A7.0).  
C.3.1.1  Main activities under each  component  
The component will improve the stability of the watershed to support climate resilient livelihoods and 
reduce risks of climate variability, including flo oding and landslides. The watershed has become degraded 
from the effects of flooding, erosion, over -cultivation and human encroachment. This component will support the 
implementation of the Muvumba Catchment Plan (2017) in sub -catchment B. Specifically, it  will address the climate 
risks by promoting appropriate land use and agricultural practices to minimise erosion and restore ecosystem 
services within a landscape -wide suite of activities. The component includes ten sub -components:  
1.1 Strengthen community bas ed adaptation  
1.2 Reduce slope erosion to sustainable  levels  
1.3 Stabilise rivers, roadsides and steep slopes with protective  forestry  
1.4 Integrate agro -forestry into farming systems on 9790 ha of the  watershed  
1.5 Support 1800 smallholder crop -livestock farmers to adopt  agro-ecological approaches to increase climate  resilience  
1.6 Increase climate resilient farming practices with tea cooperatives in Mulindi (with planting for future climate change) - targets 5000 
smallholders  
1.7 Integrate climate resilient practices into local extension  services  
1.8 Provide weather and climate services for tea and coffee farmers to increase productivity and reduce losses from weather and c limate 
variability  
1.9 Increase capacity for pest monitoring, surveillance and IPM to address current and future cli mate  change  
1.10 Increase climate resilient practices with 1000 coffee growers to reduce susceptibility to climate change and protect slopes i n the 
watershed (planting for future climate  change)  
Soil and water conservation measures will be promoted to reduce cl imate vulnerability , improve soil and 
water quality and increase the range and quality of the goods and services available for livelihood and economic 
use including support for small -scale farmers to adopt more climate resilient practices to sustain agricu ltural 
livelihoods. As well as enhancing adaptation to current climate variability and future climate change, the 
interventions will support mitigation through tree planting and soil improvements as well as provide significant 
livelihood, poverty alleviati on and biodiversity benefits.  
The component will be implemented by a team of staff recruited to the project and based in Gicumbi District 
Headquarters. All interventions will be delivered at the local level but will also be supported by the relevant sector  
government agencies and research institutions such as:  
• Rwanda Water and Forests Authority (RWFA) – for watershed management activities  (1.1-1.4); 
• National Agriculture Export Development Board (NAEB) – for tea and coffee interventions  (1.6-1.9) 
• Rwanda Agri culture Board – for climate resilient agriculture interventions (1.6 -1.9); and 
• Rwanda METEO – for climate and weather services  (1.7).  
The implementation arrangements are explained in detail in Section C.7.   
Component 1: Watershe d protection and climate resilient agriculture (USD 12.6 million)


---
*Page 23*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 93  
 
 
 Sub-component  1.1: Strengthen  community  based  adaptation  (USD  0.6 million)   
This sub -component will increase the understanding by local stakeholders of the impacts of climate 
change and the value of conserving and protecting ste ep slopes and riparian buffer zones as well as the 
benefits of productive agro -forestry, forestry and climate resilient farming practices to build support for proposed 
interventions. Empowering farmers through participatory engagement to make informed deci sions will ensure 
interventions are appropriate to local conditions and will develop local capacities. Where possible, the project will 
engage with communities through existing cooperatives and community groups and build the capacities of rural 
communities  for community -based decision -making. At the same time, the project will integrate both scientific and 
local knowledge into community planning processes through linking communities to experts. The approach will be  to 
raise farmers’ awareness of the benefit s of soil and water conservation measures, help communities better 
understand the climate threats which affect them and support them in taking appropriate steps to plan for and 
enhance their climate resilience. This participatory approach will empower loca l communities by building their 
capacity to assess their own needs. The evolving nature of adaptation (as future climate trends are uncertain), 
means that local communities need to learn about risks, evaluate response options, and adapt accordingly checkin g 
and rectifying possible mal -adaptation and exchanging information. The Government’s role is to create the right 
conditions for adaptive  action.  
The project will support local people to identify specific areas for investment in improvements that promote 
integrated land and water management. The participation of local communities in these initial assessments will 
foster ownership of the findings and planned interventions. It will also ensure that any interventions are appropriate 
to local conditions and pro vide an opportunity for dialogue, consensus building and capacity development on 
climate adaptation. The project will support the development of local adaptation plans  to increase resilience as well 
as to rehabilitate and protect the watershed and enhance the productivity of agriculture and forestry. The plans will 
incorporate soil conservation and enrichment measures including agro -forestry and will make special provisions for 
climate change impacts on vulnerable groups. Activities planned under this sub -component include:  
• Selection of target areas and target groups for  support  
• Awareness raising of climate change  issues  
• Training of project staff and community volunteers in gender sensitive adaptation  planning  
• Community based survey of project area and prioritisation of interventions with communities, water and agricultural 
experts and other  stakeholders  
• Community meetings and planning workshops  
• Development of local adaptation plans with zonation of land for agriculture, pasture, perennial crops/grasses etc. 
(based on District Land Use Plans and sub -catchment plans) with community and agricultural  experts  
• Development of Community Adaptation  Facility  
Many of the watershed protection measures proposed are not new in themselves and several have been advocate d 
and implemented in Rwanda previously. Uptake and adoption, however, is often patchy and many communities and 
individuals perceive them as costly with most of the benefits being of a public good nature. To enhance uptake of 
the proposed watershed protecti on measures, the project will provide grants (financed 100% by FONERWA) for 
either community -level or household investments providing public goods. The community grants will:  
• provide an incentive for investment and participation in project activities yield ing public  goods;  
• instil community ownership in project activities and, through community members active participation;  and 
• support efforts to build awareness and understanding of the benefits of the project  interventions.  
The grants made through the CAF w ill be funded by FONERWA and will not use any finance provided by GCF. 
FONERWA has rigorous procedures in place to manage competitive calls for proposals, screening of proposals, 
conduct due diligence of fund recipients and for monitoring and evaluation of  projects under implementation.  
Concepts are reviewed by the fund’s secretariat and full proposals by external reviewers before passing through a 
review by the Fund Technical Committee. Final funding decisions are made by the Board which has representation  
from GoR, private sector, civil society and development partners. The fund will be capitalised with USD 147,000 
from FONERWA. FONERWA is the executing entity for the proposed project so the CAF will be managed as part of 
the project but will use the estab lished fund management machinery and expertise of FONERWA to ensure the 
funds are managed in a transparent and accountable manner in accordance with the FONERWA Law and it’s 
policies and procedures.  
 
 Sub-component 1.2: Reduce slope erosion to sustainable levels (USD 2.4  million)   
This sub -component will support the rehabilitation of the watershed and promote soil conservation and 
stabilisation measures to reduce erosion and land degradation . The interventions in each area will take into 
account climatic information (rainfall variability etc.), soil type (pH, nutrient levels and texture), plant species and 
competitive ability, aspect and topography (slope stability and angle) as well as an assessment of the local surface


---
*Page 24*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FU ND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 93  
 
 
erosion. Intervention measures will be based on local priorities, needs, knowledge and capacities so that the 
interactions between future and current climate hazards and development can be managed effectively.  
The work will entail:  
• Consultation with the Rwanda Agricultural Board (RAB) and district agronomists, land officers on zoning of land for 
agriculture, pasture, perennial crops/grasses etc. with community and agricultural  experts;  
• Awareness campaign on erosion control and improved soil management  practices;  
• Introducing erosion control measures on 1250ha (850ha of progressive terraces and biological control measures and 
400ha of radical  terraces);  
• Capacity building of local authorities to support the committees a nd maintain records of functionality and utilisation of 
infrastructure;  
• Matching crops and permanent vegetation (grasses, shrubs etc.) to soils and farming methods to the terrain;  amd 
• Re-planting of steep slopes with perennial grasses and shrubs, wattling,  brush  layering.  
Where slopes are less than 55o, the project will invest in terracing51 and agro -forestry (see 1.4 below) as well 
the use of cover crops52 as these have proved to be cost effective in reducing soil erosion. Moreover use of 
leguminous cover crops53 (green manure) will improve the nutrient levels in the soil and enhance growth of the main 
crop. This is in line with the measures proposed in the Muvumba catchment plan to enhance soil fertility (through 
short -rotation nitrogen fixing or phosphoru s mobilizing shrubs and herbs, to develop a large biomass during a short 
period 6 -12 months).  
Where slopes are greater than 55o, the project will work with communities to phase out tillage systems and 
restore permanent vegetative cover and and green manure s54 to reduce erosion . The project will support 
farmers cultivating these marginal lands to transition into alternative livelihoods via paid work for planting and 
maintaining perennial cover and alternative employment and enterprise development through the  community 
adaptation interventions (see 1.1 above). Where grass cover alone is insufficient to prevent erosion, filter strips or 
wattling or brush layering will be installed to break the slope into short segments and dissipate the flow of water 
over the s urface. Restoring soil cover will involve matching crops and permanent vegetation (grasses, shrubs etc.) 
to soils and farming methods to the terrain. As well as physical erosion control measures (contour trenches, 
construction of terraces etc.), the projec t will emphasise biological measures reduce erosion and improve soil 
fertility including:  
• planting on raised bunds along the contours (but slightly sloping to allow drainage) and planting hedges of grass or 
bushes55 every 10 metres, with the cultivation of  large ridges covered with pulses or sweet potatoes every 5 metres (on 
slopes  16-40o); 
• the use of cover crops to provide a physical barrier to runoff as well as to increase soil organic matter, enhance soil 
structure, improve the nutrient and water holding  capacity of the soil, enhance the soil macrofauna habitat and raise 
households  incomes;  
• mulching (to reduce run -off and increase infiltration), intercropping (on slopes between 6 and 16o to make the most of 
the space available by selecting plants and crop ping formations that maximise light, moisture and soil nutrients), and 
crop rotation to give soils a chance to recover nutrients and restore  productivity;  
• planting of fodder grasses on bunds/ridges to increase stability and provide fodder for harvesting an d food for animals  ; 
• use of improved vegetated  fallows;  
• conversion from annual to perennial crops;  and 
• the introduction of permanent, perennial vegetation in small strips at appropriate intervals along the contour to prevent 
further erosion and conserve ra in water.  
The project will support farmers to assess the appropriate land preparation (contours, contour trenches, ridges, 
percolation ditches etc.) required before seedling planting. Fast growing herbaceous species and woody varieties 
will be included alo ng with grasses and legumes. A mix of species will be promoted to ensure a continuous even 
protection along the slope. Specialists will be consulted to ensure the seed mix is appropriate to site conditions and 
application rates for fertlisers (organic and inorganic) are correct.  
 
 
51 terraces on 16 -40%, narrow -bench terraces on 40-60%  
52 Cover crops are fast growing plants that quickly cover the soil surface. They are usually seeded between rows of crops or aft er harvest 
to reduce the velocity of rainfall falling on bare soil so reducing runoff. The root growth from the cover crop also increases the porosity of 
the soil improving drainage and also enhances soil micro -fauna. Cover crops are ploughed back into the soil increasing the water content 
and organic  matter and can used as mulch to improve water retention. Cover crops have also been used to control weeds, pests and 
diseases.  
53 Species that have been used in Rwanda include: non edible cover crops such as centro, stylo, puero and mucuna, edible cover c rops 
such as groundnuts, cowpea, soya beans, melon and fluted pumpkin and grasses such as carpet grass and giant star  grass.  
54 Grass species that are commonly used for erosion control in Rwanda include: Kikuyu grass ( umucaca ), Tefrozia as shrubs,  
Desmodium , Trifrorium , Mukuna etc. 
55 Big shrubs including Calliandra and Leucaena species will be used to stabilize terrace  risers


---
*Page 25*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 93  
 
 
This sub -component will draw on significant in -country experience in erosion control. Rwanda’s topography, 
demographics and climate variability have contributed to extensive land degradation and low soil fertility. This has 
created a pressing need to tackle widespread erosion, declining soil fertility and land  degradation. As a result, 
Rwanda has over the years, developed significant experience and expertise in land husbandry techniques that 
reduce erosion, improve soil water infiltration, and holding capacity on degraded hillsides enhancing the productive 
capa city of land and soil.  
This has been supported with sizeable investments from the Government and development partners that have 
further developed Rwanda’s capacity in this area. Interventions have typically comprised a suite of land husbandry 
techniques in cluding: radical and progressive terraces, check dams, soils/water detention trenches, cut off drains, 
waterways, tree belts, contour belts, grass strips, contour bunds, planting of fodder grasses on bunds/ridges, use of 
permanent, perennial vegetation on contours, and agro -forestry and intercropping. These investments have yielded 
positive  results  not only in terms  of agricultural  yields  but also on critical  ecosystem  services  within  watersheds  upon 
which the productivity of farming systems depends. Several countries have already learned from Rwanda’s 
experiences. The GoR has hosted study tours from eight countries that are also tackling erosion and land 
degradation on hilly landscapes. These include: Kenya, Burundi, Ethiopia, São Tomé and Príncipe, U ganda, 
Malawi, India and DRC. Technical expertise has gradually increased in physical and biological erosion control 
measures especially around terracing, infiltration ditches and drainage channels combined with agro -forestry and 
other biological measures that improve vegetative cover, reduce raindrop impact and reduce runoff. Interventions to 
improve land husbandry on hillsides have become increasingly site specific and informed by detailed site surveys 
that categorise land units (by slope, soil type, soil  depth etc.) and prescribe optimum land use/management 
regimes. These approaches encompass an integrated landscape approach that considers livelihoods as 
interconnected with ecosystems. As a result, engagement with farming communities has intensified as th e support 
of private landowners is crucial to ensuring that investments in erosion control and water management are 
sustainable in the  long-term.  
 
 Sub-component  1.3: Stabilise  rivers,  roadsides  and steep  slopes  with protective  forestry  (USD  1.5 million)   
This sub -component will establish protective forest on 1375 ha to stabilise slopes and reduce erosion. The 
Land Use Planning Guidelines by MINIRENA/RNRA of 2016, recommend that there should be no cultivation on 
slopes beyond 55%. On slopes steeper than 55% , the guidelines advise that land ‘should be used for perennial/ 
permanent crops (e.g. grass, tea, bananas and trees)’. The Prime Ministerial Order 2010 provides for a 10m buffer 
on large rivers in Rwanda while the Prime Ministerial Order 2011 provides for  a 22m buffer on main roads and a 
12m buffer on district roads in Rwanda.  
Protective forests56 include deep rooted species that can protect the slopes from slippage. They help to 
stabilise soils and slopes disrupted by road building, as well protect river banks from high seasonal water flows. An 
important element of protective forests is that they can also protect livelihoods, not only from stabilising soil but also 
from non -timber forest products, and as a safety net in times of need. For example a protect ive forest on a road 
reserve can be contracted out to the local community and used to support the poorer members of the community, 
they can be harvested in time of need and enhance resilience to shocks including those caused by climate change. 
A detailed s urvey and series of studies57 was carried out as part of the preparatory work to identify target areas for 
protective forests, these are included in Annex 1. This sub -component will establish protective forest on 1375 ha 
comprising:  
 350 ha of steep slopes where plots are greater than  2ha
 140 ha at Mulindi tea estate which is vulnerable to  landslides 
 885 ha on rivers, roadsides and steep slopes (on small plots  <2ha)
Protective forest will be established on steep slopes (managed under single or small group se lection system) to 
retain permanent cover and avoid clear -felling. For plots sizes greater than 2ha, it is proposed to promote the 
planting of species that can be harvested for timber as well as other uses. Where plot sizes are smaller (<2ha), 
smaller wood lots will be established on steep slopes with a focus on species that provide smallholders with a wide 
range of (non -timber) benefits including fruits, fodder etc. The range of species proposed for the establishment and 
management of protective forest will  provide a wide range of direct and indirect use goods and services. Tree 
planting will be in line with the accepted spacing in forest plantations in Rwanda which is 2.5m x 2.5m. Wherever 
indigenous or native species remain on the land, these shall be kept . Protective forest and other soil stabilisation  
 
56 A protective forest can be defined as the long -term establishment of forests on areas particularly sensitive lands to erosion or 
landslides, and area established primarily for provision of ecosystem services  
57 1) Watershed Protection Plan and 2) Sustainable Forest Management: Feasibility Assessment Report. Both these studies were par t of 
the preparatory studies completed on behalf of the Ministry of Environment Rwanda and funded through the Project Prep aration Facility 
of the Green Climate  Fund.


---
*Page 26*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 93  
 
 
measures will also be established in the immediate areas around the Mulindi tea plantation that are at highest risk 
of landslides.  
The project will also invest in protective forestry on buffer zones along rivers and roads. Riparian 
degradation is a contributing factor to vulnerability to flooding in Gicumbi. Riparian damage from cultivation, 
livestock and fuel -wood collection is prevalent  on most of the major rivers banks throughout the project area. The 
project will support the regeneration of grasses, shrubs and tree species to restore riparian ecosystem services. 
Protective forests on statutory river reservations consist of native/indig enous or exotic tree/shrub species along 
riversides, streams, drainage channels and gullies. These interventions will link into soil and water conservation 
measures within agroforestry systems to reduce vulnerability to soil erosion and landslides, and to reduce 
sedimentation and flooding risk, whilst also providing a wider range of forest goods and services for household and 
economic use.  
All forest types, including protective forests, will be established and managed according to best practice 
guidelines a nd standards. The design predicates that protective forests will be managed under single or small 
group selection systems to retain permanent cover and avoid clear -felling to reduce run -off and soil erosion risk and 
sustain forest benefits. Exact use will need to be determined with the owners, user groups and other key 
stakeholders on a case by case basis but a guiding table of protection and protective forest species and use is 
provided in the PPF SFM Feasibility Study Report.  
 
This sub -component will establish agro -forestry on 9790ha. A form of climate resilient agriculture, 
agroforestry58 reduces soil erosion and increases organic matter, soil fertility and soil water holding capacity, 
thereby enhancing climate resilience and productivity. Agroforestry and nursery bed establishment reduces 
deforestation which increases soil erosion, reducing soil quality and ability to retain moisture. It has ad ditional 
benefits from providing new income streams, while reducing GHG as well as helping to diversify diet and nutrition 
sources. However, up -front costs and information are barriers to uptake which this component will address through 
the CAF (under 1.1) . Five agroforestry technologies or practices are proposed: (i) Contour hedgerows on terraces;  
(ii) Boundary planting; (iii) Trees scattered in crops; (iv) Home gardens; and (v) Fodder banks. Trees and shrubs will 
be planted in rows along contour lines; for boundary demarcation, controlling livestock encroachment into fields and 
onto vulnerable slopes; and within crops and home gardens. Within the farm landscape, trees and shrubs will be 
planted  to stabilise  terraces  and ditches  and reduce  soil erosion  and storm water  run-off as well as providing  a range 
of goods and services for households and farmers, including nitrogen fixation (improving soil fertility), fodder, bean 
stakes, poles, timber, and medicinal products. Species selection for agroforestry system s will aim to enhance the 
ecosystem benefits, and the lives and livelihoods of women and men in the surrounding/impacted communities 
(through food crops, poles, timber, bean poles, bee forage and fodder crops). Specific investments will  include:  
• Planting t rees/shrubs on existing radical terraces (non -fruit trees) 3700  ha 
• Planting trees/shrubs on progressive terraces (non -fruit trees) 1351  ha 
• Boundary Planting (non -fruit trees) 450  ha 
• Planting trees and shrubs within crops (non -fruit trees) 901  ha 
• Establishi ng fodder banks with napier grasses 2937  ha 
• Planting trees in home gardens (fruit trees) 450  ha 
The project will also support Farmer Field Schools to promote soil and water conservation within 
agroforestry systems through the use of infiltration ditches an d mulching. Contour drainage ditches will be 
dug along the contours of hills to prevent water from running down the slope and causing erosion. These infiltration 
ditches drain excess water out of the field, are relatively cheap, simple to build and can be used to divert or retain 
water, aiding farm water management and reducing soil erosion. More details and analysis are included in the 
watershed protection plan59 carried out as part of the preparatory work, these are included in Annex 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
58 Agro -forestry (species that are commonly used for erosion control in Rwanda include: Alinus , Datura , Caliandra Leucena , French 
Cameroon, citeria , and  tribusacum ). 
59 1) Watershed Protection Plan. This study was part of the preparatory studies completed on behalf of the Ministry of Environme nt 
Rwanda and funded through the Project Preparation Facility of the Green Clim ate Fund.  Sub-component 1.4: Integra te agro -forestry into farming systems on 9790 ha of the watershed (USD 1.8 
million)  
Sub-component 1.5: Support 1800 smallholder crop -livestock farmers to adopt agro -ecological approaches 
to increase climate resilience (USD 1.8 million)


---
*Page 27*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 93  
 
 
This sub -component will support 1800 smallholders to adopt agro -ecological approaches60 to increase 
climate resilience. Using agro -ecological approaches including Integrated Soil Fertility Management (ISFM) has a 
number of benefits for small -holders. ISFM practices, such as compost making and manure management, help to 
increase soil moisture and water retention in soil, reducing crop vulnerability to short dry spell s. ISFM is highly 
appropriate for smallholder farmers because: (a) it reduces reliance on imported fertiliser increasing farm 
profitability; (b) it provides opportunities to use locally available nutrient sources more efficiently; (c) combining 
inorganic a nd organic sources increases productivity and maintains soil quality; and (d) it balances crop nutrient 
needs with protecting the environment. ISFM also reduces dependence on oil imports and GHG emissions from 
farming. The focus will be on techniques which  increase soil fertility, reduce soil erosion and maintain moisture 
content of the soil making farmers more resilient to prolonged dry seasons, improving crop productivity and 
ultimately household nutrition and farmer income. This includes:  
1. Climate resilie nt vegetable production techniques including (ISFM  practices);  
2. Fodder crop establishment and conservation;  and 
3. Zero-grazing systems and improved feeding practices for dairy households to ensure efficient manure production and 
management, increasing soil qu ality and water retention properties, improving crop resilience to dry  spells.  
Climate resilient vegetable production techniques, such as kitchen gardens, mandala and double -dug beds utilise 
waste -water and natural contours and use mulching techniques for moisture retention and soil fertility. Water is also 
conserved through cover crops and the utilization of waste water. This means kitchen gardens are productive 
outside of the traditional growing seasons increasing farmer resilience to drought and improvin g household 
nutrition. This will be supported by the rainwater harvesting interventions under 3.2 which will enable farmers to 
water plants into the dry season, increasing the length of time their land is productive. Fodder crop establishment 
and conservat ion will also be promoted to reduce over -grazing and over -stocking which leads to unprotected land 
which is susceptible to soil erosion and has a reduced water -holding capacity. Zero -grazing systems and improved 
feeding practices for dairy households will also be supported to ensure efficient manure production and 
management, increase soil quality and water retention properties, and improve crop resilience to dry  spells.  
The project will work through the existing GoR extension programmes including the Twigire Muhinzi which 
uses Farmer Promoters to spread the use of improved farming practices. In total, 300 Farmer Promoters across 9 
target sectors will receive training on agro -ecological practices which will enable the project to reach 1,800 
smallholder farmers with climate -resilient approaches and technologies. The project will deliver ten days of 
intensive training in the topics outlined above. Facilitators will empower Farmer Promoters to carry out their roles, 
helping them to develop training schedule s, co -facilitating training to demonstrate good training practices for 
replication and providing feedback on observed trainings. The project will also utilise these trained technicians to 
establish 9 community demonstration sites (1 per sector) modelling b est practice adoption of climate resilient 
approaches and technologies involving 1800 farmers. Training sessions will be delivered to approximately 60 
farmer groups with an average of 30 members. Farmers will also receive limited inputs to support with the  
implementation of the trained techniques. Knowledge transfer will be ensured through practical “on farm” training 
suited to those with low or no literacy and further supported through three field visits for 3 representatives from each 
group to sites alrea dy implementing best practice climate resilient agricultural techniques. Farmers will be trained in 
techniques and technologies which will enable them to intensify production in a manner adapted to the effects of 
climate change as outlined above. Farmers w ill be motivated to provide peer -support as sustainable community 
based resource. These vulnerable smallholders will see improvements in farm production, food security and income 
levels contributing to climate resilience and poverty reduction. Farmer promo ters and government extension 
workers will also be supported to disseminate their knowledge via community meetings and further sensitisation 
using mass media such as radio will reach a total of 35,000 farmers by the end of the  project.  
The most vulnerable smallholder farmers will be identified and supported with additional agricultural and 
animal health inputs. This will include the provision of 240 cows and the establishment of 36 tree nursery beds 
with 37,500 seedlings each (1,200,000 trees will be plante d in total) to enable the local community to access fruit, 
fodder and timber saplings for use on -farm, this will include drought resilient seedlings. The project will also 
facilitate community replication of imported disease/drought resilient forage specie s to enable ongoing access to the 
inputs which will facilitate farmers to adopt the promoted approaches and implement climate -resilient crop -livestock 
long-term. The specific activities will  include:  
• Building capacity of farmer promoters in climate resilie nt techniques for smallholder  farmers;  
• Supporting smallholder farmers to adopt climate resilient  techniques;  
• Establishing on -farm and community demonstration sites to inform subsequent scale up and field visits to 
showcase climate - resilient management tec hniques;  and 
 
 
60 One of the GGCRS  targets


---
*Page 28*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 93  
 
 
• Distribution of disease/drought resilient forage species and animal health  inputs.  
Rwanda has successfully implemented a zero grazing policy across the country to reduce erosion associated with 
open grazing. In line with this policy, the project includes provision for cow sheds and cultivation of fodder crops so 
that cows can be kept away from steep slopes.  
 
This sub -component introduces climate resilient agriculture to 4900 smallholder tea growers to address the 
current weather -related risks – and start preparing for future  climate change - at the Mulindi tea estate. This sub - 
component includes targeted interventions to invest in options for tea that reduce both current and future impacts. 
There is one of Rwanda’s largest tea plantations at Mulindi (In Gicumbi district), an d this has been included in the 
project for a series of interventions. The Mulindi plantation is comprised entirely of smallholder farmers, organised 
into two local co -operatives, (COOPTH É and COOTHEVM). The tea they produce is processed by a factory in t he 
plantation, which is run by a joint charitable company (Mulindi Factory Company Limited) supported by The Wood 
Foundation and The Gatsby Foundation, working under a shared ownership model with the two local co -operatives 
(all shares held in the factory will be transferred to the two cooperatives (the small -holders) at nil consideration in the 
future).  
A series of targeted low -regret adaptation interventions are proposed to reduce the exposure of small - 
holder tea growers to current climate variability an d shocks , by enhancing water management, reducing soil 
erosion and flooding and reducing landslide risks in high risk zones. However, the project goes beyond this and 
aims to make the plantation ‘climate -resilient’ to future climate change using iterative climate risk management 
concepts. Investments include:  
• Improved water management (culverts) and small -scale ‘green’ irrigation to enhance resilience to flooding and  droughts  
• Planting grass strips (napier grass) to reduce erosion and enhance soil stabilisat ion around the 1874 ha tea  estate  
• Establishing tree belts on 50 ha to reduce flooding and landslide  risks 
• Introducing shade trees in tree estate (inter -cropping) in lower (more vulnerable) areas (25  ha) 
• Upslope tea planting at higher elevation (50 hectares ) to ensure climate resilient expansion of  tea 
• Planting new resilient tea  clones  
The design is supported by a detailed feasibility study and an analysis of the current and future climate risks61 (see 
Annex 1). The analysis has used an iterative climate risk management approach to develop a portfolio of adaptation 
options that will build the climate resilience of the tea growers in Gicumbi. The interventions identified meet the GCF 
criteria, align strongly with existing policies and have high national own ership. They will also provide key lessons for 
the scale -up of climate resilience of Rwanda’s tea industry, which is critical to the country’s economy. Tea provides 
30% of Rwanda’s foreign exchange reserves and around 12% of exports by value. It is dominat ed by smallholders 
(42 000 farmers), of which 37% are women, all of whom are vulnerable to climate change.  
The first set of activities will introduce low cost low regret adaptation around the plantation, with grass 
strips, tree belts and culverts to reduce  flooding, soil erosion and landslides. These respond to the increasing 
impacts that have occurred in recent years, including the complete loss of 10 hectares of plantation due to land - 
slides as well as a loss of annual production in 20 hectares due to fl oods. These impacts will become more 
common as climate change is projected to increase heavy precipitation events in the area. These interventions will 
reduce high flows and flood risks, stabilise soil to reduce landslide risk, reduce soil erosion and down stream 
sediment loading, as well as having wider ecosystem service and GHG reduction benefits. These interventions are 
community level, plantation -wide interventions (which individual farmers cannot implement) and provide wider 
ecosystem service and public  goods benefits. Small -scale ‘green’ irrigation will also be installed in an area of the 
plantation that has been particularly subject to rainfall variability (low or intermittent rain), noting again that this is 
projected to increase under climate change.  It will implement hillside gravity based irrigation and solar pumped drip 
irrigation, with the additional aim to learn lessons on potential applicability and cost - effectiveness for the tea sector 
nationally. Complementing this, a selection of the existin g plantation (25 hectares) will be selected for planting 
shade trees (intercropping in tea). This responds to data analysis at Mulindi that shows tea productivity is reduced 
by higher maximum temperatures, noting that temperatures will increase under clima te change.  
The second set of activities aims to make the tea plantation climate -resilient , i.e. looking at more 
transformational investments for the tea sector. There are plans to expand the Mulindi plantation, converting 
existing land into tea production (which increases small -holder incomes). The project will therefore provide the 
marginal green investment – on top of the existing baseline investment for expansion by The Wood Foundation – to 
make this climate resilient. This will serve as the first exampl e of climate resilient tea expansion in Rwanda. This is  
 
61 1) Tea (and Coffee) Resilience study report; 2) Current and Future Climate Change Assessment; and 3) Technical Analysis  report.  Sub-component 1.6: Increase  climate resilient farming practices with tea cooperatives in Mulindi (USD 2 
million)


---
*Page 29*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 93  
 
 
critical as Government of Rwanda is currently embarking on a major tea expansion policy, aiming to double the land 
under tea production to deliver growth and increase exports. This expansion is focused on rural small -holder 
production (to enhance ru ral incomes) and focuses on mountain tea, grown at higher elevation where the climate 
and slower growth lead to enhanced quality (colour or flavour), which produces a higher value product which allows 
access to higher value markets through single supplier value chains (maximising small -holder incomes). However, 
tea is a long -lived crop and planting out and maturation of new plantations takes time: new plantations will therefore 
be exposed to future climate change. This necessitates that expansion areas are sited in climatic zones that will 
produce high quality mountain tea in the future (under a warmer climate) rather than located in sites that historically 
have been suitable. GCF funding will provide the additional (marginal) finance for climate resilient e xpansion of 50 
ha at Mulindi, funding climate risk screening, slope planting guidance, as well as incremental climate resilient 
activities such as mulching for the seedlings and young plants to address the increasing risks of heavy precipitation. 
Alongside  this, it will invest in new tea clones that are more resilient for the new plantation areas, addressing the 
risk of increasing rainfall  variability.  
The expansion of cultivation of tea (and coffee) to higher areas is a key transformative adaptation strate gy 
for coping with climate change. The project will ensure that the areas for expansion are chosen carefully (full site 
feasibility is included) to ensure they are not in areas of existing forest or sensitive environmental areas. Indeed, a 
priority of the higher elevation siting is to target steep slopes, targeting areas of current marginal agricultural 
production. The planting of tea plantations (or coffee trees) on slopes increases soil stability, reduces soil erosion 
and enhances water management by redu cing high run -off and flood risks downstream. Research plots show that 
these new plantations will actually improve water management and reduce downstream water sedimentation levels, 
thus improving water quality and quantity. Furthermore, all the new planta tions will include additional measures to 
enhance water management, with areas of protective forests and surrounding tree belts, as well as water 
conservation techniques for the crops themselves, such as mulching. Overall, the up -slope planting will lead t o 
positive outcomes for protection of water and improvement of water catchment management.  
 
 Sub-component  1.7: Integrate  climate  resilient  practices  into local  extension  services  (USD  0.5 million)   
This sub -component will strengthen the capacity of local extension services to support tea and coffee 
farmers to adopt CRA . It includes:  
• Farmer field schools (FFS) with Mulindi tea cooperatives (2 coops, 40 ToT, reaches 4900  farmers)  
• Farmer Field Schools – with 2500 Coffee farmers in Gicumbi/Watershed  
Tea and co ffee extension services already existing nationally and in the district, using the farmer field school model. 
However, to date, these have not adequately covered the effects of current climate variability and future climate 
change, nor provided training on  climate resilient agriculture. This means that local farmers are not addressing 
current risks of exposure to reducing losses from climate variability and they are not prepared for the changing risks 
from climate change. This sub -component will address thi s deficit, by integrating climate resilience into the farmer 
field school curriculum, and developing new demo plots (field sites or field schools) that demonstrate the use of 
climate resilient agriculture for these crops. This activity will target 50 tea f armer schools that currently exist for the 
two tea co -operatives. This will provide the training to allow farmers to introduce field interventions (complementing 
the community interventions introduced in sub -component 1.6).  
The project will also support si milar capacity strengthening for 2500 smallholders growing coffee through 
existing farmer field schools and scaleable demo plots , recognising the similarities and vulnerabilities of these 
farmers. There are 11,783 smallholder farmers growing coffee in Gicu mbi which is part of a large national coffee 
sector that is entirely smallholder based (of which 30% are women), yet still provides 12% of national exports by 
value. Coffee is also highly vulnerable to climate change (even more so than tea) and the project ed changes could 
dramatically impact on Rwanda’s coffee sector and the livelihoods of vulnerable smallholders. In line with this, the 
project will undertake some participatory surveys to take stock of current farmer knowledge, then invest in farmer 
field s chools supported by demo plots. See Annex 1 for more details 62. 
 
This sub-component will develop new weather and climate services (W&CS) for the tea and coffee sectors, 
with these interventions being developed in Gicumbi . These services provide critical information to farmers, 
improving productivity and reducing losses from weather and climate variability, and have extremely high benefit to  
 
 
 
62 Tea (and Coffee) Resilience study report; 2) Current and Future Climate Change Assessment; and 3) Technical Analysis  report.  Sub-component 1.8: Provide weather and climate services for tea and coffee farmers to increase 
productivity and reduce losses from weather and climate variability (USD 0.6 million)


---
*Page 30*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 93  
 
 
cost ratios63.They include short -term forecasting (daily up to weekly) to help farmers (and government) with farm 
management activities (planting, ongoing management, harvesting, and post -harvest activities) as well as climate 
services,  i.e. monthly, seasonal and multi -year climate forecasting (through to climate change), and include the 
supporting infrastructure and activities (climate data sets and monitoring, forecasting and prediction, information 
systems and dissemination). In Rwand a, a recent project has developed climate services for agriculture, but this is 
focused on cereal crops. This component therefore aims to build on this initiative and develop similar services for 
the tea and coffee sectors. It includes  
• Developing the weath er and climate metrics of relevance for tea and coffee and including in data  sets;  
• Undertaking participatory consultation on W&CS with tea and coffee farmers in  Gicumbi;  
• Developing the farmer field school curriculum to include  W&CS;  
• Building the capacity and monitoring infrastructure for met services to collect and process relevant information;  and 
• Developing the ICT and approaches for dissemination for farmers and  government.  
While tea and coffee area perennial crops, there are many parts of the annual fa rming cycle that would 
benefit from better weather information . For tea, understanding daily weather is important (such as for fertiliser 
application) and long -term data analysis at Mulindi64 has identified the key metrics that affect productivity, which 
would allow targeted weather products. Likewise, for coffee, there are critical parts of the production cycle where 
weather forecasting is critical, such as the period when coffee beans are dried (naturally). In both cases, better 
seasonal forecasting has t he potential to allow farmers to implement anticipatory measures to address projected dry 
spells or droughts, helping to reduce losses and protect livelihoods.  
The project will develop new targeted weather and climate services for small -holders. It will us e a 
participatory based approach with tea and coffee farmers in Gicumbi, combined with long -term climate data 
analysis and map -room development, as well as capacity building and ICT development in the met service to 
develop and disseminate weather and clim ate services. This will provide the information on the current variables of 
interest and impacts of concern, to allow the development of targeted W&CS to improve productivity and build 
climate resilience, including a variety of products such as SMS to farm ers. The services will also be incorporated 
into a farmer field school curriculum, and will be rolled out to the farmers in the district (see component 1.6 above).  
 
This sub -component targets the key climate relevant pests and diseases for the coffee and tea sectors, and 
develops and demonstrates new IPM approaches in Gicumbi to address the urgent need to develop i ntegrated 
pest management, as climate risks are increasing. Pests and diseases are already a major problem for both the tea 
and coffee sector in Rwanda, reducing productivity, and in years with major outbreaks, causing significant economic 
damage. The clim ate is a major factor in the range and prevalence of these. Detailed analysis has found a clear 
relationship with warmer temperatures and major coffee diseases (notably coffee leaf rust65). Similarly, red spider 
mite has been increasing in Rwanda, and incr eases significantly when the onset of the rainy season is delayed.  
Future climate change will increase these risks and add new ones. Evidence from other East African countries is 
showing the range of key pests is increasing under climate change, notably wi th the coffee berry borer66, which is 
now spreading in Rwanda. The project will address these issues through:  
• Surveillance and monitoring of targeted climate sensitive pests and diseases;  and 
• Developing IPM with pest and disease  controls.  
The project will develop surveillance and monitoring of the key climate sensitive pests and diseases for tea and 
coffee, using survey information and GIS and statistical software to enable surveillance and forecasting. This will 
provide the necessary information to then de velop the IPM response and build the resilience for small -holder 
farmers, including the introduction of IPM demonstrations in Gicumbi. See Annex 1 for more details 67. 
 
 
63 Recent reviews report the benefit to cost ratios of W&CS as 2:1 to 36:1: Clements (2013). The Value of Climate Services Acros s 
Economic and Public Sectors. Report to the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). Prepared by 
Engility/Inter national Resources Group (IRG). Available at http://www.climate -services.org/sites/default/files/CCRD -Climate -Services - 
Value -Report_FINAL.pdf  
64 IGC (2016). Inde x Based Insurance for Rwandan Tea. A study of basis risk. Patrick McSharry, Tom Swartz, John Spray. Report to IGC  
Rwanda.  
65 Joseph Bigirimana, Kiarie Njoroge, Daphrose Gahakwa and Noah A. Phiri (2012). Incidence and severity of coffee leaf rust and other 
coffee pests and diseases in Rwanda. African Journal of Agricultural Research Vol. 7(26), pp. 3847 -3852, 10 July,  2012.  
66 Jaramillo J, Chabi -Olaye A, Kamonjo C, Jaramillo A, Vega FE, et al. (2009) Thermal Tolerance of the Coffee Berry  Borer  
Hypothenemus hamp ei: Predictions of Climate Change Impact on a Tropical Insect Pest. PLoS ONE 4(8): e6487. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0006487  
67 Tea (and Coffee) Resilience study report; 2) Current and Future Climate Change Assessment; and 3) Technical Analysis  report.  Sub-component 1.9: Increase capacity for pest monitoring, surveillance and IPM to address  current and 
future climate change (USD 0.6 million)


---
*Page 31*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 93  
 
 
 
This sub -component will invest in climate resilient coffee development in Gicumbi. The project will work with 
the current national expansion programme for coffee, and provide the additional (marginal) finance to support a 
planned 35 ha expansion area climate resilient in Gicumbi.  The project will provide the technical assistance (climate 
risk screening, slope planting guidance) to identify suitable higher elevation sites for growing coffee under climate 
change, demonstrating the required agro -ecological shift and transformative ad aptation that will be needed under 
climate change. It will also introduce new resilient coffee varieties that have been developed in Rwanda (with scale 
up of RABC15, which is resistant to major pests and diseases, as well as a further set of demonstration plots with 
varieties developed by RAB under a previous breeding programme) at scale. The project will also introduce 
successional agroforestry for coffee, which helps soil to improve at the same time as enhancing adaptation. This 
approach introduces a seri es of interventions that enhance resilience and provide wider ecosystem service benefits 
as the plantations develop, starting with mulching and cover crops and shifting over time to shade trees. As well as 
improving rural incomes, this will provide a templ ate for a paradigm shift for the Rwandan coffee sector. See Annex 
1 for more details. Activities will include:  
 develop new climate resilient coffee in Gicumbi (35  ha);
 Introducing resilient coffee varieties for this development;  and
 Introducing succession climate resilient agriculture - 35 ha  Gicumbi .
For Rwanda’s coffee sector to survive, there is a need to transform the sector to make it climate resilient. 
This is important as the Government is expanding coffee production, particularly for high er quality specialty coffee, 
as a way of increasing the incomes of rural farmers while also delivering national growth and exports. As with tea, it 
is critical that the siting of new expansion areas is made with the current rather than past climate in mind . 
Arabica coffee requires very specific climate conditions over the growing cycle and it is a highly climate 
sensitive crop. Almost all Rwandan production is Arabica coffee and the country is targeting the production of 
specialty coffee which fetches a hig her price. Exposure to high temperatures (30°C and above) causes a range of 
physiological problems that lead to the direct damage of the plants and leads to losses in productivity and quality of 
the annual crop. To address these issues Arabica coffee is gr own at higher elevations as these higher areas are 
cooler. Higher cooler areas are especially effective in producing specialty coffee (often called mountain coffee) 
because the slower growth leads to enhanced flavour. However, future temperatures are proje cted to increase by 
as much as 2.5°C over the next 30 -40 years68. This will change the climate of Rwanda and it will alter the areas 
where Arabica coffee can be grown as lower elevation areas will start to exceed the temperature thresholds for the 
crop. Th ese lower areas will therefore not be suitable for growing coffee (due to climate change).This is already 
happening at the lower margins of coffee production areas in many countries globally, including in Rwanda.  
Planting coffee on slopes is a well -establi shed practice. While there are some short -term adaptation measures 
that can reduce short -term risks, due to the physiological temperature thresholds, there is no other alternative other 
than to start growing coffee at higher, cooler elevations, i.e. higher  up the slopes in Rwanda. It also has additional 
benefits as the coffee trees enhance soil conservation, therefore reducing soil erosion and flood/landslide risks.  
This is particularly important given the projections for Rwanda indicate climate change will also increase heavy 
precipitation in the country (thus coffee slope planting is a win -win option). Planting coffee higher up the slopes 
provides a way to maintain the high value coffee industry in Rwanda under a warming climate, addressing the 
impacts that climate change will have by reducing (current) production areas of Arabica. Moreover, slope planting at 
higher elevation is possible in Rwanda because it has higher s uitable areas to expand into. Many other coffee 
producing countries do not have any suitable higher areas and their production will fall. This means that Rwanda 
could gain a comparative advantage69 for adapting the coffee sector under climate change: takin g advantage of this 
opportunity is therefore critical. Coffee also has an additional advantage, because coffee grows well on steep 
hillsides, protecting them against soil erosion and providing a lower cost alternative to more expensive terracing 
options70. Coffee can therefore help with watershed management.  
 
 
 
68 Rwanda’s 2nd National Communication  
69 Bunn, C., Läderach, P., Ovalle Rivera, O., & Kirschke, D. 2014. A bitter cup: climate change profile of global production of Arabica and 
Robusta coffee. Climatic Change, 129, 89 -101. 
70 Clay, D (2017). Challenge to Sustainable Growth in Rwanda’s Coffee Sector  Sub-component 1.10: Increase climate resilient practices to reduce susceptibility to climate change and 
protect slopes in the watershed (USD 0.7 million)  
 
Component 2: Sustainable forest management and sustainable energy (USD 5.3 million)


---
*Page 32*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 93  
 
 
This component will assist forest owners and users to improve forest productivity  and reduce 
deforestation to create a wide range of forest products . The activities focus on reducing vulnerability to 
environmental and climate change threats, improving economic opportunities from this sector and increasing local 
capacity for sustainable  development outcomes. These interventions, are intrinsically linked with the watershed 
management activities and will be implemented together across the whole target area although watershed 
protection works will be more concentrated to the West and South and forest productivity works to the East. The 
component comprises six sub -components:  
2.1 Increase forest productivity and sustainable forest  management  
2.2 Strengthen forest management skills to sustain investments in forestry and watershed  management  
2.3 Establish,  restore and manage degraded woodlots across 297 ha of the  watershed  
2.4 Strengthen community capacity to provide forest products and  services  
2.5 Increase the use of biogas and efficient cookstoves to reduce deforestation of the  watershed  
2.6 Reduce the demand for fuelwood and GHG emissions at Mulindi tea factory through energy efficiency  measures  
 
It will demonstrate and roll out best practice, the principles and processes which are replicable across the whole 
country. A detailed Sustainable Forest Management - Feasibility Assessment Report along with detailed forest 
management models and a capacity development plan are included in Annex 1.  
The component will be implemented by a team of staff recruited to the project and based in Gicumbi District 
Headquarters. All i nterventions will be delivered at the local level but will also be supported by the relevant sector 
government agencies and research institutions such as:  
• Rwanda Water and Forests Authority (RWFA) – for forestry  activities; 
• National Agriculture Export Development Board (NAEB) – for tea and coffee  interventions; 
• UTAB which is part of the University of Rwanda and the Tumbo College of Technology – for forestry and efficient 
cooking energy activities;  and
• National Industrial Research Development Agency (NIR DA) – for energy efficiency measures at Mulindi tea  factory.
The implementation arrangements are explained in detail in Section C.7.  
 Sub-component  2.1: Increase  forest  productivity  and sustainable  forest  management  (USD  1 million)   
This sub -component aims to increase forest productivity and the uptake of sustainable forest management 
practices to increase the volume of timber sustainably available for meeting fuelwood and other timber 
needs. The interventions strive for high quality forest stands on a small targeted area. The design has 
recommended a full (phased) replacement of forest stands / plots with high -quality, site -suitable species, hybrids or 
varieties, raised, planted, established and managed to professional best practice s tandards, supported by 
significant training and capacity development and institutional strengthening to ensure standards are maintained.  
Eucalyptus does not tolerate sub -optimal practice, therefore Eucalyptus plantations are only recommended for 
plantation  owners interested in and having sites suited for commercial production (usually larger sized blocks and/or 
consolidated smaller plots into larger blocks where owners can organise and operate together). Other woodlots, 
plantations and forestry intervention s will be directed towards: timber species less vulnerable to sub -optimal 
practice (such as Pinus spp) and / or; appropriate species for the production of other goods and services, with a 
particular focus on household, livelihoods and ecosystem protection benefits. As it is proposed to fully transform 
current forestry practice, a range of demonstrations and trials, as part of the roll -out process, is required  to: 
 demonstrate to and raise awareness targeting interventions amongst stakeholders of what can be  achieved; 
 build capacity in and commitment to the use of new material and  practices; 
 test the performance and suitability of these changes, and, combined with further specific site assessment for matching 
to the introduced species and varieties;  and
 inform  ongoing management and  scale -up.
The interventions will demonstrate and roll -out best practice across forest management and operational 
processes , transforming the quality and productivity of the forest estate. To enable the uptake and maintenance of 
improved practices, and to facilitate sustainability in the application within and beyond the project area, the design 
includes: a coherent hierarchy of skills building; application of user -focused reference manuals and clear national 
standards for all aspects  of plantation development; and capacity building to ensure standards are observed. A 
series of targeted interventions are proposed:  
 Support the diversification and access to sources of high quality seed and plant  material; 
 Demonstration /trial forestry pl ots; and
 Roll-out renewal of forests. 
The demonstration plots are an important and integral part of the phased roll -out of forest renewal.


---
*Page 33*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 93  
 
 
The project will support the provision of nationally available sources of high quality seed and plant 
material . This will entail importing high quality seed and plant material (there is a lack of available high quality seed 
and plant material in Rwanda) and the use of more drought tolerant spec ies to support forest renewal. To 
demonstrate and raise awareness amongst stakeholders in nursery best practice and produce high quality 
seedlings for forest renewal, a number of demonstration nurseries will be established. This intervention will target 
the district owned nursery, Karambo in Nyaruvumu village and the Mulindi Tea Factory land. The investment will 
also support (through TA) the strengthening of the National Tree Seed Centre based in Butare which holds national 
responsibility for implementing t he recently developed National Trees Seed Strategy. Seeds stands (each 15ha) for 
Pinus and Eucalyptus will be established and managed within the target areas to demonstrate and build community 
best practice.  
The new species and varieties and best practices  will be tested on demonstration/ trial forestry plots . The 
import and use of new species and varieties is not without some risk, as they are untested in Rwanda. There is also 
limited understanding as to what productivity gains are achievable through the u se of such material, and application 
of best practice. Four initial demonstration forestry plots have been identified: Murehe public forest in Manyagiro 
(6.5ha); Gashogobe forest in Kaniga close to Mulindi Tea Factory (11 ha); Kirwa public forest in Mukara nge (14ha); 
and Rwaranda forest in Rushaki close to Mulindi Tea Factory (8.5 ha).  
Forest renewal will be rolled out over 2261 ha of the watershed. This will begin with an assessment of the 
demonstrations and trials and site assessments to match target site s with appropriate species and varieties where 
there is good potential for optimal growth and provision of forest goods and services. The renewal of forests will 
comprise three roll out models: Eucalyptus (52% of the project forest area), pine (21%) and pr otective forest (27%). 
Currently, Eucalyptus accounts for 88% of the project forest area. The current forest estate comprises 94 -97% 
Eucalytpus and Pinus species. If fully implemented the forest renewal design reduces this to 73%, increasing the 
use of oth er (largely native) species to 27%.  
The use of Eucalytpus and Pinus will be restricted to public and private forests where production is a main 
objective. This reflects the need to reduce the fuelwood demand and supply deficit, currently estimated at over 2 
million tonnes, and timber for other uses. The urgency of increasing timber and wood supply combined with the 
existing extreme land and population pressure, high demand for woody biomass and the fact that, if well grown, 
Eucalytpus and Pinus are faster g rowing than native species means that they are important genera. Renewal of 
Eucalyptus plantations (with a 8 year coppice rotation length) will therefore only be recommended for plantation 
owners interested in and sites suited for commercial production - larger or consolidated smaller plots where owners 
can organise and operate together >2ha. The PPF SFM Feasibility Study Report contains guides to species choice 
for exotic and native species for different objectives and site types to aid decision making on a forest by forest 
basis. Eucalyptus species have higher productivity potential than other feasible forest species but the productivity 
potential is highly dependent on planting high quality seed and/or source material and rigorous and timely ground 
prepar ation, planting and maintenance operations. Where Eucalytpus and Pinus are retained the design predicates 
careful species to site matching to i) ensure species suitability and productivity, ii) increase intra - and inter - forest 
type diversity and iii) avoi d deleterious landscape / watershed effects such as water loss and soil deterioration.  
Pinus plantations, are less vulne rable to sub -optimal practice than Eucalyptus and provide a greater range of timber 
products. Renewal interventions will establish Pinus plantations (with a 24 year rotation length). Further detailed 
analysis is included in the Sustainable Forest Managemen t - Feasibility Assessment Report and the forest 
management models in Annex 1.  
This sub -component will ensure that the necessary capacities and capabilities are developed for the long 
term maintenance, sustainability and scale up of the forestry and waters hed interventions. It is based on a 
capacity needs assessment and development plan71 attached at Annex 1. Capacity strengthening of individuals, 
households, organisations and institutions is integral to their ability to capture, benefit from and sustain th e 
interventions and the associated mitigation, adaptation, health and economic benefits and, by so doing, provide 
lessons, knowledge and skills for the informing of policies and plans for replication, scale up and adoption 
nationally. This sub -component in cludes a comprehensive and extensive suite of capacity strengthening 
approaches and activities to ensure skills and management competency, raise awareness and build ownership of 
new species, practices and techniques to support and improve the livelihoods o f women and men for a more 
positive outcome. This will enable and support the adoption and replication of new management and technical 
approaches and techniques, most notably the full renewal of the forest estate using new species, varieties and 
hybrids no t previously used in Rwanda. The target groups for capacity strengthening activities will comprise: seed  
 
71 A detailed Sustainable Forest Management - Feasibility Assessment Report along with detailed forest management models and a 
capacity development plan are included in Annex 1.  Sub-component 2.2: Strengthen forest management skills to sustain investments in forestry and watershed 
management (USD 0.5 million)


---
*Page 34*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 93  
 
 
stand owners, NTSC, National & District Authority staff, Mulindi Tea Factory, private forest owners; tree nursery, 
tree growers, cooperatives. Capacity development activities will comprise a mixture of training, awareness and 
capacity development interventions to target women and men comprising:  
 technical skills training for 18 sector  technicians, 
 training of forestry core groups (90 participants  trained in total),  and
 Learning exchange visits (for 117  participants). 
Technical skills training for forestry technicians will entail t he application of best practice standards and 
guidelines. It will cover topics including: seed collection, seedling raising, forestry, agroforestry and watershed 
management best practice approaches and techniques. The training will target mostly district s taff but will include 
provision to support the participation of staff from MOE and RWFA. This will also involve capacity support to 
improve site assessment, species to site matching, quality control and management planning as well as the 
application of cha rcoal regulations and green charcoal standards. Training of forestry core groups will include 
capacity building of seed stand owners, NTSC, National & District Authority staff, Mulindi Tea Factory, private forest 
owners; tree nursery, tree growers and bee keeping associations, cooperatives, and contractors. Learning 
exchange visits will include farmer to farmer and regional country visits, the use of demonstration nurseries, forest 
and agroforestry  plots and  the energy  demonstration  centre  (above).  This activity will also provide  resources  for staff 
from MOE and RWFA to participate in visits to observe best  practice.  
This sub -component will establish, restore and manage degraded woodlots with alternative species. It 
targets 297 ha (approximately 5% of Gicumbi’s woodlots). Small woodlot and other private forest owners currently 
harvest sub -optimally at very short rotation lengths. This is primarily due to pressing needs to release cashflow to 
meet other needs. As such these stakeholders require support t o bridge the financing gap between establishment 
and optimal revenue streams. It is therefore proposed that the project covers the cost of improved woodlot 
management to facilitate best practice until improved revenue streams from higher productivity are c aptured. For 
small woodlots (<2ha), the project will support farmers to enhance and diversify tree production by providing high 
quality germoplasm and training to enable smallholders to develop and implement improved management plans. 
For more details, ref er to the Watershed protection Plan (annex 1).  
 
This sub -component aims to support income generation from forestry . Interventions were developed following 
a detailed analysis of forest products and services (tree nurseries, woodlots, bee keeping) and access to finance  in 
Gicumbi72 (see Annex 1). It comprises a series of targeted interventions aimed at supporting livelihoods around 
forest products and services for poor households living in the target areas. These include:  
 Establishing community tree nurseries and capaci ty support;
 Establishing woodlot  cooperatives; 
 Strengthening bee keeping operations;  and
 Increased access to finance. 
The project will establish community tree nurseries and support the organisation, coordination and 
management of tree nurseries for local economic development. There is large demand for high quality seedlings 
for both the project interventions and from other projects. However, there are few private nurseries in the target 
area and those that do exist are mostly informal and temporary. Provid ing organisational and management support 
will provide local communities with an additional source of income and diversify out of subsistence farming. The 
project will train 3960 people over 5 years.  
Small woodlot owners will be supported to form cooperati ves. This is intended to facilitate the aggregation and 
coordination of disparate and scattered woodlots and owners to provide economies of scale in operations, improve 
coherent forest management across the landscape and increase the potential for access t o and provision of a wider 
range of product markets and improve planning and marketing opportunities for owners. This is because the 
majority of the woodland in the project area is comprised of disparate blocks with multiple owners. Alongside the 
best prac tice technical support, owners will be supported to coordinate and manage their forest resources and 
access new and higher value markets. The project will train 1080 people over 18 months.  
Bee keeping operations will be strengthened to support livelihood d iversification. Bee keeping is an 
important local economic activity but is hampered by low productivity of honey and limited production of other  
 
72 Business Development: Tree Nurseries, Woodlots and Bee Keeping. Part of the GCF preparatory studies.  Sub-component 2.4: Strengthen community capacity to provide forest products and services (USD 1.4 
million)  Sub-component 2.3: Establish, restore and manage degraded woodlots across 297 ha of the watershed 
(USD 0.8 million)


---
*Page 35*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 93  
 
 
products. The project will sensitise 405 beekeepers on best practice and target capacity support to bee keeping 
cooperatives and provide modern hives. This will include training t o support bee keepers in the use of higher 
yielding hives as well as techniques, production, packaging and marketing of higher value products and exploration 
of wider market opportunities. The project will also invest in a community -based honey processing and packaging 
facility.  
Increased access to finance for vulnerable groups will be facilitated to support the adoption of fore st 
enterprises . Accessing financial services, credit in particular, is challenging for many cooperatives and is a key 
brake on the development of forest products and services. The project will assess the financing needs of forest 
cooperatives and enterpris es and work with formal and informal financial institutions to enhance the provision of 
more accessible and appropriate financial services and products to support cooperatives to increase their 
participation in forest based services and products. This will  link into the CAF73 and other locally available funding 
including the LODA community fund.  
This sub -component will reduce the harvesting of wood for household cooking and energy use to reduce 
pressure on forest and wood resources , reducing vulnerabilities  associated with deforestation and degraded 
forest cover. It comprises a series of targeted interventions aimed at reducing household demand for biomass in the 
target areas. These are based on extensive consultations and a review of existing work in this a rea in Rwanda 
conducted as part of the preparatory studies (see the Energy Analysis and Action Plan Gicumbi District in Annex 1). 
Activities will include:  
 increasing the use of biogas by households engaged in dairy activities;  and
 promotion and provision o f cleaner cookstoves and  fuels.
The proposed interventions build on the experience of previous Government programmes implemented by 
Practical Action Consultants (2011/12) and SNV 2013/1429 under MININFRA and later EWSA/EDCL. These two 
programmes were successful in introducing the Canarumwe and Tekavabu stoves in rural areas. Standards for the 
production and installation of the stoves were developed by the Practical Action programme and adapted by the 
Rwandan Bureau of Standards.There are a number of sm all companies supplying the market so the stoves can be 
sourced locally. Tier 1 and 2 improved Cook Stoves are already locally made in Gicmbi District and use a ceramic 
liner of standard dimensions. These are either installed in the household’s kitchen (Ca narumwe model) or the liner 
is fixed in a metal cladding and insulation materials (Tehavuba portable model). These improved stoves have 
thermal efficiencies of 20 – 305% and because the technicians who install the stoves also improve ventilation in the 
household cooking area, there are measureable benefits through reduced indoor pollution. Tier 3 Gasifier stoves 
are made out of metal and produced in more advanced metal workshops currently located in the urban areas but 
with a potential to be made in Gicumbi  as well. The GCF investment will therefore draw on the existing expertise 
and supply chain in country to scale up the uptake of these stoves.  
The project will support the subsidised provision of biogas within the project area and contribute to the 
achievement of the SE4ALL target of 10% of rural households having access to biogas. The project will target dairy 
households and encourage them to invest in digesters as well as institutions (e.g. boarding schools, 
slaughterhouses etc.) that could switch to biogas. Although there are relatively few large institutions within the 
project area, their use of wood as a cooking fuel is significant. The project will provide a subsidy towards the 
investment costs which will be performance based and only be provide d by the district authorities after completion 
of the digester according to the quality standards. Training will also be provided to increase business/ technical 
skills among biogas enterprises/ technicians.  
The adoption of cleaner cookstoves and fuels wil l be promoted and subsidised to reduce the pressure on 
wood resources, greenhouse gas emissions and indoor air pollution. The project will promote the efficient use of 
biomass for cooking and improve access to alternative fuels by strengthening the capacit y of existing service 
providers to promote efficient stoves for rural households. These stoves include Tier 1 and 2 efficient stoves as well 
as Tier 3 and 4 gasifier stoves. Tier 1 and 2 efficient stoves provide an efficiency saving of 23% compared to the 3 
stone fire traditional cooking method while Tier 3 and 4 gasifier stoves74 can reach higher efficiencies of 40 - 50% 
and substantially reduce air pollution. The work will include:  
 
 
73Community grants for the CAF will be provided by FONERWA (no GCF fina nce will be used for the grants, GCF finance will only be 
used to provide the TA to support the set up and operation of the fund)  
74Tier 3: Gasifier stoves with natural draft are made out of metal and produced in more advanced metal workshops initially in the urban 
areas but with a potential to be made in Gicumbi as well. Estimated costs are Rwf 12,500 – 20,000 per stove and they will be targeted to 
the higher incomes in the rural areas. These stoves have to be adapted to the available fuel: wood chips, bro ken branches and/or pellets.  Sub-component 2.5: Increase the use of biogas and efficient cookstoves to reduce deforestation of the 
watershed (USD 1 million)


---
*Page 36*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 93  
 
 
 providing technical and market advice, conducting market campaigns and linking potential customers to distributors and 
micro finance organisations; 
 promotional activities in field to promote clean energy  options;
 establishing, training and equipping production groups to produce the clay liners for the Canarumwe/Tekavuba stoves 
in areas where there are suitable soils and some pottery experience and to se rve neighbouring  areas;
 training technicians to install Canarumwe type stoves, in household kitchens; 
 supporting service providers (local producers and distributors) to arrange awareness campaigns and demonstrations in 
local markets etc.;  and
 the production of wood chips and pellets to increase the uptake and the efficiency of gasifier  stoves.
The project will work with the district authorities and local manufacturers to test these stoves on the market 
through an intensive promotion campaign. Some of the work will be contracted out or managed in collaboration 
with the university  in Gicumbi  (UTAB)  which  already  has departments  for renewable  energy,  agriculture  and forestry. 
The project will also stimulate collaboration between UTAB and the District a s well as cooperation between UTAB 
and the Tumbo College of Technology in neighbouring Rulindo which has a strong renewable energy focus. It will 
include provision of demonstration equipment and information materials on access to clean energy; hiring and 
training of technical staff to support field promotions and promotional activities in the field to increase the uptake of 
clean energy options. Wood chipping and pelleting machinery are needed to make gasifier stoves more effective 
and user friendly. The pr oject will invest in buildings, some simple machinery and support to a local cooperative to 
manage the production and the sale of the pellets. The approach will be based on an existing facility operated by 
Inyenyeri in western Rwanda  (Gisenyi).  
The project will also assess the needs of key institutions in the district for improved cookstoves and the 
potential eff iciency savings that could be achieved and provide 100 stoves to institutions . A MININFRA 
survey of public institutions in 201075 study revealed that most of the boarding schools and health facilities that 
prepare meals, use the Muvero type stove made out of metal (80%) or built -in stoves made out of brick. Many of 
these stoves were found to be in poor condition as the metal corroded or the stoves were damaged. It is estimated 
that an institutional stove with a pan capacity of 150 litres, requires 200 m3 of fuel wood per year. An improved 
stove that is in good condition and well managed can reduce the amount of fuel by 50% and more. That would 
result in a savings of 100 m3 of firewood per newly installed stove. Further information can be found in the detaile d 
72 page study report (energy analysis and action plan) in one of the annexes to the FP.  
This sub -component will support a series of energy efficiency improvements76 at the Mulindi factory , with 
co-financing for the capital costs of energy efficiency equipment provided from The Wood Foundation / Mulindi 
Factory Company Limited (Tier 1) plus some grant support to demonstrate a series of advanced energy efficiency 
and PV options (Tier 2). Improving the energy efficiency of tea factories has the potential  to reduce GHG emissions, 
reduce the pressure on wood fuel production, and lead to operational cost savings in factories, but it has not 
happened to date in Rwanda due a series of policy, institutional and information barriers. This project will address 
these barriers, focusing on the tea factory in Gicumbi which is run by a joint charitable company (Mulindi Factory 
Company Limited) supported by The Wood Foundation and The Gatsby Foundation, working under a shared 
ownership model with two local co -operative s of smallholder farmers, (COOPTHÉ and COOTHEVM). Under this 
model, all the shares in the factory will be transferred to the local smallholders in the next few years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75 Survey of Institutional Cook Stoves and Biogas Technology, MININFRA July  2010  
76 A further option would be to convert the system to operating on wood chip, which would allow for under fed stokers and retort s to be 
installed. This involves significant additional costs for the chipper and wood store, but also operationally to chip t he wood. It is not 
considered further for these  reasons.  Sub-comp onent 2.6: Reduce the demand for fuelwood and GHG emissions at Mulindi tea factory through 
energy efficiency measures (USD 0.3 million)


---
*Page 37*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 93  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The Mulindi tea factory and plantation.  
As part of the technical audit (described in the baseline situation in section C10, a series of efficiency 
measures was proposed . These do not require significant modifications to the system and equipment, and will 
provide potential savings of around 35% leading to reduced emissions of around 4,600 t CO 2e per annum as well 
increasing the ratio of tea produced to energy consumed to 600 kg tea/m3 wood. The Tier 1 improvements 
comprise: improved fuel drying77 (cost USD40,000, fuel saving  18%), improvements to boiler controls78  
(USD25,000, saving 7% of boiler fuel), insulation79 (USD6,000, fuel saving 10%), condensate utilisation, dryer 
performance (USD10,500, saving 5% of dryer fuel), USD4,500, and installing a VSD80 to the boiler (savin g 25% of 
boiler electricity). However, there are other options that can be introduced to further improve energy efficiency, and 
these are particularly important as Rwanda is embarking on a tea expansion programme that will see another 10 
factories built in  the next few years. It is critical to ensure that these new factories include best practice energy 
efficiency, to reduce future emissions and wood fuel demand. A series of additional Tier 2 (advanced) energy 
efficiency technologies are therefore proposed at Mulindi, to address risk perceptions and encourage uptake. These 
Tier 2 measures include dryer efficiency improvements, trough efficiency improvements and a Tea Factory PV 
Roof. More details on the feasibility analysis and proposed measures are included  in the Annex  report.  
Component 3 interventions will reduce the exposure of human settlements in the watershed to flooding and 
landslides, build climate resilience and support highly vulnerable households living in exposed areas to 
relocate to green social  housing developments. Currently, there are significant numbers of households in 
Gicumbi living in houses and areas susceptible to landslides and flooding with limited access to water and other 
essential services. This sub -component includes investments in  improved surface -water management to reduce the 
risk of climate -related disasters and increase the capacity of communities to capture and store rainwater to address 
high levels of climate variability and emerging climate change. This will support the inte grated approach to managing 
land and water within the sub -catchment in line with the the Muvumba Catchment Plan (2017) and complement 
activities under components 1 and 2. Specifically, it will improve access to adequate water supply through measures 
that a re consistent with water availability and sustainability. Furthermore, rain water harvesting as an adaptation 
measure will capture and manage rain water to further reduce floods and serve as a disaster risk management 
strategy. This component will also inv est in the construction of low carbon social housing and infrastructure in two 
locations (Kabeza and Kaniga) for extremely poor families currently living in areas where there  
 
 
 
77 Install ventilated drying floor to wood  stores.  78 To retrofit automatic oxygen trim providing control according to O2 levels in the  stack  
79 The smoke box doors and the entire back end should be insulated to reduce shell losses  
80 Variable Speed Drive, adjusts electrical motor speed by inverter technology. VSDs are standard practice now  on most process 
engineering  installations.   
Component 3: Climate resilient settlements (USD 9.3 million)


---
*Page 38*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 93  
 
 
is a high risk of flooding and landslides. In the sectors where these villages are located (Rubaya and Kaniga), there 
are 172 and 228  households respectively currently living in high risk zones81. There are 3 sub -components:  
3.1 Manage surface water run -off from settlements to reduce gully formation, floods and  landslides;  
3.2 Increase rainwater capture and storage to counter inter -annual rainf all variability;  and 
3.3 Construct a green social housing development in Kabeza to reduce the number of vulnerable households living in high 
risk zones;  
3.4 Construct a green social housing development in Kaniga to reduce the number of vulnerable households living  in high 
risk zones.  
The interventions will target the most climate vulnerable households in Gicumbi.  
The component will be implemented by a team of staff recruited to the project and based in Gicumbi District 
Headquarters. All interventions will be delive red at the local level but will also be supported by the relevant sector 
government agencies and research institutions such as:  
• the Rwanda Water and Forests Authority (RWFA) – for rainwater harvesting and surface water 
management  activities; 
• the Rwanda Housing Authority (RHA) – for housing development activities 
The implementation arrangements are explained in detail in Sect ion C.7.
This sub -component will comprise a range of measures to improve the management of surface water 
around climate vulnerable human settlements in Gicumbi . It will entail an integrated approach to:  
 reduce  run-off and increase  infiltration  on the ridge  and the upper  slope  to reduce  climate  related  risks;  and
 reduce  downhill  and lowland  flooding,  siltation  and silt damage  as well as sediment  loads  in water  courses. 
Many settlements in the project area are located at the top of slopes and ridges, where run-off following intense 
precipitation is exacerbated by rapid discharge from roofs, roads and other hard surfaces causing gullies and 
landslides at the crest of the slope and flooding and siltation lower in the valley. These risks will increase under 
climate change, as the climate projections show increases in heavy precipitation intensity. A detailed GIS analysis 
and ground truthing to collect data were carried out as part of the watershed protection plan82 showed that a 
number of major gullies have open ed up around Byumba (see Annex 1).  
Measures to improve local drainage and storm -water management will include: check dams, diversion 
ditches water breaks, soak -away/infiltration pits, spate irrigation83, ridges, contour bunds etc. These 
structures are important for reducing the flooding of downstream, low -lying areas. Trees and shrub will also be 
planted particularly along pathways and access roads, and along drainage channels to stabilize soils, reduce run -off 
and improve infiltration. They will provid e the additional benefit of providing a range of NTFP goods and services. In 
gullies, vegetation will be planted in strips across the gully to slow the velocity of water, trap silt, and prevent further 
erosion and check dams and wattles installed where nec essary. Specific slope -treatment measures above the gully 
area and in the eroded area between the branch gullies may also be required, such as retention and infiltration 
ditches, terraces, wattles, fascines and staking to reduce the rate and amount of surf ace run -off and divert surface 
water away from critical planted areas. Specific investments will include:  
 Soft drains (5000  m)
 Soak -away pits (21,324 soak away pits - 1 per HH for 60%  HH)
 Check dams/ gully plugs  (10,000)
 Footpath runoff control  (100km)
 Soil erosion/infiltration ditches (62.5ha ditches with 222 ditches  /ha)
All work will be contracted through the cash for work schemes used elsewhere in Rwanda which increase 
employment opportunities and target the poorest households. Support will also be prov ided to establish cell 
watershed management committees and provide training for committees on surface water management techniques 
and rainwater harvesting (see below under 3.2).  
 
 
 
81 Data collected by Gicumbi district,  2017  
82 Watershed Protection Plan (2016).  Part of the preparatory studies completed on behalf of the Ministry of Environment Rwanda and 
funded through the Project Preparation Facility of the Green Climate  Fund.  
83 Spate irrigation involves techniques in which flood water is used for supplemental irr igation of crops grown in low -lying lands, 
sometimes far from the source of  runoff.  Sub-compone nt 3.1: Manage surface water run -off from settlements to reduce gully formation, floods and 
landslides (USD 2.4 million)


---
*Page 39*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 93  
 
 
This sub -component will invest in small -scale water collection and storage structures at the household and 
community level in upland areas to increase water conservation and reduce run -off and erosion during heavy 
rainfall. Thi s will address the high levels of inter -annual rainfall variability in the district, and the periodic extremes 
(dry spells and droughts), which mean that communities often experience insufficient water availability. Water 
storage is a key strategy for clim ate change adaptation as using harvested rainwater will enable farming 
households to diversify the cropping systems, introduce new vegetables and perennial crops, and increase 
household incomes. Rainfall harvesting enables households to manage their own wa ter supply for drinking water, 
domestic use, irrigation and other income generating activities. It also provides an increased level of drought 
protection and allows more flexibility in market timing for farmers who produce market crops. Storing the water i n 
ponds, tanks and cisterns for local use, will also improve local supplies and reduce water collection burdens. Rain 
water harvesting also reduces the burden on women and girls from collecting and carrying water.  
Three methods of rainwater harvesting will be promoted: 1) roof top harvesting, 2) underground cisterns 
and 3) communal ponds. Roof top harvesting will entail using a subsidy scheme to assist women and men in 
settlements and on steep slopes to acquire and set up, use and maintain rainwater har vesting facilities. Each tank 
will be shared between two households and splashguards will be used to prevent overshooting of rainwater. The 
project will also support the construction of 30 underground cisterns and a network of 90 ponds to absorb storm 
wate r overflows and provide supplemental irrigation and water for livestock during the dry season (which will 
increase agricultural productivity). The additional water points for livestock watering will hence support the 
increased use of biogas. Ponds will be made cost -effective by using local materials and community labour.  
The design, materials, siting and installation of this water infra -structure will take the prevailing and 
projected weather conditions into account . The villages where these structures will  be installed will be located in 
safe zones and in accordance with immidugudu controls and regulations. Moreover, the project will ensure that the 
design and construction of ponds, tanks and drainage systems is such that the structures can withstand heavy 
rainfall and other climatic extremes. This will include building in redundancies to ensure that the water infrastructure 
can continue to operate effectively under changing climatic conditions. In order to prevent siltation of run -off 
channels into the pond s which may affect the storage capacity the project will ensure that silt traps84 and filters85 are 
used to minimise the risk of siltation. In addition, the construction of the ponds will be closely linked into erosion and 
flood control measures (contour t renches, bunding, progressive terracing, ridges, pits, perennial cover of steep 
slopes and riparian buffer zones, agro -forestry, check dams, tree planting on gully banks, drainage channels etc.) to 
maximise their effectiveness as water storage facilities.  
To ensure the sustainability of the small -scale infrastructures introduced by the project (ponds, water 
breaks etc.), the project will establish a variety of committees at the sector and cell level to select the sites, 
manage and maintain the structures. T he role of the committees will be to follow up, monitor, maintain and 
rehabilitate the small -scale infrastructure after the end of the project. The project will establish effective 
arrangements to ensure continuing support to community management by compet ent external organisations, this 
will most likely be local government. The project will initially determine the demand from users for infrastructure 
interventions and ensure that households and communities are fully informed of the likely life cycle costs (operation, 
maintenance and eventual rehabilitation) of their services. The project will ensure that user participation is 
addressed, together with user contributions to capital and recurrent costs, choice of technology and participation in 
monitoring. The  project will also develop a functioning management and maintenance system comprising tools, 
supply chains, transport, equipment, training and individuals/institutions with clear responsibilities. Support will be 
provided to enhance the long -term technical , financial, and managerial capacity of the Committees to ensure the 
effective operation and management of the structures. This will include: support to enhance decision making, 
technical support for maintenance and repair, means for cost sharing of recurr ent costs86, support to supply chain 
and service providers (in the form of registration and licensing, training and technical assistance, access to capital, 
and financial and administrative services etc.) and support for coping with ongoing climate trends and shocks 
including the preparation of contingency plans. The project will also identify adequate sources of funding for 
operation and maintenance costs, define the roles and responsibilities of different players, and in particular build the 
capacity of l ocal government. The project will develop both technical as well as management skills and support 
committees to develop a mechanism for cost sharing to ensure investments are financially sustainable. The precise  
 
84 this is a small pit used to catch sediment carried by the water. It prevents the pond from becoming clogged. The size of the trap will 
depend on the amount of runoff (heavier runoff means a bigger trap) and the amount of sediment it carries. If there is a lot of sediment, a 
two-chamber tra p will be installed - one to catch soil and sand and the second one to trap finer silt. The silt trap will be located at least 3 
meters away from the pond to prevent water from overtopping during heavy rains.  
85 a filter mesh is used to trap leaves and oth er debris.  
86 Recognising that rural communities may not be able to afford the full costs of operating and maintaining structures.  Sub-component 3.2: Increase rainwater capture and storage to counter inter -annual rainfall variability (USD 
2 million)


---
*Page 40*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 93  
 
 
mechanism will be developed with committees during implementation but is likely to include a mix of user payments 
and external sources of funding primarily from the district annual budget. Part of the process will include working 
closely with communities and district officials to assess the need for external finance to cover maintenance costs 
and to ensure that these costs are quantified and  included in the district’s annual action plan and budget. Finally, 
the project will build the capacity of local authorities to maintain records of functionality and utilisation of 
infrastructure with data generated through community and household monitori ng and surveys at one year, three 
years, five years and ten years after implementation.  
The project will invest in 200 new homes and infrastructure for vulnerable families currently living in areas 
at risk from flooding and landslides. This intervention ta rgets the poorest and most vulnerable households out of 
the 14,724 currently living in high risk areas (at risk from landslides and floods) with limited assets and without 
adequate access to safe water and poor sanitation. Masterplans have been developed f or two rural sites in northern 
Gicumbi: Kabeza and Kaniga (these are included in Annex 1 along with topographical and geotechnical surveys of 
both sites as well as carbon savings calculations, options analysis, delivery and cost plan, green infrastructure 
plan). The project will support the construction of 100 new houses in Kabeza and 100 new houses in Kaniga (see 
sub-component 3.4). The settlements will include “green infrastructure” that utilises renewable energy, water and 
waste recycling strategies desi gned to work with the Rwandan topography to reduce emissions, increase resilience 
to climate change and protect the surrounding  environment.  
Kabeza is a remote rural village on top of a hill, 7km from the border town of Gatuna, close to a well 
maintained a nd recently upgraded murram road . The village is part of the GoR’s Integrated Development 
Project (IDP) ‘model village’ which was initiated under the rural settlement policy in 2010 to upgrade rural 
settlements into integrated villages, to increase economi c opportunities (by clustering houses around improved 
infrastructure, services and amenities) and to provide housing for climate vulnerable families living in high risk areas 
who are affected by landslides and floods. Currently, there are 43 existing dwell ings in Kabeza that were 
constructed in 2008 by a government initiative with funding from UNDP/UNEP/REMA -PEI and Gicumbi District to 
demonstrate low carbon and climate resilient rural villages. The project will invest in the construction of an 
additional 1 00 homes and water and energy infrastructure for vulnerable families in line with the masterplan, 
building typologies and green infrastructure plan developed as part of this design. The new homes will be built on 
an adjacent site to the existing houses whi ch slopes at a constant gradient of 12 -20% and is facing north -east with 
views towards Rubaya town. The site is zoned as rural in the District Land Use and Zoning Plan and has no 
electrical grid connection and no municipal water  supply.  
The households in t his village have already adopted a variety of green technologies including biogas, 
indoor solar lighting and climate adaptation measures including rainwater harvesting. A modified IDP 
masterplan (see Annex 1) has been developed for the site which improves on the green infrastructure in the village 
to promote enhanced climate resilience with gentle sloping, 'soft landscaping' to adsorb water, reduce soil erosion, 
improve storm water management and irrigate surrounding agriculture, all forms of adaptation to help address the 
increasing risks of heavy precipitation from climate change. Each dwelling will include rainwater harvesting to cater 
for 9 months of water supply and reduce vulnerability to changing weather patterns. During the 3 month dry season 
a commu nal rainwater collection system will be constructed to collect water from the soft landscaping system via a 
sand -bed water filter and underground water tanks. A communal biogas chamber (to supply gas for cooking), cow 
sheds and two cows per household have also been included in the design. The masterplan also includes landscape 
terraces shared between two houses, the top terrace for trees, the lower for beehives, a wormery and compost and 
remaining terraces for food production.  
The housing typologies and “green infrastructure” (that utilises renewable resources, water and waste 
recycling strategies) at both sites are designed to work with the Rwandan topography and climate to 
integrate slope stability and storm water management, reduce emissions, increase resilience to climate change and 
protect the surrounding environment. The existing house design currently used by Rwanda Housing Authority 
(RHA) in its IDP has been modified to be more efficient in terms of energy and land use. T he proposed typology 
reconfigures the dwelling plot and existing four in one house design to adapt to the sloping topography (up to 20%s 
slope), reducing the need for costly and carbon intensive cut and fill and extensive site levelling and retaining 
struc tures. This design is more efficient in terms of energy and land use (making more land available for residential 
units) and improves slope stability reducing the risk of landslides and flooding. The housing typologies have also 
been adapted to allow for ex pansion in the roof space into a future mezzanine that offer the potential for two 
additional rooms. To reduce the embodied carbon associated with the IDP, the designs incorporate the use of soil 
stabilised brick structural piers (in place of high carbon s tructural concrete). The new design also has improved roof 
geometry for rainwater harvesting and an internal bathroom connected to a communal biogas chamber. Biogas will  Sub-component 3.3: Construct green social housing development in Kabeza to reduce the number of 
vulnerable households living in high risk zones (USD 2 million)


---
*Page 41*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 93  
 
 
enable ho useholds to cook without being reliant on fuelwood (either bought at high cost or illegally sourced from 
felling eucalyptus) and there will be improved ventilation in kitchens to deal with smoke from cooking.  
Each house will have a kitchen garden and compo sting point to support household production of nutritious 
vegetables and fruit. To provide new off -farm skills and to bring construction costs down, the beneficiaries will be 
trained in low carbon construction techniques (Compressed Earth Blocks and Timber  Roofing) and supervised by 
qualified staff during the construction phase to guarantee quality and structural stability (under component 4).  
Where possible, the beneficiaries will provide the labour for the construction of their own houses. An incremental,  
self-build model of construction will be used to build the capacity of local people in construction techniques that use 
sustainable building materials and ‘green building typologies and technologies’. Local people will also be engaged 
in climate resilient  landscaping as well as the construction of biogas plants and waste recycling structures. As well 
as providing shelter and access to services for 200 vulnerable families, the expanded housing development will 
create 580 construction jobs over 2 years and a void 4308 t CO 2eq over the project lifetime from the use of biogas.  
The development of the site will be undertaken by the Rwanda Housing Authority (RHA) . Throughout the 
construction period, RHA will act as the developer. The land where the settlement is be ing constructed belongs to 
the District of Gicumbi, who will donate the land to the IDP programme. Land title will pass from the District to the 
individual householders at the point of occupation. Technical assistance to support the construction of these h ouses 
would be needed (including provision of training in construction skills) and is proposed under a wider call down TA 
facility from FONERWA. Funding of the base infrastructure will be provided by MINIFRA as per the PM Order no.87 
which provides for the  “full financing of basic infrastructure required, to and within the housing project area for 
housing project targeting low income beneficiaries”.  
FONERWA and the District of Gicumbi will together oversee the allocation of the social housing according 
to the criteria described in the Cooperation Agreement between the FONERWA and the District. The 
selection process is described in detail in the PIM and in the Cooperation Agreement between the Executing Entity 
(FONERWA) and Gicumbi District (attached as an An nex to the PIM). The Cooperation Agreement includes 
detailed provisions for the section of households for social housing. The housing will be allocated to poor and 
vulnerable people relocated from high risk zones. Responsibility for assigning houses to peo ple/families lies jointly 
between the FONERWA Project Management Unit and the District of Gicumbi and the project expects that in 
excess of 50% of the available housing will be allocated to female headed households. The process for allocating 
the houses wi ll include:  
 Ensuring that affected community members are aware of the grievance  mechanism 
 Encouraging households which believe there has been inequity in the allocation of houses to raise the issue directly 
with the PMU in  FONERWA 
The District will undertake to allocate the houses to deserving households relocated from climate vulnerable areas 
(high risk zones) using the following criteria:  
a) Households assessed as extremely poor (in ubudehe category 1) which are female headed households and containing  
young children under 10 will be given the first  priority;  
b) Extremely poor female headed households will be given the second  priority;  
c) Other extremely poor households will be given the third priority;  and 
d) Vulnerable households (in ubudehe category 2) will b e given the fourth  priority.  
Where there are more qualifying households than houses available, the communities will select the beneficiary 
households in accordance with level of vulnerability. The District will provide details of the households which have 
been allocated houses in the Kabeza and Kaniga settlements upon request from FONERWA.  
A detailed cost breakdown of the development of climate resilient settlements has been provided in an 
ancillary sheet on the budget in Annex 2. This provides the cost per  household and the cost per beneficiary.  
Excluding the works supervision which covers both the housing and the communal green infrastructure, the cost per 
unit (for a 4 room house plus a kitchen and bathroom) is USD 11,562 in Kabeza. This compares to the c urrent cost 
of an IDP house which is USD 9300. Although the cost is higher, there are considerable design benefits. The 
housing typology is more efficient in terms of energy and land use. It can be built on slopes up to 20% and it does 
not require cut and fill which improves slope stability and reduces the risk of landslides and flooding. It also uses 
local materials reducing the for imported, high carbon materials such as cement and steel which ultimately reduces 
construction costs. The new design also has  improved roof geometry for rainwater harvesting and allows for 
incremental expansion into the roof space providing a further 2 bedrooms. Each house includes a garden kitchen 
and composting point and an internal bathroom connected to a communal biogas cham ber. Biogas will enable  
 
 
87 Draft Prime Minister instructions n°... of... determining the conditions and procedures for obtaining government support for affordable 
housing  projects


---
*Page 42*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 93  
 
 
households to cook without being reliant on fuelwood (either bought at high cost or illega lly sourced from felling 
eucalyptus) and there will be improved ventilation in kitchens to deal with smoke from cooking. The cost per unit is 
therefore very reasonable considering the quality of building and hence we believe the intervention is scalable 
across the IDP programme as a social housing model but also beyond as an affordable home purchase in line and 
even lower than existing house prices for similar properties.  
This sub -component includes the same activities as sub -component 3.3 at a different si te. In Kaniga, the 
project will invest in 100 new homes and green infrastructure for vulnerable families currently living in areas at risk 
from flooding and landslides. The housing typology is the same as for the Kabeza site.  
Kaniga is located near the Mulindi Tea Factory. The site is well situated below a loop road that follows the 
natural ridge with an existing low density strip development of houses and only 2km from the Mulindi tea factory and 
6km to the border post of Gatuna. Much of the site is currently used for agriculture. A good proportion of the site is 
at a reasonable gradient below 20 % and is suitable for development88. There is a mains electricity overhead 
connection avail able along the main road as well as a municipal water supply line. The site is defined as Urban sub 
core residential in the District land use and zoning plan but is a typical rural site, commonly found across the 
country, that has reasonable access and top ography. The masterplan is arranged around winding roads and green 
infrastructure  to minimise  cut and fill and optimise  access  and land use efficiency  (see Annex  1). The settlement  was 
planned at over 14 units per hectare - with 100 houses. The development  of the site will also be undertaken by the 
Rwanda Housing Authority (RHA) following the same process outlined in 3.4  above.  
This component will ensure that climate resilience and green growth knowledge and learning from the 
project are effectively communi cated and mainstreamed to promote the replication of effective adaptation 
strategies at the district and national level. These activities will include a range of activities to raise awareness, 
build capacity and share project results, as well as mainstream ing to create the enabling environment for 
replication:  
4.1 Communicate project results and lessons learned;  
4.2 Awareness building, promotion and advocacy to support replication and scale up in other  districts;  
4.3 Increase capacity of local institutions and communities to sustain investments in watershed protection and climate 
resilient  settlements;  
4.4 Mainstream climate resilient approaches into existing forestry programmes and practices to support scale up and 
replication;  
4.5 Mainstream approaches to climate resi lient agriculture for smallholders into existing plans and programmes to 
support scale up and  replication;  
4.6 Mainstream climate resilient approaches into existing agriculture extension programmes to support scale up and 
replication;  and 
4.7 Mainstream energy eff iciency into the tea industry to support scale up and  replication.  
 Sub-component  4.1: Communicate  project  results  and lessons  learned  (USD  0.8 million)   
This sub -component will analyse the results of the project and produce a range of knowledge  products  
including policy briefs and case studies to demonstrate the benefits of the project interventions. During the inception 
stage, the project will develop effective communications and knowledge management strategies and invest 
specifically in disseminating in formation. This will include the production of briefing notes for policy makers and the 
use of intervention sites to showcase best practice. Activities will include:  
• Preparation of briefing notes for local and national decision  makers  
• Develop a communicati on strategy  
• Develop a knowledge management  strategy  
• Farmer -to-farmer fora (cross visits, community meetings etc.)  
• Development of participatory  videos  
• Competitions to reward innovative approaches to  adaptation  
• Media articles in newspapers, journals, newsletters,  radio  
• Website  
• Forum and upkeep of  website  
 
88 There is a fairly flat plateau in the centre of the site and the gradient increases dramatically towards the valley to over 2 0% gradient. 
There are two steep natural amphitheatres either side of the plateau. (Masterplan Kaniga,  2017).  Sub-component 3.4: Construct green social housing development in Kaniga to reduce the number of 
vulnerable households living in high risk zones (USD 2.7 million)  
 
Component 4: Knowledge tra nsfer and mainstreaming (USD 3.2 million)


---
*Page 43*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 93  
 
 
• Develop and disseminate knowledge  products  
• Workshops to share results and lessons  learned  
• An ex -post cost benefit analysis  
• Development and dissemination of knowledge  products  
The additional value generated by the approaches to increase climate resilience will be assessed with a 
cost benefit analysis . This will determine the value added by the project compared with existing approaches and 
practices so that scaling up can be justified. Peer -to-peer learning where community representatives meet other 
community representatives from areas where successful interventions have taken place will be used to support 
replication elsewhere. Dialogue and lea rning at workshops will ensure horizontal scaling up and the project will use 
a website, site visits, and the media to:  
• broadly advertise project results and foster replication and scaling up of successful  interventions,  
• provide updates on the progress and  project  activities,  
• disseminate case studies and emerging information from the project participants,  and 
• communicate lessons learned from project activities.  
This intervention will build awareness and understanding of best practice approaches successfully 
implemented by the project to support the adoption and replication of successful approaches and technologies at 
scale . It will target other district authorities, and cooperatives and will highlight benefits of successful approach and 
communicate lessons learned. This will include building awareness of all project interventions including: watershed 
protection; sustainable  forest management; good CRA practice; IPM; and climate risks to settlements and 
measures to increase resilience. This will be achieved through national and local workshops and the production of 
guidelines, posters and leaflets. For example, to build aware ness and understanding of green construction 
materials, technologies and approaches to low carbon, climate resilient settlement development, the project will 
finance workshops, study visits to the sites, and district meetings to present and discuss the low  carbon 
construction technologies and design and highlight benefits.  
 
This sub -component will develop local capacity to plan for climate change and to increase resilience 
through watershed protection. It will also develop capacity in the green building technolog ies and settlement design 
and maintenance to ensure that human settlements are more resilient to climate change. This will include:  
• Capacity building of local institutions to plan and implement climate resilient land and water management regimes and 
scale  up effective  adaptation  strategies  in integrated  Development  Programme  model  villages  at the community  level 
• Building capacity in watershed protection  approaches  
• Building capacity in sustainable forest management  approaches  
• Building capacity in green construction technologies (CEB, timber roof construction; house construction, operation and 
maintenance of biogas digesters, sand bed water filters, water  harvesting)  
Enhancing capacities for planning, coordination and implementation at the local level is critical to ensure 
effective climate adaptation. The project will target the training towards key staff in the local authority at District, 
Sector and Cell levels as local authorities currently have limited capacity to support project beneficiaries. At the  
District level  this will include: Agronomist Officers, Environment Officers, Co -operative Officers, Infrastructure 
Officers, Land Officers, Forestry Officers and RAB CIP Officers as well as the contracted CIP service providers who 
organise seed and fertil iser distribution and provide extension advice. A capacity building programme will use 
project site visits as a training tool. At the sector level , the training will target the Agronomist Officer who covers 
many of the above functions dealing with aspects of rural infrastructure, lands adjudication/title registration, forestry 
and environmental management (responding to the respective four designated officers at District level) in addition 
to the ‘primary’ focus on agriculture, livestock and horticulture. F orestry Officers deployed at Sector level by 
MINAGRI and MINRENA respectively will also be included in this training. At the Cell level , the training will target 
the Social  Development  Officers  (better  known  as the Integrated  Development  Programme  Officers  or ‘IDPs’)  as this 
is the main salaried post concerned with agricultural and development issues. Training will also target relevant staff 
from local and national NGOs.  
Training will also be organised at the national level to build capacity up through a series of workshops to 
promote best practices . Training will be delivered by project staff supported by technical specialists. The expected 
result of the training is an increased understanding of climate change hazards, an improved understanding of how 
Government can best support communities to increase their adaptive capacity to future climate variability and an 
enhanced capacity to support community adaptation. Training manuals, guidelines and other materials will be  Sub-component 4.3 Increase capacity of local institutions and communities to sustain investments in 
watershed protection and climate resilient settlements (USD 0.5 million)  Sub-component 4.2: Awareness building, promotion and advocacy to support replication and scale up in 
other districts (USD 0.6 million)


---
*Page 44*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 93  
 
 
developed and posted on the project website to help ensure the quality of any scaling up by describing the 
individual steps involved in the process and describing tried and tested approaches and tools. It is expected  that the 
training  will contribute  to scaling  up these  approaches  in other  areas of  the country  beyond  the end of the project.  
Activities planned under this output include:  
• Training needs assessment  
• Training workshops and short courses for Government and N GO staff in gender sensitive adaptation  planning  
• Preparation of training and awareness  materials  
• Evaluation and revision of training  materials  
Training will also target local communities so that they develop skills and expertise in the range of 
interventions including forestry, agro -forestry, green construction etc. For example, the project will develop local 
capacity in low carbon home construction in Kabeza and Kaniga, including training for thin bed Compressed Earth 
Blocks masonry construction; timber roof construction; house construction, operation and maintenance of biogas 
digesters, sand bed  water filters, and rain water harvesting. This will include the production of technical manuals 
and case studies to explain the green materials and design.  
This sub -component will support RWFA to integrate good forest management practices into existing 
national planning . Activities will include:  
• An Initial analysis of barriers to uptake, identification of entry points and appraise mainstreaming  options  
• Mainstreaming support for integration of new approaches and technologies into plans and  programmes  
• Mobi lsing funding for scale up and  mainstreaming  
• Assessing and evaluating the mainstreaming  actions  
It will draw on the lessons learned during implementation of forest renewal and management interventions as well 
as experience from supporting nursery development and investments in forest products and services. It will also link 
in closely to the activ ities under 4.3 building on the strengthened capacity to mainstream best practice into annual 
planning and programming across the sector.  
This sub -component will mainstream evidence generated by the project into policies and plans at the 
national level to create an enabling environment so farmers are empowered to implement adaptation measures. 
Project results and lessons learned will be synthesised to provide an evidence base to inform the scale up of 
climate resilient approaches in small -holder farming sys tems. This will be used to develop policy briefs, guidelines 
and other communication materials (under 4.1) highlighting key issues and examples of good practice and with a 
focus  on approaches  deemed  most  suitable  for smallholder  farmers.  This will build  key stakeholders’  awareness  and 
influence strategies, policies and programme development as well as planning and budgeting processes. The agro -
ecological approaches and techniques rolled out to 1800 smallholder farmers under 1.5 will be disseminated via 
improved extension training materials along with practical and theoretical training with Provincial level technicians. 
Capacity building activities, including technical assistance and field visits will also provide an opportunity  to share  
lessons  learned  during project  implementation  with key stakeholders.  The activities  will include:  
• Developing extension training materials that incorporate climate resilient approaches;  and 
• Delivering training to extension staff.  
This sub -component will take the lessons from the Gicumbi tea and coffee interventions and mainstream 
them into nation al strategy and programmes , to ensure that the project has a transformational effect. It will:  
• Mainstream climate resilient resilience into the tea and coffee extension services and FFS  curriculum;  
• Mainstream climate resilient planning into national tea sector  development;  
• Mainstream weather and climate services and IPM into the national extension curriculum;  and 
• Disseminate information through national  workshops.  
The intervention will integrate climate resilient agriculture into the national farmer field  school (FFS) 
programme for tea , extending the curriculum to include climate information and climate resilient agriculture advice 
for smallholder farmers. This will be targeted at 12 existing tea co -operatives (8 000 tea farmers), developing the 
curriculum  with climate risk assessments (technical assistance) to provide information on climatic risks, and using  Sub-component 4.4: Mainstream climate resilient approaches into existing forestry plans and programmes 
to support scale up and replication (USD 0.2 million)  
Sub-component 4.5: Mainstream climate resilient agriculture approaches into existing plans and 
programmes to support scale up and replication (USD 0.1 millio n) 
Sub-component 4.6: Mainstream climate resilient agriculture approaches (for tea and  coffee) into existing 
extension programmes to support scale up and replication (USD 0.6 million)


---
*Page 45*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 93  
 
 
farmer field school demo plots of climate resilient agriculture (new train ing for trainers and climate resilient demo 
plots out of grass strips and tree belts), to raise farmer awareness and encourage the uptake of climate resilient 
interventions. This will disseminate the knowledge and information from the project and enable re plication at scale.  
Lessons from the project will also be mainstreamed into the existing extension programme for coffee to 
improve understanding of climate change and increase the uptake of low regret climate resilient agriculture 
(mulching and shade trees ), using the existing curriculum and field school demo plots (of climate resilient 
interventions) to again deliver the Gicumbi lessons at scale. This will be prioritised towards those coffee farmers 
with the highest risks, targeting 5000 coffee farmers (pa rticularly women).  
A related intervention will be to create the enabling environment for the future climate resilient 
development of the tea sector nationally . This will mainstream climate risk information for planned new 
developments (technical assistance ) into the national tea development strategy, helping government to ensure 
planned sites are suitable for tea under future climate change and ensuring the right smallholder farmers are 
encouraged into production. It will also provide information, though th e national investor portal, to inform new tea 
investors. This information is critical, because the development of new plantations involves irreversible land -use 
change (and the risks of lock -in) and involve extremely long -term investment cycles (30 years) and it is critical that 
these one -off early siting decisions are made to ensure that sector development is resilient for the future under 
climate change, rather than today.  
The sub -component will also mainstream weather and climate services and Integrated Pest Management 
into the tea and coffee extension services programme , scaling -up the interventions in Gicumbi. This will ensure 
that this information is included in the FFS curriculum and it will provide the IT support to provide national SMS 
information for farmers (for weather and climate, and pest monitoring and surveillance) to disseminate the 
intervention at scale. Finally, to ensure these activities are mainstreamed into national development planning and 
disseminated to relevant actors in the tea and coffee sectors, national and province level workshops and 
dissemination activities will be undertaken.  
This sub -component will pr omote the uptake of energy efficiency in the industrial tea sector in Rwanda , 
using the lessons from the Mulindi tea factory, to ensure green growth is mainstreamed in current and future tea 
sector development policy. As highlighted earlier, tea factories are the largest industrial source of greenhouse gas 
emissions in Rwanda, and the Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) analysis identified the reduction of 
GHG emissions from the tea sector as a national priority. The project (technical assistan ce) will assess the potential 
for energy efficiency in the industry and hold a national workshop (under 4.1) to promote energy efficiency in 
existing tea factories, using the Mulindi tea factory as a best practice example. It will then introduce a 
mainstre aming programme into national tea strategy and programmes, using technical assistance to provide advice 
on energy use and options in tea factories one energy efficiency, to encourage the uptake of Tier 1 (good practice) 
energy efficiency improvements acros s the industry. As part of this programme, there will be capacity building and 
training for national experts. These activities will address the current information barriers which have prevented 
uptake of these measures to date. Assuming that factories take  up and implement this advice (using their own 
financing to implement the measures), with a 50% uptake of measures, the subsequent carbon savings are large, 
estimated at 47072 tonnes of CO 2 over the project  period.  
The sub -component will also introduce new energy efficiency standards (with the provision of technical 
assistance) for the planned expansion of the tea sector, which aims for a doubling of production in Rwanda, to 
ensure that low carbon development is main streamed into the sector’s development plans. These standards will be 
based on the lessons from Mulindi, including the advanced energy efficiency options, and also provide case study 
material from the site.  
 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on the Executing E ntity  
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) and how  it will support the project in 
terms of equity investment, management, operations, production and marketing.  
The management  team  
The Ministry of Environment, MOE, is the project sponsor and FONERWA is the executing entity. MOE will be 
accountable for the overall management of the project and will assume an oversight role while FONERWA will be 
responsible for the delivery of al l project outputs.  
Overall strategy and financial profile of the Executing Entity  Sub-component 4.7: Mainstream energy efficiency into the tea industry to support  scale up and replication 
(USD 0.3 million)


---
*Page 46*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 93  
 
 
FONERWA was established by the GoR in 2012 as a national basket fund for climate and environment 
(FONERWA) to mobilise and manage the flow of climate funds across various sectors of the Rwanda 
economy. FONERWA is now the primary vehicle through which addit ional environment and climate change finance 
is channelled, programmed, disbursed and monitored in Rwanda. The FONERWA Law formed the primary basis for 
the design of the fund. Initial seed capitalisation of GBP 22.5 million was provided to FONERWA in 2012 by the UK’s 
International Climate Fund (ICF) and GoR has contributed USD 4.3 million demonstrating its commitment to 
supporting LCCR growth. FONERWA has also served as the financing channel for the GCF readiness support funds 
for the NDA support and the st rategic framework. FONERWA has a well -established operating system requiring 
project developers to clearly demonstrate aims, objectives, methods and anticipated results and monitoring systems, 
value for money, stakeholder engagement, and addressing gender and equity issues as cross cutting issues. To 
date, FONERWA has financed projects valued at USD 40 million and has played a key role in attracting climate 
finance. Since 2013, FONERWA has leveraged over USD 3 million in private sector finance into LCCR pro jects 
including hydropower, off -grid solar power, sustainable buildings, and biogas projects.  
The Governance structure of FONERWA has been developed to allow oversight and GoR control of its 
projects. The Prime Ministers Order (PMO) sets out the governance  arrangements and gives powers to 
FONERWA’s Fund Management Committee to provide overall oversight of the fund. The PMO also makes provision 
for the internal rules and procedures that guide the functioning of other levels including FONERWAs Fund Technical 
Committee as well as the participation and roles of development partners, private sector and NGOs in decisions that 
are taken at each level. This project has been designed under the guidance of MOE and endorsed by a specially 
convened Ministerial group. As  such, it aligns to the Governments’ drive to accelerate real, tangible development 
through climate resilient investments on the ground.  
FONERWA provides the necessary and appropriate institutional arrangements to meet the criteria of 
international climate  funds. It maintains high standards of fiduciary management, aligned with GoR best practice 
and systems, including environment and social safeguards. It channels finances on a competitive basis to 
Government agencies, Districts, CSOs and the private sector  using a range of financial instruments (grants, loans 
etc.). Delivering GCF project interventions through a capable national institution such as FONERWA with high levels 
of accountability will further strengthen country ownership.  
Further details on the m anagement team, financial profile of FONERWA and the implementation arrangements are provided in 
the Project Implementation Manual at Annex 5 and Section C.7.  
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. Describe the competitive environment including the list of 
competitors with market shares and customer base and key differentiating factors (if applicable). Provide pricing structures,  price controls, subsidies 
available and government involvement (if any).  
na 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the project, the issuing authority,  and the date of issue or 
expected date of issue. Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations. Provide details on insurance policies rel ated to project.  
Government permits: A number of permits will be required and will be secured by the project team under 
FONERWA.  The District Authority will provide the Construction Permit and authorisation for land use change for the 
housing developments as well as permits to harvest forest and transport forest products. An EIA certificate is also 
required and has already been pro vided by RDB. Approval is also required for irrigation works and for works using 
the surface waters (e.g. rainwater harvesting) and will be obtained from the Minister in charge of water resources. 
The Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB), in collaboration with A griculture and Livestock Inspection and Certification 
Services/MINAGRI will provide permits to import forest plant material and seeds. There are also comprehensive 
regulations  governing  all phases  of the procurement  process  including  publication  of opportu nities  and notification  of 
award decisions prior to contract execution. These regulations along with a comprehensive list of permits required 
can be found in Annex 4 of the legal study (accessed via the link in Annex 1). Section 3 of the PIM (also accessed  
via the link) also includes coverage of and makes provision for all of the regulations applying to the project in order 
to comply  with the Rwandan  regulatory  framework and  meet  MOE’s  obligations  under  the AMA  and any future  FAA.  
Foreign exchange regulations: Exchange control is administered by the Bank of Rwanda and is governed by 
Exchange Control. Both the current account and capital account have been liberalised. All residents and non - 
residents are free to bring in and take out  capital with minimal restriction.


---
*Page 47*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 93  
 
 
Taxation and insurance: As a Government institution, MOE is required to follow the Rwandan constitution89 and 
abide by the national regulatory and tax framework. As the recipient of the GCF grant, MOE will therefore be liable 
for taxes on goods and services in accordance with national law. For VAT, under Law no 37/2012 of 09/11/2012 
goods and services will be zero - rated since they are for a project funded by a partner that has a signed agreement 
with the Government of Rwanda.  
In the design, any other tax liabilities will be borne by the government and have been built into project financing 
plans and audit accounts and records of tax payments will be used to monitor the ongoing compliance with national 
tax laws. The PMU will check that all necessary insurance cover is in place prior to signing contracts with service 
providers.  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail  the governance structure of the project, including but not limited to the organization structure, roles and responsibilities of the 
project management unit, steering committee, executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure. Also des cribe which of these structures 
already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish them.  
Arrangements for External Financing  
MOE is the Accredited Entity as per the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed with the GCF in June 2016. 
As the designated Party in the AMA, MOE will sign the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) related to this project. As 
Per Article 30 of the Ministerial Order N°001/16/10/Tc of 26/01/2016 Relating To Financial R egulations, all External 
Financing Agreements with the Government of Rwanda must be signed by the Minister of Finance and therefore 
MINECOFIN will be a co -signatory party of the FAA.  
Funds received by MOE under the FAA will be paid directly into a project bank account under the management of 
MOE.  
Implementation arrangements between AE, Executing Entity (EE), Gicumbi district and implementing 
partners  
MOE in its role as the Accredited Entity has the overall responsibility and oversight for the project includ ing project 
implementation and supervision, financial management, and project monitoring and reporting. It is responsible for:  
1. Liaising with MINECOFIN on the External Funding  arrangements;  
2. Receiving funds from GCF, distributing funds to the Executing  Entity;  
3. Chairing the Project Steering  Committee;  
4. Accounting for funds under its  disposition;  
5. Preparing project lifecycle plans and budgets;  
6. Preparing annual plans and budgets;  
7. Receiving and reviewing quarterly financial and progress reports from all entiti es which have received funds under the  GCRDP;  
8. Carrying out due diligence on all entities which receive funds under the  GCRDP;  
9. Managing fiduciary and project risks;  and 
10. Providing reports to the GCF on all the  above.  
MOE will sign a Fund management service level agreement with MINECOFIN to enable it to manage GCF 
requirements under AMA, FAA and Rwanda law. MOE will perform a Quality Assurance role to ensure work done 
under the project is delivered to the appropriate quality standards and that procedures are appropriately 
implemented within the project. The quality assurance process typically deals with three competing dimensions of a 
project: time available to complete a project; cost/available budget; and scope of work. Quality Assurance (QA) will 
be achieve d through a three -stage process: 1) Develop a Quality Assurance Plan (to be updated annually); 2) 
Collect data; and 3) Analyse Project Quality. More detail is provided in the PIM. As the QA function will be carried 
out by MOE, the costs will not be part of  the project budget. These will be covered by the AE Fee.  
The Executing Entity of the project, FONERWA, will have overall responsibility for implementation of the Project. 
MOE will conclude a Subsidiary Agreement with FONERWA for the implementation of proj ect activities. The 
agreement will set out the obligations of the Executing Entity in implementing the project activities. An internal rules 
and procedures document will be developed as part of the implementation tools for the operationalization of an 
autonomous FONERWA under the new law. This will be endorsed by the Board of Directors of FONERWA following 
their appointment. FONERWA will appoint a Legal Advisor to i) draft and negotiate contracts for MOE; ii) work with 
Procurement Unit; iii) monitor complia nce; ii) to advise on implementation; iii) to comment on project contracts at all 
levels and iv) to report on legal aspects of the project.  
The implementation and contractual arrangements between MOE, FONERWA, Gicumbi District and implementing 
partners as well as the flow of funds is shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
89 Article 81 of the constitution of the Republic of Rwanda stipulates that no exemption from or reduction of tax may be granted  unless 
authorised by law.


---
*Page 48*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 93  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Implementation arrangements, contractual arrangements and the flow of funds  
Note: GCF Proceeds will not be used for sub -grants, only for “goods, services and works” as to be determined in the FAA  
MOE will be the rec ipient of bank transfers from the GCF. An account for GCF funds already exists in the National 
Bank of Rwanda under MOE as the recipient and user of the PPF funds. The Minister of Finance will sign the Fund 
management service level agreement in reference t o the FAA to ensure that the Ministry of Finance is informed of 
and acknowledges external funds flowing to the country.  
FONERWA will be responsible for:  
1. Planning the project  activities;  
2. Receiving funds from the Accredited  Entity;


---
*Page 49*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 93  
 
 
3. Disbursing grant funds to implementing entities and other service providers, after due  diligence;  
4. Establishing and staffing the Project Management Unit in  FONERWA;  
5. Funding and contracting (in conjunction with  the District authorities) the staffing of a district -based Project Implementation  Unit; 
6. Accounting for funds under its disposition, receiving reports from implementing entities and other service providers to which  funds have 
been  disbursed;  
7. Preparing annual workplans and  budgets;  
8. Organising oversight and audit (internal, financial,  procurement);  
9. Managing the provision of funding and payment of contractors and consultants engaged under the  Project;  
10. Providing support to the District (including training a nd coaching for District officers engaged in the implementation of the project, 
including the payment of allowances at the authorised Government of Rwanda  rates);  
11. Managing the provision of funding and payment of contractors engaged under the Project;  and 
12. Financing community grants and managing a Community Adaptation Fund (the grant award mechanism is described in Annex 1 of the 
PIM).  
The main implementing entity within Local Government level will be Gicumbi District , which will be 
responsible for delivering  the core activities for all components. The activities will be integrated into the Single Action 
Plan and will be reported on at the District Management Meetings, chaired by the Executive Secretary. The 
contractual arrangements between FONERWA and the Dis trict will be managed through a Cooperation Agreement 
provided in the PIM. Gicumbi District will be responsible for:  
11. Ensuring  that project  activities  to be delivered  during  the next financial  year are incorporated  into the District  Single  Action  Plan and 
Imihigo agreements;  
12. Ensuring that activities to be funded by the District (see co -financing sheet in Annex 2 – project budget) are incorporated into the 
District budget and Procurement Plans as necessary;  
13. Ensuring that the key heads of department take owne rship of and implement the agreed  activities;  
14. Participating in the recruitment of staff for the Project Implementation  Unit; 
15. Providing office accommodation for the Project Implementation  Unit; 
16. Ensuring that all expropriation and land acquisition costs, livelihoods restoration and associated costs are incorporated into District 
plans and budget;  
17. Timely approval of permits for forestry activities, tree felling and construction works at Kaniga and  Kabeza;  
18. Timely approval of other permits that may be require d in the execution of this  Project  
19. Convening Community Coordination Committees under the chairmanship of the Sector Executive Secretary and with volunteer 
participation from NGOs, civil society and representatives of womens’ organizations and organising me etings with the population at the 
sites where the project activities are to be performed before implementation  
20. Participating in training events related to gender responsiveness which will be organised by  FONERWA  
21. Ensuring female headed households are priori tised in the allocation criteria for social  housing;  
22. Ensuring women are provided with training under the projects, which may include women -only training  events;  
23. Ensuring women are able to apply for and access work opportunities on an equal basis to men (su ch as house building  etc). 
 
Proposed governance structure of the project  
The governance arrangements for the project at the national level are designed to build upon the 
institutional structure of MOE (the accredited entity) and FONERWA (the executing entity). An inter -ministerial 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the  Permanent Secretary will be established by MOE to serve as the 
project’s coordination and decision -making body. The PSC will ensure the project delivers its outputs and achieves 
its outcomes. The Committee will meet on a quarterly basis to review project progress and evaluations, facilitate 
implementation (ensuring the necessary resources and support are provided in a timely manner) and provide 
guidance to the PMU. The Steering Committee will also facilitate effective coordination between the key 
stakehold ers at the national and district levels and ensure the project aligns with Government strategies and 
programs. The Steering Committee will reflect the multi -sectoral nature of the project, and will include senior -level 
representatives from GoR and partner organisations. The PSC will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, MOE (or 
the Director of Finance, MOE) with representatives from: MININFRA, Rwanda Housing Authority, REG, REMA, 
RWFA, MINALOC, Rwanda Development Board, MINAGRI, RAB, NAEB, MINECOFIN, FONER WA, Vice Mayor of 
Economic Affairs, Gicumbi District. The PSC meeting minutes shall be taken in the format prescribed in the PIM.  
Project Management Unit  
FONERWA will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU) which will be housed internally within 
FONERWA.  The PMU will be responsible for delivering the project and will be ultimately responsible for the timely 
delivery of inputs and outputs and for coordination of project activities. The PMU will use FONERWA’s financial and 
management systems to administer t he GCF funds and draw down on the technical assistance available through its 
call down list of consultants and the climate change unit in REMA. This will maximise efficiencies of existing 
processes but importantly ensure strong fiduciary standards are adhe red to and robust monitoring and evaluation is 
carried out, in accordance with existing FONERWA requirements. The PMU will comprise a number of technical 
specialists – providing either full time or part time inputs including:  
24. Team  Leader  
25. Strategic  Advisor  
26. Financial Management  Specialist  
27. Procurement  Officer


---
*Page 50*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 93  
 
 
28. Accountant  
29. Legal Advisor  
30. Internal  Auditor  
31. Communications  Specialist  
32. Office Manager/ admin assistant for Kigali  
Terms of reference for these posts are provided in the PIM.  
The Team Leader will ensure the efficient disbursement and use of GCF funds and the timely delivery of 
project inputs and outputs. S(he) will also coordinate all project activities and will coordinate Steering Commi ttee 
meetings, technical assistance and contractors by assisting in recruiting and contracting of project personnel and 
consultant services, sub -contracting and procuring equipment in accordance with Government guidance and 
procedures. S(he) will prepare q uarterly progress reports, work plans and budgets which will be reviewed by the 
Steering Committee. All reporting will be in accordance with the project sponsor’s (MOE) rules and regulations with 
support from the Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (distr ict based –see below) and the Finance Manager. The 
Financial Management and Procurement Specialists will be responsible for contracts, procurement, book -keeping 
and day to day financial aspects of project implementation.  
In addition to the above arrangemen ts, responsibility for export promotion of tea and coffee lies with the Province 
Zone Coordination Office, who must also participate in the management of the tea and coffee interventions.  
Capacity to implement a major new project within Local Government is  limited: staff are fully engaged on their 
existing activities. For this reason a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) based in Gicumbi and staffed with specialists 
will be appointed to support the District in the implementation of the project. The specialist s will be contracted to 
FONERWA, however they will be dedicated to work in and for the District and the District management will be fully 
involved in the recruitment of the contracted specialists. The role of the PIU is to support the District in (i) techn ical 
implementation of the project (ii) capacity building and (ii) administrative support activities including M&E data 
collection and lesson learning. Eight positions (comprising full time and part time positions) are proposed:  
33. Watershed protection and agriculture  specialist  
34. Forest management  specialist  
35. Infrastructure  specialist  
36. Climate resilient agriculture  specialist  
37. An M&E  specialist  
38. Social safeguards specialist (including  gender)  
39. Environmental safeguards  specialist  
40. Trainer (capacity building specialist, to work with communities and District staff to ensure that sustainable capacity is instituted at all 
levels and that lessons learned are captured and reflected in on -going  plans)  
41. Administrator for Gicumbi  office  
The PIU team will be recruited in the first 6 months of the project and will be retained until the end of the project 
(however, not all of the posts will be full time and not all will be required until the end of the project). ToRs for the 
PIU and its organisational diagram are provided  in the PIM.  
Local entities will identify, prepare, and/or supervise activities supported by and compatible with the 
project. Many activities supported by the project will require full engagement will communities, for example, 
construction of terraces and settlements and community members will be provided with employment opportunities 
and training. Whilst procurement of project activities will be carried out primarily by central or District Implementation 
Teams, the communities will be heavily involved in t he selection and oversight of activity execution. Further, some 
activities will be carried out at the local level by community based organisations and their members, for which 
community -based procurement procedures will be used. Community -based organisatio ns will also be involved in 
monitoring and evaluation of project activities, in line with the philosophy of the project to promote participatory M&E 
and engaging the direct beneficiaries to ensure, for example, that: women have an equal opportunity to bene fit from 
livelihood activities; and opportunities for house purchase are fairly applied.  
It is therefore expected that the specialists in the Project Implementation Unit will engage extensively at the 
community level and the Unit will have a budget to faci litate working in the communities. In order to ensure that 
there are multiple ways for the communities to engage with the project sector -specific Community Consultation 
Committee (CCC) is proposed to be established in each sector where the project is being  implemented. The CCC 
will provide a platform for sector and community leaders to engage with farmers and other community members for 
each site. Activities would cover  
42. Planning and M&E of project activities at community level;  
43. Community discussions, commun ity consultations;  
44. Mobilising community participation and facilitating  communication;  
45. Output evaluation, lesson learning;  and 
46. An independent point of entry for the grievance  process.


---
*Page 51*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 93  
 
 
The CCC will be chaired by the Sector Executive Secretary and Secretary will be the Sector Governance Officer. 
Membership will include Community representatives and representatives from CSOs and NGOs, Church Groups; 
Sector & Cell Representatives from the Woman’s Forum; Sector and Cell Representatives for people with 
disabilities/marginalised groups. Meetings will be every quarter, attended by the Project Implementation Unit Team 
and will as much as possible align with and involve the Joint Action Developme nt Forum as applicable. The project 
will pay facilitation for people attending.  
The construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements  
The activities and funding will be programmed through the PMU but will largely be managed and 
imple mented through relevant partner organisations. The PMU will manage a small proportion of the services 
provision directly, such as technical advice and capacity building provision. The main partners in implementation are 
expected to include but are not limi ted to: The Wood Foundation, Rwanda Housing Association, Rwanda Agricultural 
Board, National Agricultural Export Development Board, Send A Cow Rwanda and the University of Technology and 
and Arts of Byumba. Additional partners may be identified during the inception phase. The following 
Ministries/agencies through their Special Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) will also be involved in supporting 
the different work streams and integrating the results from project interventions into policy  and planning dec isions:  
47. MINAGRI, RAB and NAEB – low regret resilient tea options and other agricultural  interventions;  
48. REMA and Rwanda Meteo – climate and weather  service;  
49. RWFA – sustainable forest management;  and 
50. MININFRA, Rwanda Housing Authority and REG – low carbon  settlements.  
SPIUs are specific implementing entities established within Ministries to deliver projects. As such they have 
structure that is dedicated to delivering projects for which the ministry is responsible. These SPIUs will be the first 
opportunity t o engage Ministries in project delivery and enhanced ownership and sustainability.  
To increase uptake and replication of the project interventions the PMU will ensure that results are 
communicated through Sector Working Groups (SWGs). The SWGs provide a fo rum for dialogue that includes 
development partners who intervene in the sector as determined by the GoR division of labour modality, ownership 
and accountability around the development agenda by a multi -stakeholder group at the sector level. These groups 
build synergies in policy formulation, implementation and undertake biannual joint sector reviews as a part of high 
level monitoring of implementation that feeds into the EDPRS2 results framework. The project will regularly report 
results to the SWGs and p rovide inputs as a measure for continuous improvement of project delivery.  
Gicumbi district office will oversee and coordinate the implementation of project activities in Gicumbi. The 
Vice Mayor (Economic Affairs) will oversee interventions with assistance  from the senior management team 
including the Executive Secretary and Director of Planning while district technical staff will provide technical support 
where needed and report on progress. In addition, the District Joint Action Development Forum (JADF) w ill support 
and assist local stakeholder engagement with the project. JADFs bring together Central and Local Government 
institutions, Development Partners, Civil Society and the Private Sector involved in district development and play an 
important role in implementing the Government’s Decentralised Governance and Service Delivery Policy in 
decentralising budgets, decision making and interventions to the district level. The project targets will be integrated 
into the annual District performance contract ( Imihigo) which focuses on key indicators that are closely monitored 
and reported regularly in national forums including those presided over by the President of the Republic and/or the 
Prime Minister. The contractual agreements between the PMU and the partner organisations and any due diligence 
and credit analysis (if required) will be undertaken during the inception phase.  
 
C.8. Timetable of Project Implementation  
Please provide a project implementation timetable in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for  illustrative purposes. If the table format below is 
used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Section H. In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required acti vities will be completed.  
Detailed workplans for each component are provided i n Annex 2.


---
*Page 52*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 93  
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project, in consideration of other alternatives.  
Rwanda is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change. The expected impacts on 
climate change in Rwanda are well documented in the national communications to UNFCCC, the Stockholm study 
and the recent climate vulnerability analysis.  High levels of poverty, a shortage of land and rapid population growth 
combined with Rwanda’s hilly topography are creating huge pressures on its natural resources. Climate change 
impacts will combine with these anthropogenic factors to significantly dama ge Rwanda’s growth and development 
with implications for economic and social stability in the country as well as the region. Urgent action is needed to 
deliver the national strategies that have been developed by the Government.  
As one of the poorest countr ies in the world, Rwanda does not have the necessary financial resources to 
adopt the programmes of action needed to deliver national priorities for green growth and climate 
resilience set out in the EDPRS II, the GGCRS and the NAPA. There is high potentia l to shift Rwanda to LCCR 
development pathway but this will require a substantial investment of resources. As a least developed country, 
Rwanda needs external financing to fund the additional net economic costs of climate change, and deliver its vision 
of a low carbon route to development. Climate change is already affecting large numbers of vulnerable households 
throughout Rwanda particularly those dependent on rain -fed agriculture. The upfront investment costs needed to 
shift Rwanda toward more climate re silient green growth are a significant barrier for pursuing these development 
pathways. A GCF contribution is therefore crucial to build on the progress Rwanda has made so far and take this 
project forward. Whilst National Budget contributions currently fa cilitate a step by step delivery of LCCR 
development, GCF funding will enable the immediate roll out of proposed interventions, thereby i) enabling rapid 
delivery of climate resilience; and ii) providing immediate information with which to inform the wider  national 
development agenda. The GoR has received financial assistance in the past from a variety of climate funds (LDCF, 
Adaptation Fund etc.) and bilateral agencies (DFID, KfW etc.) but the ongoing and projected need for funding 
exceeds the capability o f these funds many of which have introduced country caps due to a shortage of funds. For 
example, a study by the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) financed by DFID on economics of climate change 
projected that Rwanda will need between USD 50 – 300 mill ion per year up to 2030 to address current and future 
impacts of climate change on economic growth. The projected amount refers to additional resources beyond the 
current levels of development aid and as such happens to be exactly what climate finance must  be available to 
address.  
Rwanda needs GCF support now to avoid the predicted higher costs of adapting to climate change in the 
future. Failing to act now will result in higher costs downstream from damage caused by extreme weather events 
and the additiona l costs of supporting higher numbers of poor households affected by lower agricultural production 
associated with erratic rainfall patterns and rising temperatures. For example, without effective intervention now, 
Rwanda’s  planned  expansion  of the tea sector will take place  without  adequate  consideration  of climate  risk. GCF  is 
mandated to support developing countries in limiting their greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to the impacts of 
climate change. If the needs of Rwanda are taken into account considering it’s lack of financial resources and that 
is particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, there is a strong case for GCF  support.  
Supporting the proposed project will demonstrate the fund’s commitment to enabling developing  countries, such as 
Rwanda, that have demonstrated high levels of commitment, ownership, capability and fiduciary management to 
manage their own LCCR growth agenda. Evidence has already been presented by the Adaptation Fund showing 
that direct finance thro ugh countries like Rwanda is more cost effective than channelling funds through multilateral 
agencies with quicker start up times and lower transaction costs, the underlying rationale for direct access of 
climate finance by developing countries. With robus t systems already in place and a strong track record in resource 
management, the fund can minimise its risk and maximise the impact of its funding.  
The proposed interventions have been designed with significant stakeholder participation and designed in 
a cost effective way to ensure sustainability of outcomes. Supporting climate resilient tea production and forest 
services and products will ensure that some of the most vulnerable households in the district participate and benefit 
from the project. The innov ative approaches put forward will also showcase what is possible and the knowledge 
management component will facilitate effective lesson learning and communication of results to maximise the 
uptake of successful approaches. Directly financing MOE (and henc e FONERWA) also means that expertise 
developed during the project is internalised to a national institution that can gain the capacity to promote uptake 
more widely and is already mandated to coordinate climate finance at the national level. The proposed i nterventions 
are well aligned with GCF funding priorities and meet the investment criteria as set out in Section E.  
D.2. Exit Strategy


---
*Page 53*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 93  
 
 
Please explain how the project sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project is implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, 
taking into consideration the long -term financial viability demonstrated in E.6.3 . This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance 
of physical assets (if applicable).  
As previously outlined, the project aligns to national and sectoral development strategies with high level 
commitment, ensuring sustainability is built into  the design. These include the National Strategy for 
Transformation, and the National Strategy for Climate Change and Low Carbon Development (the Green Growth 
and Climate Resilience Strategy GGCRS), as well as sector strategies including the Programme for Transformation 
of Agriculture (Phase IV), the National Forest Policy, National Disaster Management Policy (MIDIMAR, 2012, 
Energy Sector Strategic Plan, and the Urbanisation and Rural Settlement Sector Strategic Plan (2012 – 2017).  
There is high level of Go R commitment to the project objectives which builds in sustainability to the project design 
and ensures ownership beyond the end of GCF funding. The inclusion of mainstreaming interventions ensure that 
successful climate actions embed into current and futu re sector plans and continue beyond the end of the project 
further strengthening the sustainability.  
The project will embed deliverables in local performance contracts, budgets, procurement and 
development plans to create commitment to project goals at the  district, sector and cell level. This will 
ensure project participants (district authorities, local communities, contractors etc.) have a shared vision of 
outcomes and are committed to delivery timelines and objectives. The use of local performance contra cts is 
widespread and accepted throughout Rwanda and has been shown to be an effective means of delivering 
development targets. Moreover, integrating the deliverables within district budgets, procurement and development 
plans ensures that resources are pro perly allocated and administered within existing systems and structures. At the 
community level, the project will establish tripartite contracts between the project, the communities and the 
district/sector authorities to define roles, responsibilities and set objectives at the local level.  
The financial structure of the project and the individual interventions have been designed to ensure long - 
term sustainability (see Section E6.1 and E6.3). Interventions has been chosen that will have financial viability in 
the long run beyond the Fund intervention period, and in cases where demonstration interventions have been 
selected, separate activities will ensure their continued uptake. The project also has focused available finance 
towards barriers to adaptation an d mitigation, to enhance the enabling environment, and thus ensure longer -term 
impact. For example, under component 3, the cost per housing unit (for a 4 room house plus a kitchen and 
bathroom) is USD 11,562 in Kabeza90. This compares to the current cost o f an IDP house which is USD 9300.  
Although the cost is higher, there are considerable design benefits (set out in section C1). The cost per unit is 
therefore very reasonable considering the quality of building which means this approach is scalable across t he IDP 
programme as a social housing model but also beyond as an affordable home purchase in line and even lower than 
existing house prices for similar properties. A detailed cost breakdown of the development of climate resilient 
settlements has been provi ded in an ancillary sheet on the budget in Annex 2.  
The strong emphasis on local capacity building will create the skills and expertise needed to shift to adapt 
to climate change and adopt low carbon development. Equipping rural communities with skills in climate 
resilient agriculture, forestry and forest enterprises, land husbandry etc. along with providing opportunities to use 
these skills in paid permanent employment will enable them to reduce their dependency on farming and provide a 
long-term solution to the over -cultivation of marginal lands in the target areas which exacerbates and contributes to 
climate vulnerability. By partnering with cooperatives and local communities, the project will create new economic 
opportunities for climate vulnerable house holds around key sectors that can grow and flourish in Gicumbi and 
establish a foothold for climate resilient livelihoods.  
Adopting a participatory approach will root ownership of the interventions firmly in local communities. The 
project will be based on principles of local empowerment and implemented by grassroots organisations such as 
farmer groups, community based organisations and local NGOs with the support of local government. The success 
of the project will depend on the ownership and implementation  by the District authority. Engaging communities in 
the design and implementation of the project and creating local employment and enterprise development, will 
empower and build capacity of local people to adapt to climate change risks. Local communities h ave been widely 
consulted during the design exercise and will continue to play a significant role as the interventions evolve. A 
stakeholder engagement strategy will be developed during the inception phase and opportunities identified where 
local people ca n play a leadership role in implementation. The project will establish community -based structures to 
ensure the ongoing operation and maintenance of physical assets. To ensure the sustainability of the small -scale 
infrastructure introduced by the project ( water harvesting facilities, biogas, reed beds etc.), the project will establish 
a variety of committees at the sector and cell level to manage and maintain the structures. The role of the 
committees will be to follow up, monitor, maintain and rehabilitate  the small -scale infrastructure after the end of the 
project (see 3.3 in Section C.3).  
 
90 Excludes the cost of works supervision which covers both the housing and the communal green  infrastructure.


---
*Page 54*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PA GE 53 OF 93  
 
 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the proposed  project against each of the 
Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and indicative assessment  factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, 
should be addressed where relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in secti on B.2.  
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub -criteria and assessment factors in the Fund’s 
investment framework . When applicable, specify the degree to which the project avoids lock -in of long -lived, high emission or climate -vulnerable 
infrastructure.  
The project will have a significant impact on adaptive capacity and resilience among vulnerable groups as 
well as increased awareness of climate threats and risk -reduction processes. The main adaptation b enefits 
will accrue to vulnerable communities primarily engaged in agriculture on Gicumibi’s slopes, achieved through 
improved soil and water management, forestry and agroforestry which reduce erosion and the reduced 
vulnerability to catastrophic events af fecting production systems. Creation of new/green economic opportunities 
will enable 75,000 people dependent on rain -fed cultivation of marginal lands to transition to diversified, climate 
resilient livelihoods. Moreover, the agriculture interventions have  a high impact potential through the targeting of 
highly vulnerable small -holder farmers reaching 1800 smallholders, 4900 tea farmers and 2500 coffee farmers in 
Gicumbi, as well as 8000 tea farmers and 5000 coffee farmers nationally. By including support f or integrating the 
use of climate and weather information into decision -making by farmers, the project will also build resilience and 
enable farmers to better plan planting and application of inputs. This will increase the resilience of the agriculture 
sector, including Rwanda’s major source of exports tea and coffee (which represent 25% of all exports by value) 
and thus contribute to national development objectives and climate resilient growth. In all an estimated 150,000 
people will be direct beneficiarie s of the project.  
Mitigation interventions target high emission sectors and so also have high impact potential. Investments 
in forestry, efficient technologies for cooking, and increased efficiencies in tea factories will result in significant 
reductions in emissions, as well as delivering wider ecosystem services benefits. The most significant impact will 
be achieved through improvements to the operating system of tea factories across Rwanda, with energy efficiency 
avoiding up to 70,105 tCO2e over the cou rse of the project. The tea sector (factories) is identified as the key 
priority in the NAMA for reducing current industrial emissions and the cost -effectiveness of options to reduce 
emissions is extremely high. The support for biogas and improved cookstov es also has high impact potential, 
given the widespread use of inefficient cooking methods using wood and charcoal, with expected emission 
reductions of 59,261 tCO2e over the 6 year period in Gicumbi. The forestry and agro -forestry will also result in a 
significant reduction in emissions (70,060 t CO2eq from agroforestry and 69,986 t CO2eq from forestry) over the 
project period. However, all of these interventions will generate additional emission savings (after year 6) as a 
result of these interventions, t hus the total emission benefits of the project is much larger than this.  
In all cases, the cost -effectiveness of these interventions is high, as presented in Section E6.1.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators   
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  45,620 t CO 2eq (annual savings, averaged 
over the 6 years of project)  
 
Lifetime  273,720 tCO 2 eq over the project lifetime (6 
years)  
 
• Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender (reduced 
vulnerability or increased  resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total population, 
disaggregated by gender (adaptation  only)   
Total  150,000 direct beneficiaries (incl. 78,450 
women) and 381,465 indirect beneficiaries91 
 
Percentage 
(%) 96% (incl. 52.3% women) of the population 
living in the 9 target sectors (150,000 / 
156,008)  
 
91 Indirect beneficiaries include: a) farmers outside the target area using weather and climate services to increase productivity 
and reduce losses from weather and climate variability; b) farmers outside the target area using IPM surveillance information  to 
reduce pest and disease  attack; c) Farmers adopting CRA after farmer to farmer cross visits and viewing participatory videos; d) 
Policy makers and practitioners participating in workshops; g) GoR and NGOs trained in climate resilient forestry, watershed 
management and green sett lements; e) People benefiting from climate resilience plans adopted and implemented; f) People 
benefitting from forestry mainstreaming and new investments. The figure does not include g) Individuals employed in forest 
processing and forest product enterpri ses beyond the target area; h) the wider population outside the target area in relation to 
their reduced exposure to soil erosion, landslide, flooding and watercourse  siltation;


---
*Page 55*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 93  
 
 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  The climate impacts of the Project will be measured using the following Fund -level impact indicators 
and end of project targets:  
• M3.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent reduced as a result of Fund - funded projects (expected 133,674t  
CO 2eq over the project  lifetime)  
• M4.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2eq) reduced or avoided (including increased removals) as  
a result of Fund -funded projects – forest and land -use sub -indicator (expected 140,046t CO 2eq over the  
project  lifetime)  
• A1.2 numbe r of males and females benefitting from the adoption of diversified, climate -resilient livelihood 
options (expected 150,000 of which 78,450 will be  women)  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. Describe how the project indicator values compare to the appropriate 
benchmarks (i.e. the indicator values for a similar project in a comparable context).  
The carbon savings have been estimated relative to baseline emissions. This has drawn on previous estimates in 
the sec ond national communication of Rwanda (2012) and IPCC guidelines and emission factors, with global 
warming potential (GWP) taken from IPCC AR5 (2013). The emission reductions are presented as below. Note 
that emission benefits during the project period (6 y ears) have been annualised for the indicator reported above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The methodology for producing these estimates is detailed below.  
 
(1) Household and Cooking Energy carbon saving calculation methodology. The methodology for estimating emission reductions for improved 
cookstoves and biogas is based on:  
• Quantity of wood saved per year in tonnes of wood. Tier 1 models save 23% fire wood per year; Tier 3 gasifier models save 40% , relative 
to current baseline of energy use in cook ing. Estimated from national inventory analysis and existing cookstove programme  data.  
Activity  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6  tCO 2e (over project  
6yr lifetime)  
Cooking energy (1)         
No. units Installed and 
operating (cumulative)         
Biogas domestic   90 240 420 660 900  
Biogas institutional    1 2 2 2  
Stoves Tier 1+Tier 2   1950  5850  11700  17550  23400   
Stoves Tier 3   390 975 1755  2730  3900   
Stoves institutional   8 24 40 40 40  
CO 2e savings         
Biogas domestic   485 1292  2262  3554  4847  12439  
Biogas institutional   0 50 100 100 100 350 
Stoves Tier 1+Tier 2   794 2382  4764  7147  9529  24616  
Stoves Tier 3   276 690 1243  1933  2762  6905  
Stoves institutional   787 2361  3934  3934  3934  14951  
TOTAL tCO 2e  2342  6776  12303  16668  21172  59261  
        
Agroforestry (2)         
Hectares (Cumulative)  1468  3916  6363  7832  8811  9790   
TOTAL tCO 2e 2695  7186  11677  14371  16168  17964  70060  
        
Tea factory energy 
efficiency (3)         
Mulindi tea factory         
Baseline tCO 2e 10600  10600  10600  10600  10600  10600   
Energy efficiency         
Tier 1 CO 2e savings   4175  4175  4175  4175  4175  20877  
Tier 2 CO 2e savings   431 431 431 431 431 2156  
TOTAL tCO 2e  4607  4607  4607  4607  4607  23033  
National tea factories         
Tier 1 CO 2e uptake    11768  11768  11768  11768  47072  
TOTAL tCO 2e  4607  16375  16375  16375  16375  70105  
        
IDP Village (4)         
Biogas (community)         
TOTAL tCO 2e   1077  1077  1077  1077  4308  
        
Forestry (5)         
TOTAL tCO 2e 15,102  13,799  11,904  10,209  9,523  9,449  69,986  
        
TOTAL  17,797  27,934  47,808  54,335  59,810  66,037  273,720


---
*Page 56*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 93  
 
 
• Multiplied by the fraction of non -renewable biomass saved by the project activity (savings from  sustainably which is set at the UNFCCC 
default value or Rwanda of 98%92) times by Emissions factor (EF) for the substitution of non -renewable biomass by similar consumers  
(81.6 tCO 2/TJ) . 
• Plus the Net Calorific  Value  (NCV)  of the non-renewable woody  biomass  percentage  (IPCC  default  NCV  of 0.015  TJ/tonne  for wood  fuel).  
• Emission  reductions  for domestic  biogas  are based  on 5.385  tCO2e/digester/year,  based  on data from the Hivos  carbon  programme  2010 
(the Rwanda national biomass programme), relative to baseline emissions from energy use in cooking, with institutional biogas leading to 
savings 10 times the carbon emissions of a domestic  digester.  
 
(2) Net sequestration from agroforestry (agroforestry introduced in current areas of low quality agricultural pro duction) is taken as 0.5tC per ha  
per year93 and converted to  tCO 2e. 
 
(3) Tea factory emission factor methodology. A detailed energy audit was undertaken at the Mulindi tea factory to estimate curren t baseline 
emissions (included as a separate technical docume nt in supporting information). In summary this  found:  
• Annual firewood consumption is 14200 m3  (Eucalyptus)  
• Annual electricity consumption of grid electricity is 1860000 kWh (98% of electricity  consumed).  
• Annual diesel for genset of 10954 litres. Equivalent  genset power 42173 kWh and genset efficiency 0.35 on  site. 
• Diesel generation emissions are based on 74,100 kg CO2E / TJ fuel burned (IPCC 2006), with a generation efficiency of 35% for  grid 
(IPPC 2006). Site generation efficiency is assumed to be  36%.  
• Grid composition is assumed to be 60% hydro / methane, and 40% diesel generation (national data). The factory uses 1.86 GWh p.a. , of 
which 98% is from the grid. Emissions associated are 567 tonnes  CO 2E. 
• Wood fuel analysis (DETS) including wood moisture was derived from a laboratory analyses (see technical  annex).  
• The baseline CO 2E emissions from the Mulindi plant are 10,000 tonnes per annum. thermal, plus 32 t from on -site generation, plus 567 t  
from grid supplied electricity. Total annual baseline emissions are 10,600  t. 
An analysis was made of the energy efficiency savings possible from a set of options, based on figures above, a factory audit  and literature 
estimates. In summary this found the  potential energy efficiency improvements were:  
• Tier 1. Wood drying, 18% of boiler wood. Boiler efficiency – controls, 7% of boiler wood. Insulation - boiler, mains, dryer, 10% of boiler 
wood. Condensate / hot well 8% of boiler wood. VSD to boiler ID fan, 25% of boiler  power.  
• Tier 2. Dryer efficiency improvement, 5% of 2 dryers wood. Trough efficiency improvement, 20% of fan power. PV to roof, 6% of  bought in 
electricity..  
• For wood fuel savings, the current Mulindi wood forest plantation only provides enoug h for 50% of factory demand, hence the marginal 
reduction is assumed to come from non -renewable biomass (see cookstoves  above).  
The mainstreaming programme, provides capacity building and training to other tea factory owners in Rwanda, to encourage the uptake of Tier 
1 (good practice) energy efficiency improvements across the industry. The method for deriving these benefits was:  
• National emissions were estimated based on emission per unit of tea produced at Mulindi, scaled up based on national producti on 
(National Agricultural Export Board data) which reports that Mulundi produces 15% of national production (made  tea). 
• It is assumed that the provision of capacity and training leads to the uptake of Tier 1 (no regret) measures in other factori es at the nati onal 
level. Efficiency measures and efficiency improvements are assumed to deliver similar benefits to the analysis at Mulindi. It  is assumed 
that the rate of uptake is  50%.  
 
(4) IDP village methodology. The IDP houses have community biogas fitted. The methodo logical assumptions for estimating emissions benefits 
are the same as used for domestic biogas in (1)  above.  
 
(5) Forest Carbon sequestration and Agroforestry calculation methodology. Total Carbon sequestration in tCO 2 eq was calculated by the  
following  method : 
• Forecasting of forest stand growth, giving incremental volume of timber by  area:  
o For existing crops prior to their conversion during implementation, using average Eucalyptus Mean Annual Increment (MAI) of 
6.5m3/ha; 
o For renewed forest areas, during  implementation:  
• Eucalyptus based on conservative MAI of E. grandis;  
• Pine based on conservative MAI of Pinus caribaea;  
• Protection forest based on conservative MAI of Markhamia lutea and Maesopsis  emenii;  
• Conversion of volume to tonnes of wood, based on wood  density factors of 0.56 for Eucalyptus , 0.59 for Pinus and 0.43 for protection 
forest  species;  
• Conversion  of tonnes wood  to tCO 2 eq based  on DECC/DEFRA94 factors, and  adjusted  for wood  moisture  content,  assumed  to be 15%.  
Thus the equations used are:  
• Total  tCO 2 eq = ∑(Existing  Eucalyptus  tCO 2 eq + Renewed  Eucalyptus  tCO 2 eq + Renewed  Pine tCO 2 eq + Renewed  Protection  forest 
tCO 2 eq); 
• Existing  forest  tCO 2 eq = ∑Ha Existing  Eucalyptus x (MAI x  CF 1 x CF 2); 
• Renewed  forest  tCO 2 eq = ∑( (Ha renewed  Eucalytpus x (MAI x  CF 1 x CF 2) + (Ha renewed  Pine x (MAI x  CF 1 x CF 2) + (Ha renewed 
Protection x (MAI x CF 1 x CF 2)). 
Where,  
CF 1 = Conversion Factor from volume to tonnes wood and, 
CF 2 = Conversion Factor from Tonnes wood to tCO 2 eq. 
 
92 https://cdm.unfccc.int/DNA/fNRB/index.html.  93 Montagnini, F (ed) 2006 Environmental Services of Agroforestry Systems Yale University  Press.  
94 2012 Guidelines to DEFRA / DECC's GHG Conversion Factors. The 2012 Methodology Paper for Emission Factors.


---
*Page 57*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 93  
 
 
 
However, many of these interventions (notably forestry) will produce much larger lifetime emissions, thus the total 
emissions reductions from the investments are larger than shown above. Using the same methods, it is estimated 
that the total Cooking energy  (1) savings are 150,263 tCO 2e, the total agroforestry savings (2) are 107,785 tCO 2e, 
the total tea factory energy emissions savings (3) will be 163,746 tCO 2e, the total IDP Village (4) emission savings 
will be 10,769 tCO 2e and total Forest Carbon sequestration (lifetime) will be 431,681 tCO 2e. The total lifetime 
emissions are shown below.  
 
 
 
 
Describe how the project’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator values for a similar pr oject in a 
comparable context).  
A Project M&E team will be established during the inception phase to fully design the methodology and put in 
place best practices in data collection/measurement, analysis and reporting and systems for verification (MRV). 
Baselines  for project  level impact  indicators will  be calculated  in the inception  phase  for early  monitoring  purposes; 
they will be linked to all projects/interventions. Population and socio -economic data exists for all intervention 
areas.  
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or climate -resilient development pathways could be scaled -up and 
replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish it.  
The climate vulnerabilities and low adaptive capacity observed in Gicumbi are to varying degrees typ ical 
to other districts in Rwanda increasing the transferability of successful project interventions . Along with 
Gicumbi there are 10 other districts (one third of the districts in Rwanda) that are considered to be high risk for 
flooding and landslides95. Proposed interventions to reduce risks from flooding and landslides, improve land 
management and reduce dependency on rain -fed cultivation will therefore have strong potential for replication and 
scale up in other districts across Rwanda. Channelling funds  through Rwanda’s national climate fund will 
strengthen its capacity to coordinate climate finance and oversee climate compatible development in Rwanda 
while maximising opportunities for further scale and replication.  
Channelling the funds through Rwanda’s  climate finance architecture FONERWA also means that there is 
significant potential to scale up, replicate and sustain the results. Through FONERWA the project will create 
linkages and synergies with existing and planned climate relevant investments and a ctions for the efficient delivery 
of integrated results, institutional embedding of approaches and multiplier effects. By channelling funds through a 
competent national institution, GCF will enhance existing institutional capacity and facilitate improved c oordination 
of development interventions around climate adaptation and mitigation. For example, FONERWA already 
coordinates a series of demand driven investments into climate adaptation and mitigation around the country and 
has a knowledge management platf orm that ensures cross learning and information sharing.  
There is strong potential to cost effectively scale up, replicate and sustain the results of the project 
interventions beyond project completion. Much of the existing funding on adaptation has been t argeted 
towards existing types of development projects, which while beneficial, will not deliver the paradigm shift which is 
the goal of the GCF. This proposed investments are all scalable across Rwanda. The project has deliberately 
targeted investments to wards the key institutions that are driving the development of the respective sectors and 
each component includes mainstreaming activities that will support the national scale up of successful 
approaches. The investment in building capacity and mainstreami ng will support the ongoing replication of 
adaptation and mitigation strategies country -wide and is expected to make a lasting contribution to delivering the 
Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy. As the national climate fund, FONERWA is also unique ly placed 
to support scale up and replication at the national level though its existing portfolio of climate projects and the 
pipeline of projects that are under development. Importantly, the mainstreaming approach adopted will ensure that 
the components f eed into national and sector development plans, such that the interventions and information is 
embedded into policy and will deliver the paradigm shift.  
 
 
95 Burera, Rubavu, Nyabihu, Ngororero, Musanze, Rutsiro, Nyamagabe, Muhanga, Kamonyi and Bugesera, MIDIMAR data  2012  
Overall project  tCO 2e (over lifetime emissions)  
Lifetime emission reductions  864,244


---
*Page 58*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 93  
 
 
Forestry and watersheds: Forest coverage and woodlots in Gicumbi district are similar to those in other parts of 
the country and the best practice forest management methods, efficient cooking technology and the associated 
income generating activities linked to forest resources can easily be scaled up. The investments in forest renewal 
in Gicumbi are expected to demonstrate what best practice can achieve and combined w ith the capacity building 
and mainstreaming investments in component 4, this is expected to create an irreversible shift to improved forest 
management in other parts of Rwanda.  
Tea and coffee: these are Rwanda’s most important cash crops and support thousa nds of smallholders across 
the country. The proposed project is timely because production of tea is currently being scaled up across the 
country. The interventions have been designed to address key barriers to adaptation, including information and 
market f ailures, and build capacity at the national level, and will therefore ensure that the available resources 
deliver at scale. In addition to the 7,440 farmers benefitting directly, an estimated 357,735 indirect beneficiaries will 
also be reached through the mainstreaming which will cover the entire tea and coffee sectors. The move towards 
climate resilient export crops creates a paradigm shift, and has the potential for a transformative effect, moving 
towards a climate resilient export crop market in the coun try. Scaling up the tea drying efficiency measures across 
all 15 tea factories in Rwanda is expected to have a huge impact on GHG emissions because the baseline 
emissions in the tea sector – from energy use in tea factories - are expected to increase signi ficantly. Supporting 
the key institutions, NAEB and RAB during this expansion phase will enable many of the innovative approaches to 
be incorporated into sector planning. Partnering with The Wood Foundation, as the biggest producer of tea in 
Rwanda, also e nables successful approaches to be easily absorbed, replicated and scaled up in other tea estates 
owned by the Foundation influencing a significant amount of tea production in Rwanda. The proposed hand over 
to cooperatives which is built into The Wood Foun dation’s philanthropic plan also creates additional opportunities 
to embed good practice in climate resilient tea production into local structures. This investment therefore has the 
potential to have wide reaching impact across agricultural planning and po licy making.  
Settlements: The technologies being promoted for sustainable building materials production are simple and easily 
transferable and therefore have strong potential to continue beyond the end of the project. Extensive deposits of 
clay have been mapped across Rwanda which means that the compressed earth block technology could be 
replicated across the country to meet the high demand for building materials. The housing typologies and green 
infrastructure are designed for the typical sloping topograp hy of Rwanda and the approaches to low carbon, 
climate resilient construction are simple and can be easily replicated and scaled up country -wide. The improved 
surface water management and storage can also be applied in other parts of the country and will b e promoted and 
mainstreamed under component 4.  
A full Theory of Change which illustrates the inter -locking roles of the four components is provided in Section C.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Describe how the project contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning processes, or institutions.  
Channelling funds directly through MOE which is mandated to coordinate climate projects nationally and 
partner  GoR  agencies  at the sector  and local  levels  significantly  increases  the potential  for knowledge  and 
capacity development . With FONERWA already funding over 20 projects (listed in Annex 3), Rwanda is well 
positioned in grappling with the practical challenges of fostering such knowledge development. The GCF 
invest ment has the potential to accelerate this process by supporting the provision of high quality and very 
practical information and lessons on how to achieve GGCR development in a developing country. By being 
deliberately multi -sectoral and multi -disciplinary , providing coordination and demanding complementarity, the 
project will generate knowledge and understanding across multiple areas with multiple stakeholders which can be 
shared with other countries through organised knowledge exchange partnerships such a s south – south 
cooperation and inter Africa  dialogues.  
The project includes measures to transfer and mainstream the knowledge generated and lessons learned 
and ensure that the necessary capacity is developed within local and national institutions. For exa mple, the 
nursery and forest management demonstration sites are all located along roads and easily accessible. These will 
be used, i) as focal centres for training and capacity development and ii) as visit sites to show, and inform, other 
forestry stakehol ders (including key decision makers are forestry staff and professionals) improvements resulting 
through best practice. Monitoring systems will also include bi -annual documentation of changes in water quality, 
soil erosion reduction and landslides control to enable a systematic evaluation of success factors and challenges 
to inform replication and scale up. The GCF investment will support a range of other activities to support learning 
and knowledge development  including:  
o analysis and communication of the r esults of project  interventions;  
o production of knowledge products including (policy briefs, guidelines, extension materials  etc.);  
o farmer -to-farmer  fora; 
o gender -sensitive monitoring and evaluation system;  and


---
*Page 59*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 93  
 
 
o awareness building of new approaches and technologies with farmers as well as local planners and policy makers at the 
national level.  
These measures will strengthen the knowledge and capacity base for climate action and facilit ate dialogue for an 
effective climate response at the national level. The proposed investment in knowledge development, 
communication and uptake means there is real potential to create new markets in low carbon industries and for 
this project to be transfo rmational.  
Awareness building will also ensure that knowledge and information are shared widely, building wider 
support for climate adaptation and mitigation. The strong emphasis on monitoring, evaluation and lesson 
learning will also provide for continuou s feedback on impacts and results at the community level. Moreover, the 
communication of knowledge products will support lesson learning and sharing of best practices as well as the 
mainstreaming and replication of successful approaches. The integrated app roach will maximise learning and 
provide for a holistic understanding of factors influencing people’s capabilities to adapt and mitigate climate 
change. The fact that the project is consciously and deliberately designed to address interlinked sectors, 
vulnerabilities and development priorities reduces the risks associated with narrow interventions which can fail to 
address underlying barriers or related issues undermining delivery of results. Thus by seeking to address not only 
direct climate related threat s but the array of factors influencing these, the integrated design itself provides a 
greater assurance of the sustainable delivery of benefits and impact.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will  create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of private and public sector actors in 
low-carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the program. Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market d evelopmen t and 
transformation. Examples include: introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region; an d using innovative 
funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects  
The GCF investment will s trengthen the technical capacity of key government agencies, local NGOs, 
cooperatives and other key stakeholders to support new climate -resilient approaches and technologies and 
respond to climate change. Strengthening sectoral and local government agencie s will raise awareness and 
understanding of climate issues and provide a strong foundation for more informed policy making for increasing 
climate resilience. The project also targets barriers to the uptake of climate resilient approaches. There is a strong  
emphasis on ensuring the participation of multiple stakeholders including the Gicumbi district authority and civil 
society as well as the local community. The investments will increase the climate resilience of rural communities 
through an integrated wate rshed approach. Working closely with the district authority will ensure that planning and 
development at the local level takes account of climate change during and beyond project activities. Building 
capacity at the local level in enterprises such as nurse ry development, efficient cookstoves, biogas digesters etc. 
will foster the integration of climate -resilient approaches and technologies into key areas of the local economy 
creating new markets and livelihood opportunities. Additionally, partnering with se ctoral institutions in project 
delivery will facilitate the uptake and mainstreaming of climate analysis and successful approaches at the national 
level. The Wood Foundation will be a critical partner in taking forward successful innovative approaches beyo nd 
project completion because they have a long -term presence in -country and the financial and technical resources 
to do so.  
In terms of innovation and market development, the GCF investment will support the uptake of climate 
resilient technologies. This includes the roll out of 11 green technologies to enhance low -emission development 
in the construction and tea sectors which have strong potential to significantly reduce GHG emissions. Resilience 
interventions such as rain water harvesting, climate resili ent agriculture and the FONERWA managed community 
adaptation fund96 are also innovative and include measures not used before in Rwanda.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Describe how the project strengthens the national / local reg ulatory or legal frameworks to systematically drive investment in low -emission technologies 
or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, and/or improve climate -responsive planning and development.  
The Project supports the implementation and operationalisation of several key national policies and 
strategies, including the GGCRS, the NAPA and the NAMA. These are discussed in section C.1. A detailed 
review of national strategies and policies is also in cluded in the preparatory study reports in Annex 1. Rwanda has 
a comprehensive, coordinated and progressive legislative framework but there are areas for improvement 
particularly in generating and managing knowledge and information relevant to new and emer ging areas such as 
climate change and green economy. Operating at the higher echelons of government and co -located with the  
regulatory agency REMA, FONERWA is well placed to facilitate high level policy discussions, communicate the 
results of such studies and foster dialogue around mainstreaming climate change considerations into policies and  
 
96 Community grants for the CAF will be provided by FONERWA (no GCF finance will be used for the grants, GCF finance will 
only be used to provide the TA to support the  set up and operation of the  fund)


---
*Page 60*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 93  
 
 
regulatory frameworks to drive investment in low -emission technologies and activities and improve climate - 
responsive planning and development.  
Within the Environment and Natural Resources Sector improved provision of climate information and 
analysis will enhance the oversight of natural resources in Rwanda (water, lands, forests, nature reserves 
and biodiversity, mines and wetlands). This will he lp to ensure that existing policies on climate adaptation and 
mitigation are adequately integrated in planning, implementation and monitoring across all sectors of the national 
economy. For example, whereas afforestation and reforestation efforts have been  successful and follow policy 
direction, deforestation remains a challenge due in part to limited investments in alternatives to fuelwood use. The 
GCF investments in alternative energy options will provide cost effective low carbon solutions compatible wit h 
Rwanda’s green economy aspiration. This will create opportunities for strengthening the implementation of existing 
policy and regulatory framework particularly in ensuring enabling conditions for enforcement of existing laws as 
well as developing new one s to spur innovation in low carbon development areas. At the same time, the use of 
best practice guidelines and standards should also facilitate their uptake and enforcement via the institutional and 
contractual conditions used in forestry management. By p romulgating and promoting best practices within forestry 
and defining guidelines on where and how forestry should be practised, all relevant regulations and policies will be 
consolidated in a way that facilitates and supports their observance.  
 
E.3. Susta inable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
The Project is expected to deliver a wide range of co -benefits.  
Economic co -benefits: the promotion of ecosystem based approaches to mitigate and adapt to climate change 
will enable target households to address current climate threats to rain -fed agricultural production and improve 
food security. The investments in rural industries, agriculture  and forestry will directly benefit more than 86,000 
people  and includes  a strong  emphasis  on financial  and environmental  sustainability  to secure  long-term livelihood 
opportunities for local communities. The interventions have a positive benefit to cost ratio (>1) and a highly 
positive net present value, demonstrating the economic rate of return is high (see Section E.6.3). For those 
components that involve market sectors (settlements, tea energy efficiency, energy), the return on investment is 
high and d emonstrates their financial viability in the long -term. Other economic co -benefits  include:  
- Increased range of forest goods creating new potential market opportunities, including timber processing  factories;  
- Increase in value of tree nursery  seedlings;  
- Increased household incomes from new livelihood  opportunities;  
- Time savings due to improved access to water and  energy;  
- Reduced losses in productivity due to illness and reduced health care  costs;  
- Sustained productivity and export revenues from a climate r esilient tea and coffee sector;  and 
- Reduced loss and damage costs associated with impacts, response and rehabilitation costs from extreme weather events 
under current and future climate  change.  
Environmental co -benefits: Proposed interventions to restore d egraded habitats and improve the management 
of natural resources are expected to generate a wide range of environmental benefits. The project will promote a 
number of climate –resilient technologies and approaches that are expected to enhance ecosystem ser vices and 
agricultural productivity, and reduce GHG emissions, including soil and water conservation and restoration of 
degraded watersheds (through reforestation, agro -forestry, erosion control, promotion of efficient cookstoves etc.). 
With around 18,000h a under improved management by the end of the project, these investments will reduce 
erosion on steep slopes, improve soil stability and fertility leading to increased agricultural productivity and 
reduced siltation of Gicumbi’s rivers and other water bodi es. This will build resilience to extreme weather events 
such as flooding and landslides and the effects of variable rainfall on crop production and human settlements. The 
focus on climate resilient agriculture also ensures that the project activities alig n to sustainable development 
principles. Other environmental co -benefits include:  
- Increased forest ecosystem types with increased productivity and diversity of forest products (including NTFPs) which will 
reduce pressure on other forest and land area resources for the provision of timber and wood  products;  
- Increased forest and agro -forestry  cover;  
- Improved soil quality, water retention capacity and increased agricultural  productivity;  
- Improved biodiversity and preservation of ecosystem services in critical watersheds;  and 
- Reduced emissions from reforestation, energy efficiency in the industrial tea sector and the use of efficient  cookstoves.  
 
Social co -benefits including gender -sensitive development impact: Proposed interventions target some of the 
poorest and most vulnerable households in Rwanda and are expected to generate significant social benefits for 
local communities. The increased water and energy security resulting from improved watershed management and


---
*Page 61*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND  FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 93  
 
 
the adoption of efficient cooking technologies are expected to disproportionately benefit women and children as 
they are generally responsible for cooking and collecting water and fuel -wood. This will lead to improved he alth 
(from reduced indoor air pollution, as well as from clean and reliable water sources) and well being as well as 
creating more time for economically productive activities. The increase in protection forest types will also expand 
and widen the range of forest goods and services, including NTFP’s of benefit to women, and open up potential 
new value chain and business opportunities for a wider range of groups than currently engage in forest product 
utilisation and processing. This will help to correct the prevailing inequalities in climate change vulnerability and 
risks that exist between men and women particularly in rural Rwanda and ensure that that benefits are distributed 
equitably. Other social and gender co -benefits include:  
- Increased productive and a daptive capacity of individuals, households and  communities;  
- Reduced impact of climate -related shocks on food security of target households with improved nutrition from climate resilient 
agriculture;  
- Strengthened, climate resilient livelihoods and off -farm employment opportunities with associated increased skills within the 
rural workforce and a reduced dependency on rainfed agriculture leading to reduced poverty  levels;  
- Reduced health problems associated with indoor pollution from cooking;  and 
- Reduced number of deaths, injuries, livestock losses and damage to housing from extreme weather  events.  
We have estimated environmental and social co -benefits in the economic analysis, with the valuation of market 
and non -market benefits. These indicate the projec t will deliver high net benefits in these areas, estimated at 
USD50 million (present value of benefits, 10% discount rate). These benefits arise from the combination of 
reduced loss and damage due extreme climate events, reduced soil erosion and siltation,  GHG emission 
reductions, and social and health improvements due to reduced air pollution and improved water. The value 
excludes a number of important additional benefits from enhanced ecosystem services (for which quantification 
was not possible), which w ould increase these benefits further.  
 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of  vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the project addresses the issue (e.g. the level 
of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, overall income level, etc).  
The vulnerability and financing needs of Gi cumbi and its population are evidenced by the recently 
prepared national climate vulnerability Index. The study indicates the scale and intensity of vulnerability of 
Rwanda based on a comprehensive analysis using 37 vulnerability indicators along with base line data from a 
national survey97 of household vulnerability. It reinforced earlier studies that found that the Northern Province 
where the target district is located is exposed to high intensity precipitation events and (along with the Western 
province) is the most sensitive to soil erosion and landslides due to its mountainous topography and steep 
ravines. MIDIMAR data show that six sectors of Gicumbi were affected by landslide and flooding events between 
2011 and 2012 alone. In 2013, there were 3 deaths  and 52 houses destroyed or damaged by landslides. The 
targeted  sectors  include  some  of the most  affected  by landslides  and flooding  (Byumba,  Rubaya,  Cyumba,  Kaniga 
and Mukarange).  
Poverty levels in Gicumbi are very high compared to national levels, with 55.3% and 24.7% of the 
population living below the poverty line or in extreme poverty respectively (EICV4). The project specifically 
targets Gicumbi as one of the poorest and most vu lnerable districts, where there is heavy dependence on rain fed, 
subsistence agriculture (with 72% of the district’s population engaged as small scale farmers) and where there are 
limited employment opportunities which locks households into perpetual pover ty, high morbidity and mortality 
among young children and food insecurity (44 % of children in Gicumbi have chronic malnutrition). The high levels 
of poverty, topography, deforestation and land use patterns combine to make the people of Gicumbi highly 
vulnerable to climate variability and extreme weather events. The poorest groups are most affected by climate 
change, particularly women and women headed households as they have limited resources and abilities to cope 
with disaster and climate change impacts. The project includes interventions to restore ecosystem services, 
strengthen climate resilient farming for smallholders as well as open up new employment opportunities in forest 
services and products to increase household incomes and strengthen livelihoods  so that vulnerable communities 
can be more resilient to climate change. Efforts to reduce soil erosion and improve soil fertility and water 
availability will have a direct impact on smallholder production, enhancing food security for the district’s poores t 
and most vulnerable inhabitants.  
 
97 sample size 1500 across all 30  Districts


---
*Page 62*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 93  
 
 
A recent risk assessment by MIDIMAR also confirmed that the country is highly prone to drought, 
landslide, flood and windstorms98. Because of its geographical features (the relief is hilly and mountainous with 
an average altitude of 1,700 meters) and climatic profile, Rwanda is one of the sub -Sahara African countries most 
prone to disasters and espec ially localised landslides and floods. National data from 2012 shows there were 72 
deaths, 122 injuries, 2,580 ha of crops and 3,176 houses damaged or destroyed due to landslides, floods, fire, 
heavy rains, heavy rains and winds, thunderstorms and lightnin g99. The cost of the disaster response and 
recovery in 2011 was more than Rwf 515,520,000 (USD 730,000). According to a MIDIMAR study in 2012, the 
main cause of flooding across the thirty districts is climate change which results in heavy rain and flash fl ooding 
through overflowing of Rwanda’s rivers. Around 40% of the country’s population is estimated to be exposed to 
landslide  at moderate  to very high slope  susceptibility  with14%  of the exposed  population  being  children  aged  <20 
years and elderly aged >64  years. In all, over 1.6 million poor Rwandans (about 15% of the total population) are 
estimated to be exposed to landslides100. In terms of infrastructure, 43% of Rwanda’s health facilities, 25% of its 
schools, 553 kilometres of paved national roads (45% of the total) and 691 kilometres (39% of the total) of 
unpaved national roads are exposed to landslides with the economic cost of damaged houses due to landslide 
estimated to be in excess of Rwf 9.2 billion. Moreover, with four major water basins experienc ing absolute water 
scarcity, Rwanda is classified as a water scarce country undergoing high water stress. Around 40% of Rwanda’s 
land is classified as being under a “very high risk” of erosion and approximately 37% requires soil retention 
measures before c ultivation, only 23% of the land is not prone to erosion. With over a half of Rwanda’s power 
deriving from hydropower generation, and installed hydropower generation capacity set to increase from 95.93 
MW in 2014 to 141.97 MW by 2018101, reducing erosion a nd protecting the country’s watersheds is critical to 
national energy and food  security.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project addresses the following needs:  
• Economic and social development level of the country and the affected  population  
• Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from addressing the needs of  the country; 
and lack of depth and history in the local capital  market)  
• Need for strengthening  institutions and implementation  capacity.  
Section c.1 provides a detailed overview of the economic and social development level of the country which has 
been summarised below.  
Rwanda is one of Africa’s poorest countries with Official Development Assistanc e (ODA) financing 
approximately 40% of the country’s annual budget. The country is small, hilly, and landlocked and has the 
highest population density in Africa102. Agriculture provides around 33% of GDP, 72% of employment (EICV 4) 
and generates more than 45% of the country’s export revenues (mostly from tea and coffee). Rwanda has a high 
dependence on imported diesel and heavy fuel oil for its electricity supply and has a small103 and its uncompetitive 
industrial sector is constrained by a lack of locally available raw materials and high transport costs as a result of 
being landlocked. With around 83% of the population still living in rural areas104 and more than 70% of the 
population engaged in rain -fed, subsistence agriculture and a high dependence on bio mass for fuel, there are 
increasing pressures on natural resources (especially considering that more than 70% of the cultivated land 
surface has slopes greater than 10% which results in high levels of erosion and surface run off into  waterways).  
The project investments will benefit more than 86,000 people living in climate vulnerable areas that currently 
depend on rainfed farms with low soil fertility.  
Rwanda lacks the financial resources to adequately address climate threats and support low carbon 
growth. The total additional capital costs of shifting to climate resilient and low carbon development pathways 
outlined in the GGCRS have been estimated to be around USD 2.7 bn (cumulative to 2030) compared to business 
as usual across three key sectors (wat er, agriculture, energy)105. Funding for the implementation of LCCR 
development activities in Rwanda is mobilised from four principle sources:  
1) internal public investment  resources,  
2) external development partner  resources,  
3) international climate finance  and 
4) non-public sector resources (e.g. NGOs, private  sector).  
 
98 MIDIMAR (2015). The National Risk Atlas of Rwanda. Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs. 
99 REMA (2015). Baseline climate change vulnerability index for Rwanda, May  2015.  
100 MIDIMAR  2015 
101 Vulnerability index report, May  2015.  
102 415 people/km2, NISR  2012  
103 Manufactured products include cement, agricultural products, small -scale beverages including beer, soap, furniture, shoes, plastic goods, textiles, and cigarettes. 
104 Fourth population and  housing census, Rwanda 2012. National Institute of Statistics, Rwanda  
105 Policy Brief: Costing the Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy.  AFDB


---
*Page 63*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 93  
 
 
The fiscal balance for Rwanda is in adequate to finance the additional costs of shifting to climate resilient and low 
carbon development pathways outlined in the GGCRS. In the medium term, total revenue and grants are 
projected to rise in nominal terms from Rwf 1,462.5 billion (23.1% of GDP)  in 2015/16 to Rwf 1,578.3 billion in 
2016/17 and to RWF 1,774.4 billion in 2017/18 while total expenditure and Net Lending projected at RWF 1,741.1 
billion (27.5 percent of GDP) in 2015/16 is programmed to rise in nominal terms to RWF 1,856.9 billion (26. 2% of 
GDP) in 2016/17 and to Rwf 2,099.7 billion (26.3% of GDP) in 2017/18. Foreign reserves coverage at the end of 
2014 was only expected to cover around 4.7 months of imports in 2015106. The BNR and MINECOFIN Rwanda 
have limited experience of capital bon d markets although a regular bond issuance program was initiated in 2014. 
The total Public and Publicly guaranteed debt stood at 30.4% of GDP as of end December 2014. Rwanda 
therefore requires ongoing support from donors to plug its fiscal gap. This projec t will make a direct contribution to 
Rwanda’s funding gap and will contribute to delivering the GGCRS.  
Certain agencies including the Districts and MOE receive relatively low levels of budget support and the 
limited availability of private funds highlights  the need for additional external finance. Strong alliances 
among ministries of finance and economic planning and environment ministries/agencies have improved 
mainstreaming of Climate Compatible Development (CCD) into planning and budgeting but further ma instreaming 
efforts to tap into District and Ministries’ budget requests, as well as encouraging private sector and green 
investments, are important steps towards sustainably financing LCCR growth in Rwanda. Moreover, attracting 
private investment and enga ging the private sector in climate resilient low carbon projects is challenging due to 
high interest rates and risk adverse financial institutions unwillingness to finance investments in areas with limited 
or absent historical demonstration of viability. O ther constraints include high transport costs, a small domestic 
market, inadequate infrastructure, ambiguous tax rules, and a lack of skills in the workforce. Given the relatively 
new technologies and practices required within the low carbon sector, many c ooperatives and other local private 
sector agents will require new skills and knowledge to be able to establish and deliver these goods and services. 
The technical assistance services that will be provided have been specifically designed to address these n eeds. 
GCF can play a crucial role in helping Rwanda to overcome these financial limitations and achieve its goal of 
climate resilience low carbon growth.  
Rwanda has demonstrated success in terms of its institutional capacity to absorb and manage climate 
finance but ownership and coordination of climate activities across sectors needs to be improved.  
Rwanda’s good progress towards high fiduciary management standards, its commitment to service delivery and 
its strong track record of effective and efficient budget execution demonstrate it is at an advanced stage of climate 
finance  readiness.  The establishment  of the FONERWA  provides  a robust  structure  for channelling,  programming, 
disbursing and monitoring additional environment and climate change finance to Government agencies, Districts, 
CSOs and the private sector. The fund has also established a concessional lending facility for eligible private 
sector applicants with the Rwanda Development Bank (BRD), a move that is considered ground -breaking in the 
Rwand an context, as national financial institutions view environment and climate investments high risk in nature, 
offering limited financing options. Despite these advances, low institutional capacity coupled with financial 
constraints both at the national and sub-national levels results in a limited capability to implement national policies 
and plans. For example, implementing and financing Rwanda’s GGCRS (adopted in 2011) and the green 
economy concepts of EDPRS III is proving challenging due to its crosscuttin g nature and because responsibility 
for implementing its 14 projects of action is shared among diverse sectors with often competing interests, 
complicating issues of ownership, monitoring and coordination. The lack of a clear, costed implementation plan 
means that sector and district planners face difficulties in translating high -level objectives into practical, costed 
activities107. This project includes significant investments to increase awareness, understanding and institutional 
capacity of measures nee ded to increase climate  resilience.  
Public agencies require additional funding, technical support and capacity development in order to 
capture the opportunities and adjust to low carbon and climate resilient development trajectories. Many of 
the existing and planned operations follow proven approaches for which knowledge, systems and skills are 
already present. Transformation to new and alternative technologies, practices and interventions will require 
individual staff, institutional and management systems  development and support as it becomes the new business 
as usual. Awareness of climate threats and related strategies, approaches and technologies remains patchy 
below  the highest  levels,  particularly  in Districts.  Effective  mechanisms  are needed  to ensure  good  communication 
and flow of information on climate change issues between national -level technical ministries/agencies  and 
institutions and organisations at District and sub -District levels. Financial and human capacities are overstretched 
which impedes  the translation of climate resilient and low carbon concepts and activities endorsed nationally into  
 
 
106 IMF (2015) Rwanda: Letter of Intent, Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies, and Technical Memorandum of Understanding  April 30, 2015  
107 Caldwell,  D. (2015) High  fiduciary  standards  and Rwanda’s  access  to climate  finance. Blog  posted  on http://cdkn.org/2015/05/fiduciary -standards -and-access -to-climate -finance/?loclang=en_gb


---
*Page 64*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 93  
 
 
sector and District budgeting and planning. This project will provide the finance, capacity de velopment, technical 
advisory and importantly a long -term approach in order to meet these needs.  
Targeted approaches are required to build capacity for CCD planning, budgeting, mainstreaming and 
proposal development at national and sub -national levels. A coordinated, and systematic approach to 
capacity building, planning and resource mobilisation is required within and across sectors and districts. The 
proposed measures to increase institutional capacity at the district level and collaboration with RHA, RWF A, 
NAEB and RAB will address some of these capacity shortcomings that exist at the district (Gicumbi) and sector 
level. In addition to the capacity building and awareness raising interventions will increase understanding of 
climate threats within key gover nment agencies.  
The proposed interventions are ‘people’ focused not just to address adaptation needs but also to 
capacitate local communities to be the engines of climate sensitive rural growth. At the community level, 
rural households are familiar with an d experts in their existing livelihood strategies but lack the financial means, 
information, knowledge and skills to adopt new practices and technologies to adapt activities to respond to climate 
threats and/or to diversify into alternative and new income generating and employment options. As a key 
component of this project, supporting climate adaptation of agricultural activities through improved soil and water 
conservation will address inherent vulnerabilities common to the majority of rural households in  Rwanda.  
 
E.5. Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or project  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate -resilient development, and the degree to 
which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
Rwanda’s commitment to tackling climate change is recognised worldwide and there is strong 
ownership of the development and green growth agenda. Rwanda has established a strong and effective 
policy framework to dea l with climate change (see Section C1 for all the relevant policies and strategies). All the 
necessary policies and legal frameworks are in place including a national climate fund that can absorb, disburse 
and monitor interventions to tackle climate change . There is high -level ownership and commitment to adapting to 
the effects of climate change and Rwandan institutions, particularly MINRENA, have good experience from 
implementing  a number  of projects  that support  adaptation.  In terms  of mitigation,  the Government  has enshrined 
low carbon growth in its policy framework across Government and has made significant efforts to build 
awareness at the local level. Tree planting is widespread and efforts to replant areas deforested after the 
genocide against the Tut sis, generate small woodlots and agroforestry have increased  cover.  
NAPA  
The planned interventions are closely aligned with Rwanda’s national priorities for low -emission and 
climate -resilient development. The project will make a significant contribution to  achieving national climate 
compatible development priorities as it is closely aligned with national strategies and policies. The National 
Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) submitted to the UNFCCC in 2007 articulates Rwanda’s strategy to reduce 
vulnerabilit y to climate change particularly from the main climatic hazards including intense rainfall, flash flooding, 
landslides, drought and low flows, extreme temperatures and heat waves. The NAPA comprises six priority 
adaptation options to climate change, four o f which are included in this project: 1) promotion of “non -agricultural 
income generating activities” which is considered critical to strengthen resilience of rural communities to climate 
threats; 2) Integrated Water Resource Management via the watershed p rotection and sustainable forest 
management interventions; 3) introduction of species tolerant to climatic variability; and 4) development of 
alternative sources of energy to firewood.  
NAMAs  
Rwanda submitted its NAMA to the UNFCC in June 2015108. The GoR e stablished an institutional, legal and 
policy framework for Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) in May 2014. A series of NAMAs have 
been identified across seven priority sectors: agriculture, buildings, energy, industry, land use, land change  and 
forestry, transport, and waste to address sustainable development in the context of mitigating GHG emissions 
beyond “business as usual” (BAU) via technology -know how transfer, capacity building, and finance. The most  
relevant sectors to this proposed project are 1) land use, land use change, and forestry (LULUCF), 2) industry  
 
 
 
108 Rwanda Sectoral Analysis:Assessment of Sectoral Opportunities for the Development of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action s (NAMAs) in Rwanda. June  2015


---
*Page 65*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 93  
 
 
(including tea and coffee) and 3) buildings. The NAMAs for each of these are presented in the following 
paragraphs.  
The most pressing challenge in land use, land use change, and forestry (LULUCF) is the current and 
continuing deficit in the national wood balance. The alternative scenarios put forward in the NAMA aim at 
increasing the basic productivity of Rwanda’s fores ts and increasing the supply of wood through improved forest 
management and agro -forestry programs (see Table 1). The proposed project includes provision for all six 
shortlisted scenarios:  
1. agro-forestry,  
2. improved management of  forests,  
3. new forest  plantations,  
4. forestry -business (saw -wood, wood products  industries)  
5. improved cook stoves,  and 
6. efficient charcoal  production.  
It is estimated that improved forest management for multiple purposes carried out on 50% of the existing 
plantations (including a 10% increase in plantation area between 2009 and 2020) will increase productivity of 
approximately 440,000 tons by 2030. The c ombined sequestration potential for the NAMA period of 2016 – 2030 
is approximately 4,000,000 tCO 2e. 
Table 1: Shortlisted Alternative Scenarios identified for land use, land use change, and forestry 
(LULUCF)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed capacity needs identified during  the NAMA process will be addressed by the planned 
interventions. As land for afforestation is a very scarce resource in Rwanda, the NAMA has prioritised forest 
management that encompasses multiple purposes and advocates for the creation of new plantations  to achieve a 
national tree/forest cover of 30% as envisioned in forestry policy papers, with particular attention to steep slopes 
in order to combine protective and productive functions. The NAMA calls for capacity building in forest 
management, personnel , inspection and information systems at MOE, RWFA, MINAGRI, and district extension 
services as well as capacity building in promoting wood products industry (biomass pellets and charcoal) for new 
technology, equipment, and service. These are specific objec tives of the project.  
The tea and coffee sectors were selected for NAMA development under the industry section of the NAMA 
report. The selected NAMA scenario for these sectors is considered to be a high priority with moderate 
mitigation potential and moder ate cost. The overall objective is to improve the downstream activities in the tea 
and/or  coffee  sub-sector  by improving  the existing  tea drying  and processing.  Specifically,  the NAMA  focuses  on: 
• Energy efficiency  improvements,  
• Installation of new equipment and technologies for drying, roasting  packaging,  
• Establish an energy efficiency standards for all new  factories  
• Promote energy management, auditing and reporting and national best practice  sharing  
• Promote international eco -labelling  
• Improvements of water efficiency,  and 
• Improvements in working  conditions.  
The first NAMA applicable alternative emission scenario for energy efficiency improvements in the coffee and tea 
production is expected to lead to a GHG emission reduction potential of 146,000 tC O2e during the 2016 - 2030 
period. Tea was considered a high priority for NAMA development due to the historical importance of the sector 
and the economic potential for value addition in the downstream sections which involves building industrial 
capacity fo r processing and packaging of high quality tea.  
Adoption of energy measures in tea processing are estimated to result in a potential emission reduction 
of 146,300 tons CO 2e for the period 2016 -2030 and savings in energy costs between 15 -20%. Capacity 
needs  include: support for preparation of a NAMA design and documentation; pilot programs in the tea plants to 
demonstrate the potential measures; awareness creation with financial institutions to offer commercial lending  
rates to participating industries; esta blishing an insurance scheme to reduce risks for financial institutions in 
availing energy efficient technologies; bringing together a wider community of equipment suppliers, academic  
Shortlisted Alternative Scenarios  Mitigation 
Potential  Challenge  Cost  Data 
Available  Total 
Score  Policy 
Alignment  
Agro -Forestry (soil, erosion, seedlings, fertilizer)  High Low High Med 5 Direct  
Improved Management of Forests  High Med Med Med 5 Direct  
New Forest Plantations (+Corporate Social Responsibility)  Med Low Med Med 5 Indirect  
Forestry -Business (Saw wood, wood products industries)  Med Med High Low 3 Indirect  
Improved Cook Stoves  Med Med Low High 6 Direct  
Efficient Charcoal Production  Med Med Med Med 4 Direct


---
*Page 66*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 93  
 
 
institutions, owners and buyers to make energy efficiency available and affordable to all factories. The proposed 
NAMA activities are expected to result in reduced consumption of carbon intensive fuels (fossil fuel based 
electricity and heavy fuel oil) a nd lower consumption of woodfuels as well as improved quantity and quality of tea 
due to improved drying allowing the industry to seek for higher price at international auctions. Improvements in 
the tea sectors will also increase employment opportunities a nd income generation. Proposed GCF supported 
interventions are therefore highly relevant to NAMA priorities for the tea sector.  
The first NAMA applicable alternative emission scenario for the Housing / Building Sector is focused on 
householder energy use t hrough efficient cookstoves, LED lighting and water heaters. Efficient cook 
stoves have the highest mitigation potential of 2 tCO 2e/year per cookstove, which can lead to millions of tCO 2e of 
annual GHG emission reductions a year by 2030. Efficient lights m ay not have a large impact but is expected to 
lead to annual GHG emission reductions of up to 50,000 tCO 2e per year 2030. The most notable co -benefits of 
the alternatives are lower resource demand for wood and charcoal and electricity, and potential lower net 
household cost of energy.  
The Green Growth and Climate Resilient Strategy (GGCRS) is central to achieving the government key 
development target of becoming a developed climate -resilient, low -carbon economy by 2050. The planned 
interventions will contri bute to a number of priority areas under the NST including: connecting rural communities 
to economic opportunity through improved infrastructure; integrated approach to land use and human 
settlements; increased agricultural productivity; enabling graduatio n from extreme poverty. Moreover, the 
proposed project will also help to deliver against two of the ‘Big Wins’ agro -forestry and irrigation and five 
programmes of action in the GGCRS including supporting: integrated approaches to sustainable land use 
plann ing and management as well as integrated water resource management and planning; sustainable forestry, 
agroforestry and biomass energy; and disaster management and disease prevention. Addressing the risks of 
climate change on export crops (and specifically  tea and coffee) was also specifically highlighted as a priority in 
the strategy.  
Planned interventions will benefit from the existence of strong policy and institutional frameworks to 
address climate change issues . The introduction of comprehensive climat e legislation in Rwanda created a 
critical enabling environment for the development and implementation of progressive institutional arrangements, 
policies and strategies for addressing climate threats and low carbon growth. Strong political will and owners hip 
exists at the highest levels including the Office of the President and there are active climate champions across 
national government. To ensure the necessary broad partnership and institutional responsibility (especially 
between donors and the GoR) req uired to take forward national climate priorities, the GoR implemented a series 
of innovative institutional arrangements to improve coordination. These include the Sector Wide Approach 
(SWAp) Secretariat in MOE as well as the Natural Resources Sector Worki ng Group and Environment and 
Climate Change Sub -Sector Working Group, which serve as multi -stakeholder forums to discuss environment 
and CCD issues. Rwanda’s national climate and environment fund, FONERWA, plays a coordinating role for 
CCD projects (includ ing mainstreaming projects that require coordination across several ministries).  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the activities that they are expected to 
undertake in the proposed project.  
Rwanda has strong capacity to implement a GCF -funded project and consistently delivers results against 
targets set out in its national strategies. The GoR is well known for the efficient and effective use of external 
funds, due to the high levels of good governance, the OECD rated Rwanda as one of the countries that uses aid 
most effectively and Rwanda is on course to achieve most of its 2015 MDG targets. The Government o f Rwanda 
has demonstrated comprehensive country ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project.  
Rwanda has also established strong institutional frameworks and the accredited entity MOE has a 
reliable track record for implementing climate change projects. MOE’s solid track record is most recently 
demonstrated through its current management of USD 10 million from the Adaptation Fund to implement the 
Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based Adaptation Project. 
The project operates in 2 districts, Nyabihu and Musanze, covering approximately 400km2 and extendin g across 
8 administrative sectors. Initiated in 2013, this project is mid -way in its implementation and is very well regarded 
through its successful delivery of early results. MOE also oversees a number of other climate projects including: 
an early warning  system project (funded by LDCF), the Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and 
Conservation (LAFREC) project (funded by GEF/World Bank), and the “Building resilience of communities living 
in degraded forests, savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an  ecosystem management approach” project 
(funded by LDCF). MOE is the Ministry responsible for ensuring sustainable management and rational use of  
natural resources. It is responsible for the development of policies, strategies and projects as well as the 
formulation of regulations and mobilising resources for the development of the sector. The Ministry is also


---
*Page 67*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 93  
 
 
responsible for monitoring and evaluation the implementation of environment, climate change and natural 
resources management at the national level.  
As the national climate and environment fund, FONERWA (the nominated executing entity) already 
manages a significant portfolio of climate finance and is therefore well equi pped to implement the 
project . The Environment and Climate Change Fund, FONERWA, was established by the GoR in 2012 as a 
response to the low public resource allocations directly available to address environment and climate concerns. 
FONERWA is now the prim ary vehicle through which additional environment and climate change finance is 
channelled, programmed, disbursed and monitored in Rwanda. The FONERWA Law formed the primary basis 
for the design of the fund. Initial seed capitalisation of GBP 22.5 million w as provided to FONERWA in 2012 by 
the UK’s International Climate Fund (ICF). Domestic counterpart funding was critical to securing this bilateral 
support and so far, the government has contributed USD 3.7 million demonstrating its commitment to supporting 
LCCR growth. FONERWA provides the necessary and appropriate institutional arrangements to meet the criteria 
of international climate funds. It maintains high standards of fiduciary management, aligned with GoR best 
practice and systems, including environme nt and social safeguards. It channels finances on a competitive basis 
to Government agencies, Districts, CSOs and the private sector using a range of financial instruments (grants, 
loans etc.). Delivering GCF project interventions through a capable nationa l institution such as FONERWA with 
high levels of accountability will therefore further strengthen country ownership.  
The GoR has invested heavily in training projects targeting technical personnel in the relevant ministries 
and other relevant institutions including the private sector. This was to address historic shortfalls in capacity 
have arisen due to a shortage of qu alified and experienced people (with good problem solving, analytical, 
language and literacy skills) following the genocide against the Tutsi. The GoR is continually developing the 
capacity of its technical personnel in its line ministries. The Strategic C apacity Building Initiative has played a key 
role in strengthening capacity and UNDP is continuing to support capacity development in MOE, REMA and 
RWFA. For continuous development under different sectors, the National Capacity Building Secretariat (NCBS) 
was established for capacity creation, utilisation and retention; this has yielded results under the different sectors 
and especially in watershed management. The GoR is also increasingly working in partnership with technical 
service providers from the pri vate sector. The GCF funding will ensure that the project relies on existing capacity 
while creating opportunities to draw from the lessons to develop further technical and overall management 
capacity to scale up investments for transformation.  
E.5.3. Eng agement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with NDAs on the f unding proposal and the 
no-objection letter. Please  also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal was 
developed.  
Country ownership is rooted in high -level GoR commitment to delivering national priorities set out in the 
NST and the GGCRS and is evidenced by the nomination of a national institution, FONERWA, as the 
executing entity . The initiation of the proposed project was guided by a stakeholder dialogue led by the 
Ministers of Environment (MOE) and Agriculture and Animal Husbandry (MINAGRI)  along with Directors General 
from Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), National Industrial Research Development Agency 
(NIRDA), Rwanda Housing Authority (RHA) and representatives from the Ministry of Local Government 
(MINALOC), Rwanda Water and  Forests Authority (RWFA) and the private sector. There has been close 
consultation with the NDA throughout the project design from the concept stage through to the full proposal 
development. FONERWA routinely works closely with NDA and particularly had on -going consultations with 
REMA’s climate change unit, responsible for preparing national communications and representation at 
international climate change negotiations which has been instrumental in supporting the analysis of climate 
threats and vulnerabil ity baseline included in this proposal. As such, the design is based on a thorough 
understanding of the threat and the vulnerability level and provides a comprehensive evidence base for action 
(see Annex 1). As FONERWA will be the executing entity, there w ill continue to be close collaboration with the 
NDA throughout the project cycle.  
This proposal has been developed in consultation with a wide variety of stakeholders at the national, 
sectoral and local levels and includes provision for their future engage ment in accordance with GCF’s 
environmental and social safeguards and stakeholder consultation guidelines . Multiple and extensive site 
visits have been made by the design team which was inter -disciplinary and included technical specialists in 
sustainable b uilding design and master -planning, forestry, gender, environment, climate change, economics, 
water resources and agriculture as well as local communities and Gicumbi district authority. The initial field visits 
were carried out following guidance and cons ultation with the Governor of Northern Province where Gicumbi 
District is located along with the Mayor of Gicumbi District and various other leading staff of the District including  
the Executive Secretary of the District who provides oversight over the tec hnical aspects at the District level. The 
design team also visited the Kabeza, Kaniga, the Mulindi Tea plantation, multiple forestry sites and held


---
*Page 68*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 93  
 
 
discussions with communities as we ll as community leaders. The list of stakeholders consulted during the design 
phase is attached to each of the study reports in the Annexes. Particular attention was given to gender equality 
(through a gender analysis) so that women and men can participate  in the project and benefit from proposed 
interventions. Multi -stakeholder processes involving non -governmental organisations and gender and youth 
interest groups are firmly established within national and sub -national planning processes, including the 
development and implementation of NST (through the sector working groups) and District Development Plans 
(through the Joint Action Forums). Further engagement has been undertaken as part of the Gicumbi DDP 
revision exercise, including the incorporation of GGC RS into the DDP development template, during early 2015.  
Further stakeholder engagement will be undertaken during implementation. The design will develop a 
detailed plan to communicate and consult with stakeholders throughout the lifetime of the project, including field 
surveys, business round table discussions, workshops, structured interviews and focus group discussions with 
vulnerable groups and other stakeholders. Stakeholders will be involved in M&E processes to enable the project, 
through FONERWA, to  have downward accountability to the communities and rural institutions in the areas 
where the project is being implemented – not as beneficiaries, but as actors and leaders in their own 
development. A Communication Strategy targeting stakeholders at diffe rent levels will be developed and 
progress against project deliverables will be communicated on a regular basis, with the Communication Strategy 
underpinning a participatory, two -way process of communication with stakeholders.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effecti veness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addr essing existing 
bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private and other public investmen t. 
Given the IE accreditation status, the financial structure of the project is limited to grants. However, the 
high level of conce ssionality and the grant modality applied (delivered through direct access mechanisms) is in 
line with GCF guidance (published B_10_06), as the project is in a LIE, targets vulnerable communities, and 
primarily invests in public projects that are non -reven ue generating or uses small grants for technical assistance.  
The project has also developed a disaggregated approach for the detailed financial structuring, recognising that 
different barriers exist across the various interventions areas, and so GCF financ e needs to be tailored to 
address the specific market failures (the presence of externalities, public goods characteristic, information 
asymmetry and misaligned incentives) as well as policy failures and behavioural barriers, in each case.  
All intervention s have been designed to maximise the use of GCF grant finance and comply with the 
principles set out in Annex III to decision B.05/07. In line with GCF guidance (B_10_06) grant elements have 
been tailored to i) the incremental cost or the risk premium requ ired to make investments viable, i.e. to meet the 
additional costs of green investment, provide longer -term finance or to create incentives for behavioural change 
(so far as is required to make activities financially viable, or to overcome risk perceptions ) ii) for demonstration 
effect, i.e. where there is clear demonstration effect in relation to new technology, approach or market, which if 
needed, is then further supported by TA to ensure scale -up iii) to cover technical assistance, or iv) to meet the 
additional costs of climate action that would otherwise not be available, particularly for resilience (adaptation) 
activities for vulnerable groups. In all cases, the interventions have been designed to address barriers and create 
the enabling environment for  mitigation and adaptation, to leverage on existing public and private finance, and to 
ensure there is no distortion or displacement of existing public or private sector funds.  
For the watershed protection interventions, the focus is to address the underlying market failures in relation to 
the loss and degradation of ecosystems, especially from climate change, by investing in information, public 
goods and ecosystem -based adaptation (non -market), targeting highly vulnerable and very poor communities t o 
address impacts of soil erosion and poor watershed management (which increases the risks of floods and 
landslides). The financing recognises that these investments are non -revenue generating, and while some direct 
grants are used (protective forests, whe re there are major ecosystem service benefits), for other interventions 
the focus is on technical assistance (farmer field schools) and community incentives to increase adoption, 
combined with investment in awareness raising and market development to inclu de non -timber forest products 
and other income streams to help the uptake and sustainability of investments.  
For climate resilient agriculture , the project focuses on supporting adaptation to climate change impacts and 
targets highly vulnerable smallholder  and subsistence farmers. The project is financing some interventions of  
climate resilient agriculture in these sectors, recognising the longer paybacks on these projects, the fact they 
often involve information barriers and opportunity costs, and that the  target beneficiaries are constrained in terms


---
*Page 69*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 93  
 
 
of access to finance including capital. Alongside this, the project is providing information (climate risk 
information) to help ad dress the larger scale investment needs in the industry, especially for the siting of new tea 
plantations, providing technical assistance to encourage climate resilient planning and thus leveraging private 
sector  finance.  
For the sustainable forestry compo nent, the project is implementing high quality demonstration pilots, and 
providing technical assistance to the Government and forest owners to advance the take up of good practice, so 
as to transform the forestry sector in the district. However, it is reco gnised that the longer paybacks on forestry 
projects and the constrained availability of long term capital (especially as many forests and woodlots are small - 
scale) requires additional incentives, and thus an additional financial instrument has been inclu ded with the 
introduction of performance based grants. These interventions are also strengthened as the project is investing 
in public goods and provision of non -market benefits (ecosystem services).  
For the energy (biomass) interventions, the underlying t echnologies have a high financial IRR, and the main 
barriers are around awareness and behavioural change. The project is therefore investing in local capacity 
(trained staff and demonstration pilots) and financing awareness raising, promotion and market de velopment 
with technical assistance/capacity building for installers. There is also some direct grant support to introduce low 
carbon technologies in public institutions that are large biomass users (schools, clinics). Again, all these 
interventions have h igh non -market benefits, through the reduced pressure on biomass and thus deforestation, 
as well as providing health benefits from lower indoor air pollution.  
For the tea factory energy efficiency component, the grant finance is targeted to address information failures 
and risk perception around the use of financially viable (no and low -regret) energy efficient measures and 
technologies. It is therefore focused on an initial demonstration. GCF grant is used to provide technical 
assistance to help int roduce basic energy efficiency measures, with co -financing from the factory for the 
equipment, but also a grant for the incremental costs of more advanced technologies for demonstration. The 
national scale -up is achieved through a similar programme of tech nical assistance for mainstreaming, to build 
the enabling environment for leveraging private sector investment for capital and equipment costs from the tea 
factories.  
There is also investment in capacity building across the project at the district level, w hich will bring about large 
benefits in terms of greater effectiveness and efficiency of public interventions for mitigation and adaptation.  
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigatio n/ adaptation impact that the project 
aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the 
cost per tCO2eq) . 
The project has been designed to maximise the effic iency and effectiveness of the interventions above. 
For mitigation, the project analysis has assessed the core indicator of cost per tCO 2eq as the key benchmark. 
This has been assessed using two alternative methods. First, the analysis has assessed the cos t (GCF finance 
only) per tCO 2e for the lifetime emission reductions that the investment achieves (column 1). This provides a 
simple assessment; however, it does not fully capture cost -effectiveness. To address this, the assessment has 
quantified the margin al abatement cost, expressed as the cost (financial present value) per tCO 2e over the 
lifetime of the investment (GCF and co -finance, 10% discount rate) (column 2). This marginal abatement cost 
analysis shows that many of the project investments are no - or low-regret measures, leading to cost savings, 
and demonstrates the high cost -effectiveness of the investments.  
The cost -effectiveness for the overall project – for the relevant mitigation components – is extremely 
high, and a marginal abatement cost (pres ent value, 10% DR) has estimated the cost -effectiveness at - 
USD3.4/tCO 2e, demonstrating the very high effectiveness and efficiency.  
For adaptation, the effectiveness and efficiency of the interventions is demonstrated through the 
economic assessment, set out in Section E6.3 and Section F1. This has assessed the overall net present 
value of investments and the benefit to cost ratio (BCR) of individual interventions (using a 10% discount rate, but 
with sensitivity analysis). The latter provides a key metric showing the benefits that arise for every USD 1 
invested. The analysis shows that all interventions all have BCRs above 1, hence they represent good value for 
money. For climate resilient tea and coffee, the BCR is 2.0, for the forestry programme the BCR i s 1.3 (excluding 
wider ecosystem service benefits) and for watershed protection it is 2.8.  
For all mitigation and adaptation components, the interventions have been designed to be highly 
effective, with a theory of change informing each intervention, linki ng inputs to outputs to outcomes. 
The programme has been structured to deliver at scale by maximising the number of beneficiaries reached and 
GHG emission reductions achieved. The programme will ensure that the quality, quantity and price of inputs are 
appropriate to achieve the desired outputs, thereby delivering efficiency. The procurement approach - and the 
commercial and management arrangements – will also ensure the highest value for money for goods and


---
*Page 70*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 93  
 
 
services within the programme. Unit costs will be benchmarked against market norms, and technical assistance 
will be sourced through transparent and competitive procurement processes.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co -financing ratio (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the project) and/or the poten tial to catalyze 
indirect/long -term low emission investment. Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
The focus of the project is on one of Rwanda’s poorest districts, which is primarily rural in  nature . Most 
of the interventions are targeted at helping the most vulnerable to address climate change impacts and 
supporting non -market sectors (especially in relation to ecosystem services) or provision of public goods. These 
are challenging for private sector co -financing. Even when markets do exist in Rwanda, co -financing is limited by 
low income levels and access to finance. It is also highlighted that the accreditation status of MOE, which is for 
direct grant finance only, limits the more obvi ous routes for co -financing and leveraging (i.e. through 
concessionary loans or blending). Nonetheless, the proposal has sought to maximise the level of co -finance and 
leveraging.  This involves  partnering  with existing  Government  programmes  to maximise  the impact  and influence 
of GCF investment. The co -financing ratio (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) is as  follows.  
 For the tea energy efficiency pilot at the Mulindi factory, the factory is providing the  finance for the Tier 1 energy efficiency measures 
(co-finance), with the GCF finance providing technical  assistance. 
There are also a number of interventions in the project that are focused on adaptation or operate in non -market 
sectors, where co -financin g or in -kind contributions have been secured. These are not mitigation activities, and 
in line with GCF guidance, these are not included as formal co -finance. These are set out below.  
 For the ecosystem and watershed component, the rain harvesting tanks inc lude a co -financing component, with a 15% household co - 
financing contribution from Ubudehe category 3 and a 40% contribution for Ubudehe category 4. The co -finance ratio is 0.2 and 0.7 
respectively. 
 The Government of Rwanda is providing the cost of land p urchase for the rural green village  site.
 The climate resilient tea and coffee component leverages on public finance from an existing FONERWA project grant on tea and coffee, 
which has a value of USD2 million. There is also a large (USD>1million) in -kind c o-financing stream from The Wood Foundation at the 
Mulindi planation, for up -slope planting for climate resilient  planning. 
• For climate resilient tea and coffee – and watershed protection - the project interventions are focused on technical assistance and pilots, 
and there is in -kind co -financing from farmers and local communities in the form of labour for implementation of climate resilient and 
ecosystem protection based  interventions. 
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
The total expected volume of direct finance to be leveraged is estimated to be USD 359,990 (formal co -finance, 
of which USD 105,964 is mitigation targeted) giving a co -financing ratio (total amount of co -financing divide d by 
the Fund’s investment in the project on mitigation) of 0.003. A breakdown is provided below of the formal co - 
finance for mitigation only.  
 
 
 
In addition to the above, there would also be in -kind labour contributions from the community towards forestr y 
interventions (USD 1,318,831) and a financial contribution toward the cost of cookstoves by households USD 
1,539,652). The USD 2,858,483 in co -financing from the communities had to be excluded from the calculations 
as it was not practical to obtain lette rs of commitment from community members.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the analysis conducted in F.1. 
A full economic appraisal has been undertaken for all sub -components , using a social cost -benefit analysis 
(CBA), which adopts a social welfare maximisation perspective (see Economic and financial analysis in Annex 
1). The analysis has valued all costs and benefits including, where possible , non -market benefits. The central 
analysis has been undertaken using a 10% discount rate, but with a sensitivity of 5 and 13%, the latter being the 
recommended (social) discount rate used by the Government of Rwanda. The results are shown below. These 
show the benefit to cost ratio of individual interventions (present value of benefits/present value of costs) and the 
overall net present value, calculated as total discounted benefits minus total discounted costs, using a 10% 
discount rate.  
All interventions  have a positive benefit to cost ratio (>1) and a highly positive net present value, 
demonstrating the economic rate of return is high and that the project has a strong economic viability . 
Sub-component  Co-finance US D 
Tea factory energy efficiency  105,964


---
*Page 71*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 93  
 
 
GCF fund support is needed, however, as many of the economic benefits are in non -market sectors (i.e. 
environmental and social benefits).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even at a 13% discount rate, the project still has a high overall net positive present value, although the lower 
discount rate affects longer -lived investments, notably reducing the BCR of forestry to 1.  
A financi al analysis has also been undertaken. This is only relevant for those components that involve market 
sectors. The financial analysis assesses the return on investment and adopts a different perspective to the CBA, 
maximising towards the individual, excludi ng societal costs and benefits (such as environmental benefits, carbon 
savings, etc.) and including taxes and charges (which are excluded in the economic appraisal). It is undertaken 
from the point of view of the investor and uses the internal rate of retu rn (IRR) as a metric to evaluate projected 
cash flows and assess the feasibility of a project or investment. The IRR is the rate at which the NPV is zero, and 
it is compared with the financial discount rate to assess whether project generates a sufficient return on 
investment to be financially viable or profitable: a higher IRR means a more financially attractive investment.  
The analysis shows that the financial rate of return for project investments (GCF finance and co -finance) 
is high, demonstrating the f inancial viability. Note that a financial IRR cannot be calculated for the project as 
a whole, due to the combination of mitigation and adaptation components.. For the climate resilient production of 
tea and coffee, the interventions are financially viable , but target subsistence farmers and thus there is support 
needed (in the form of awareness and technical assistance) to encourage adoption. For the energy efficiency 
measures in tea factories and biomass (cook stoves and biomass) there investments are fin ancially viable 
without GCF support, but require awareness raising and technical assistance (from GCF finance) to encourage 
adoption.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Values for individual options vary: tier 1 and 2 improved cook stoves (61%), improved large (public building) cook -stoves (42%), small scale 
biogas (%), large scale biogas 14%.  
2 Values are for pine (12%) and eucalyptus (16%).  
3 Average for climate resilient interventions, though some sub options are higher (e.g. water management (27%) and grass strips  (216%)).  
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
The high underlying IRR for market orientated interventions demonstrates their financial viability in the 
long -term. The national mainstreaming activities in relation to dissemination and awareness will ensure their 
continued uptake beyond the Fund intervention. For the climate resilient tea and coffee production and 
sustainable forest management and watershed components, the project has focused on addressing current 
barriers to adaptation and will invest in creating the enabling environment for future adaptation (including public 
and private adaptation).  
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.).  
As mentioned earlier, scale up, replication and exit will also be ensured through partnering with organisations 
such as The Wood Foundation that have the market outreach and capacity to do this as well as partnering with 
public agencies such as RHA that hav e the mandate to expand and scale up in other parts of the country.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
Rwanda has in the recent past benefited from a proliferation of new technologies and increasing the uptake of 
these through the success factors seen to date will be a tar geted in this project. These include:  
• off grid solar technologies and market enhancing approaches that facilitate penetration of the technologies in rural areas en abled 
by growth and spread of  ICT; 
• technologies to produce soil stabilised compressed earth  blocks;  
• rainwater harvesting retrofitted with cleaning facilities to improve access to safe water for rural populations;  and 
Sub-component  Benefit to Cost ratio 
(10% DR)  
Energy (biomass)  6.5 
Forests  1.3 
Ecosystems  2.8 
Climate resilient tea and coffee  2.0 
Energy efficiency industry (tea)  8.2 
 
Sub-component  Financial Internal rate of return (IRR)  
Energy  14 – 61% 1 
Forestry  12 – 16% 2 
Tea climate resilient agriculture  25% 3 
Coffee climate resilient agriculture  22% 
Tea energy efficiency  49%


---
*Page 72*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 93  
 
 
• biogas and efficient cookstoves to reduce deforestation and solar water heaters to reduce energy  consumption.  
The innovations and market enabling conditions that have facilitated penetration of these technologies 
particularly in rural communities include the introduction of the telephone scratch c ard usage, loan schemes for 
purchases of rain water harvesting units for rural poor as well as the well thought out payment plans that have 
been introduced in accelerating home solar water heaters. In some instances, tax incentives have been applied 
to pro mote adoption of new technologies such as water heaters.  
Watersheds: While Rwanda is committed to restore 2,000,000 ha of its degraded lands and forests by 2030, the 
national Restoration Opportunities Assessment report shows that there is already best practices on watershed 
management including small scale water harvesting for household usage109, agriculture and agroforestry on 
smallholder lands. There is a need however to implement a wide scale watershed management practices and 
techniques building on these best practices. A number of agencies are working with national and district 
authorities to pilot forest and landscape restoration in different sectors of Gicumbi and develop technical 
packages adapted to each landscape. The packages includes tailored  agroforestry technologies as well as water 
management on steep slopes and these together with other best practices will be scaled up in the project areas. 
In addition to this RWFA110 over a long period has developed agroforestry tools and modules used by farmer 
field schools and these will be used in this program. The Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) 
department at the ministry of natural resources also developed a series of tools in water resources management 
that will be used during this progr am. The current Water for Growth project operating in Muvumba and 
Nyabugogo catchments both covering Gicumbi district have established watershed management committees 
and these will also serve for the GCF funded project as a governance and capacity buildin g structure.  
Tea and coffee : The investment has focused on energy efficiency best practice technology for tea factories, as 
these are large industrial users of energy. The component is linked to Rwanda’s NAMA, which identified tea 
factories as the major in dustrial source of emissions. The study design phase, which undertook detailed energy 
audits and options assessment, identified a large number of good practice retrofit options for the current factories 
in Rwanda that can reduce energy use, generate cost s avings and reduce emission. These will be used to 
produce best practice guidance. There are also a number of more advanced energy efficiency options that will 
be demonstrated at the Mulindi factory, with the most promising being included in this best pract ice guidance.  
The component will also use these lessons, and review of international best practice, to draw up new guidance 
on energy efficiency standards for new tea factories (a further ten major plants are proposed, as part of the 
national development p lan, and industrial blocks for two sites have already been progressed). The combined 
effect of tackling both current and new industrial plants in the project will have a transformational impact on the 
sector, reducing wood fuel use (and wood requirements) as well as greenhouse gas emissions. Alongside this, 
the component is undertaking climate resilient pilots for tea and coffee production, demonstrating the use of 
climate resilient agriculture and climate risk information for siting of new areas, to help t ransform the planned 
expansion of these cash crops in Rwanda. The information on climate resilient agriculture will also be integrated 
into the Government Farmer Field School programmes for these crops, ensuring best practice is disseminated at 
scale at na tional level.  
Forestry: The entire intervention is premised on application of best practice. RWFA already hold excellent best 
practice guidelines developed under the Support Project to the Development of the Forestry Sector (PAREF 
Be2) project (the Tree Pl antation, Establishment and Management and Tree Harvesting Techniques manuals 
annexed to this report) and the project prescribes demonstrating the productivity and performance gains possible 
through their application, developing national capacity in their best practice approaches, methods and 
techniques before using them as the template for roll -out improved forest management and forest renewal 
across the project area. The techniques described are based on the accumulated experience of plantation 
forestry i n East and Southern Africa, and standard forestry plantation practices which have enabled productive 
plantation forestry to be undertaken on the challenging sites normally available for tree planting. These best 
practices have been successful across the re gion and are well articulated in the recently published PAREF 
guidelines and the guidelines from the Sawlog Promotion Grant Scheme in Uganda and, if implemented in a 
timely and effective manner, will have a transformational effect on the survival and produ ctivity of plantations in 
Gicumbi.  
Climate resilient settlements : The project will adopt and improve on the successful IDP model village concept 
(a national policy) to house socially disadvantaged social groups living in high risk zones from flooding and 
landslides. The proposed modifications to the IDP model apply green design, structural and environmental best 
practice, landscaping houses into the hillsides in a way that reduces the use for cut and fill as well as building 
resilience and sustainability th rough enhanced water management and storage as well as biogas. The kitchen  
 
109Forest Landscape Restoration’s opportunities assessment for Rwanda  
110Rwanda Water and Forests Authority (RWFA)


---
*Page 73*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 93  
 
 
garden model has been successful throughout Rwanda and is currently being scaled up through RAB to 
enhance food and nutritional security. Rwanda already has developed policies and statutory guidance that 
promote best practice urban design. The innovative approaches and technologies proposed in this project have 
been  selected  on the basis  of several  years of international  and Rwandan  experience  in low carbon  technologies 
by Light Earth Designs, Modulus and other key stakeholders such as RHA. The proposals, meet or exceed 
Rwanda building regulations - and meet or exceed European standards (EN or equivalent  standard). The design 
team has the strongest background in sustainable design as well as engineering innovation (though the 
Cambridge University Centre for Natural Material Innovation). The practice partners have been previously 
awarded (as partners of FC B studios and Light Earth Designs) several sustainability awards including the 
Queens Award for Innovation and the Holicim award for sustainability. The best practice application on this 
project combines innovative research, writing and thinking on Green i nfrastructure with sustainable urban design 
practice (and parallel green city work with GGGI - and the Roadmap for Secondary Green cities guidance), 
extensive housing and urban design experience in Rwanda (Rwanda pilot green city design for GGGI) and 
world wide (using knowledge and principles from green certification methods such as LEED (neighbourhood 
design) and BREEAM and use of UK based data and guidance such as University of Bath Inventory of Carbon 
and Energy). Services design has been undertaken by CI BSE qualified and LEED certified  professionals.  
Material and engineering knowledge is underpinned by cutting edge doctoral thesis work undertaken by qualified 
structural engineers and architects under the auspices of the Cambridge University Centre for Nat ural Material 
Innovation. The material proposals capitalise on academic research as well as strong engagement over a long 
period with DFID, GIZ, Rwanda Government supported Rubengera Technical Secondary School. Underpinning 
all of this is experience over a  5 year period in the Rwanda context - with green building, urban and housing 
projects of national importance.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation only)  
The estimated cost per t CO 2eq is presented below. As this is a cross cutting project (adaptation 
and mitigation) the analysis has been calculated for the tot al project and mitigation investments only 
(forestry, energy efficiency, biomass reduction). The analysis shows the estimated cost - 
effectiveness for full lifetime of the investments is USD 7.6 / tCO2eq (mitigation, lifetime)111, 
showing a high  cost-effect iveness.  
(a) Total project financing (not  incl. Fees)  USD 33,154,432 (total  ) 
USD 6,574,920 (mitigation components)  
(b) Requested GCF amount (not  incl. Fees)  USD 32,794,442  (total)  
USD 6,574,920 (mitigation components)  
 
(c) Expected lifetime emission  reductions  overtime  864,244 tCO 2eq (lifetime  reductions)  
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a  / c) USD 7.6 /  tCO 2eq 
 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e  = b USD 7.6 /  tCO 2eq 
/c 
The analysis has also undertaken a full marginal abatement cost analysis , which has 
assessed the financial present value cost per tonne of CO 2eq. This is considered a more accurate 
metric for assessing the cost -effectiveness of the project. These values were presented in Section  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency. The results show t hat the overall project cost - 
effectiveness, for the mitigation components, is USD -3.4/tCO 2eq (as the financial present value,  
10% discount rate).  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above.  
The method used for estimating emissions was set out in E.1.2. and the method for estimating the 
metric was set out in Section E6.1  
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a comparable context.  
The metrics above – and the full marginal abatement costs analysis in Section E.6.1 – show that the 
individual investments comprise of no - and low -regret measures (many leading to actual cost  
 
111 
See earlier  table. Note  iff the emissions  reduced  only during  the 6 years  of the  project are  considered, the  value  rises to USD  24 / tCO2eq.


---
*Page 74*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 93  
 
 
 savings) and  demonstrates the high cost -effectiveness of the investments. The overall project cost - 
effectiveness, as measured in terms of the marginal abatement cost, is USD -3.4/tCO2eq, 
demonstrating that the project is highly cost -effective.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
The expected volume of finance leveraged, and the sources of this finance, was set out in Section  
E.6.2 . In summary, the total volume of the co -financing is USD 359,990 the volume of co -finance 
(mitigation only) is USD 105,964.  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
The methodology for estimating this indicator was set out in Section E.6.2.  
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a comparable context.  
Other  releva 
estimated c 
generated  a nt indicators (e.g. 
ost per co -benefit  
s a result of the project)  The economic benefit of the interventions has also been assessed 
using a full cost -benefit analysis. These provide a key indicator of the  
economic efficiency of the adaptation interventions. The benefit to cost 
ratios are set out in Section E.6.3.  
 
* The  informa   
tion can be drawn from the project appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial model, t aking into consideration the 
information provided in section E.6.3 ). 
The results of the economic and financial analysis were set out in Section E.6.3. This presented the economic 
appraisal. It also presented the financial analysis for the market based mitigation options. Overall, the economic 
appraisal, and the high benefit to cost ratios, demonstrates that the project has a very hi gh net present value (at 
a 10% discount rate), and will lead to large net economic benefits in Rwanda. The benefits include direct 
economic benefits, but also large environmental and social benefits.  
The watershed protection involves a suite of interventio ns. This intervention addresses the high current 
economic costs of climate variability and emerging climate change in Rwanda, and the high costs of soil erosion, 
landslides and floods, as well as the effects of rainfall variability. The intervention is pri marily focused on 
integrated and sustainable landscape management, which includes agroforestry, protective forests, soil and 
water conservation, and rain water harvesting. The GCF investment will primarily be in public goods and 
ecosystem services, using e cosystem based adaptation and climate resilient agriculture. There are some direct 
financial benefits for some options (notably agroforestry) but the main benefits are economic (non -market), and 
arise from the combination of reduced impacts of climate chan ge, enhanced ecosystem services and reduced 
greenhouse gas emissions. The economic analysis shows a high benefit to cost ratio from these interventions, 
estimated at 2.8:1.  
Investments in climate resilient production of tea and coffee , target two of the to p exports of Rwanda 
(totalling 25% of exports by value). Interventions primarily address the impact of climate change on these 
sectors, on both in terms of productivity and quality, which is reducing small -holder incomes as well as affecting 
exports. The i nterventions will increase climate resilience, reduce GHG emissions, and increase 
revenues/incomes. The economic benefits are high (including environmental benefits), and they also show a 
high financial viability (IRR) to farmers (>25%), but there is a lac k of awareness and barriers to their uptake. The 
GCF finance is being used to provide technical assistance (in the form of farmer field schools) to support climate 
resilient farming practices as well as investments in tree belts, shade trees, irrigation an d up slope planting. The 
interventions  also target  new Government  agricultural  development  plans  to increase  the land area of production 
under cultivation (for tea and coffee). Current plans for expansion run the risk of locking -in areas for production 
that will become  unsuitable  in the future112. The project  will invest  in mainstreaming  information  (public  good)  to 
help Government and external investors plan this expansion so it is climate resilient. The benefits arise from the 
reduced impacts of climate change, and thus the protection of future production, revenues and exports. Finally,  
 
 
 
 
112 Given the very long investment lifetimes in these sectors (and the long lifetime of new plantations), these investments will be 
exposed to future climate  change.


---
*Page 75*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 93  
 
 
the GCF finance is therefore investing in information (the value of information) to help prepare for future risks113 
and improve future decision making as part of an iterative climat e risk management framework. Again, tea and 
coffee involve a longer investment cycle, as these are long lived crops, which is affected by the 10% discount 
rate used. Nonetheless, the combination of activities in the tea and coffee area show high economic b enefits 
(10%DR), with an overall benefit to cost ratio of 2:1. These benefits (financial and economic) have a positive 
distributional effect, as they predominantly occur to small -holder and subsistence farmers.  
The forestry investments will lead to increas ed revenues through improvements in quality and productivity, and 
also additional income streams from non -timber forest products. These also lead to large non -market benefits 
from sequestration (of carbon) and wider ecosystem service benefits, including re duced soil erosion, soil 
stabilisation, reduced landslides and flooding, reduced sediment loads in water systems and biodiversity 
benefits. While the investments are potentially financially viable in IRR terms (12 -16%) the long period of 
investment before payback means that GCF finance is targeted to bridging finance. The interventions do 
generate  a positive  benefit  to cost ratio (1.3:1),  though  the value  is lower  than other  interventions  due to the long- 
term cycle of forestry and the high discount rate used in the assessment (although the benefits exclude many of 
the wider ecosystem service benefits, as these could not easily be  monetised).  
The next area targets the household energy sector , looking to reduce biomass consumption through the use of 
biogas and improved cook stoves. The financial benefits and IRRs of these interventions are generally high, due 
to the fuel wood savings they can achieve, and the project is focused on creating the markets and awareness to 
simulate uptake. The interventions have large economic benefits through the combination of direct benefits, but 
also high non -market benefits, from reduced GHG emissions, health benefits from reduced indoor pollution, and 
reduced pressure on deforestation (with associated high ecosystem service benefits). The benefit to cost ratio for 
this intervention is high, at 6.5:1.  
Investments in two green rural settlements will reduce GHG emissions, from the combination of lower 
embodied carbon in construction materials and the switch to biogas in homes. T he latter has important non - 
market benefits by reducing wood fuel use, avoiding deforestation, and also leads to health benefits from 
reductions in indoor air pollution. The development also leads to additional health benefits through the provision 
of wat er to cope with rainfall variability and the reduced risk of natural hazards such a landslides and floods.  
These strengthen the economic case. The combination of activities has an overall benefit to cost ratio of 1:1 
(10% DR).  
Investments  in improving  energy  efficiency  in the tea factories  of Rwanda  also have  very large  economic  and 
financial benefits. The financial viability of energy efficiency in the sector is high (with an IRR of ~ 50%), but 
current information failures and lack of awareness hinders  uptake: the GCF finance is being used to address 
these barriers through technical assistance and subsidies on biogas and fuel efficient stoves. The economic 
benefits of these interventions are very high, primarily due to the large GHG emission reductions that they 
subsequently achieve, as well as cost savings from reduced energy use. The latter also leads to large 
environmental benefits, as it reduces fuel wood consumption (the primary energy source for tea processing in 
the factories) and therefore reduce s greenhouse gas emissions. The current levels of wood use from tea 
factories in Rwanda are very high, and represent one of the largest industrial users: there are therefore large 
benefits from energy efficiency as this will reduce the current wood deficit  in Rwanda, reducing pressure 
(indirectly) on deforestation and increasing wider ecosystem service benefits. The benefit to cost ratio of the 
technical assistance energy efficiency measures is high, at  8:1. 
The high focus  on climate  change  impacts,  public goods  and non-market  sectors  means  that the project  does  not 
generate a cash flow that returns to the project. However, the financial analysis of the market based 
interventions shows that they generate sufficient revenues to be self -sustaining and the econ omic analysis 
provides a strong overall rationale for the  project.  
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for the concessionality that GCF 
provides, with a reference to the finan cial structure proposed in section B.2.  
The accreditation status of the Ministry of Environment (MOE) (direct access, national) limits the financial 
instruments available to direct grants. However, while the accreditation status means a focus on direct gra nts, 
the interventions in the project have been designed (see above) to maximise the efficiency and effectiveness of 
these grants. For mitigation, grant elements have been tailored to address the incremental cost or the risk 
premium required to make invest ment viable, or to cover specific activities such as technical assistance.  
Mitigation components have also leveraged public and private co -finance. For adaptation, grant elements have  
 
113 the long -term projections show major changes in the agro -climatic zones of the country from climate change, which could have very 
significant impacts on the suitability of current areas for production of tea and coffee, and could lead to shifts in the pre valence and 
incidence of pests and  disease


---
*Page 76*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 93  
 
 
been targeted to provide technical assistance, provide support for public goods, and create the enabling 
environment to address barriers, leveraging on public – and where possible – private finance.  
 
 
 
 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, describe  why it is the most 
appropriate for this project.  
A range of innovative technologies and best practices will be promoted under the project. These 
technologies will be applied based on an understanding of the specific local context of the settlement, land, or 
infrastructure in the project site, and tailore d to the needs of the target beneficiaries. The technologies that will be 
promoted include:  
• watershed protection - agroforestry, gully plugs, soak away pits, protective  forests  
• sustainable forest management – improved seeds, planting techniques and matchin g of species to site conditions, improved 
silviculture, improved cook -stoves (Tier 3 and 4 cook -stoves (the most efficient) are not currently available in Rwanda; their 
local production will be supported under the project), and rain water  harvesting;  
• affordable, low carbon building materials, approaches and technologies - soil stabilised compressed earth blocks, appropriate 
landscaping, biogas as sustainable energy  sources.  
 
The application of best practices and technologies is discussed earlier in thi s proposal in Section E.6.4. The 
technologies and approaches that are proposed in this proposal have each undergone a rigorous options 
analysis as part of the feasibility studies that were carried out in support of this design. The options analyses and 
a detailed description of various technologies and their appropriateness are provided in the three component 
reports (attached as reports 1, 2 and 3 respectively) that have been prepared with support from the PPF.  
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, incl uding Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social Management Pl an, and how the 
project will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s 
Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the F und’s Gender Policy 
and Action Plan.  
The ESIA and gender analysis are attached as separate reports under Annex 1 respectively. 
Environmental and social impact assessments have been used to assess the project as a whole and to assess 
each intervention and mitigating changes were made to the pr oposal in line with the recommendations of the 
ESIA and the gender analysis.  
Environmental assessment  
The project is expected to have largely positive impacts on the environment as much of the GCF 
investment is targeted towards ecosystem based adaptation a nd interventions that reduce emissions. The main 
potential adverse environmental impacts of the project is the potential modification of hydrological flows for 
downstream users of the Mulindi marshland stream from the proposed irrigation investments that a re part of the 
tea resilience measures to be implemented in Mulinid tea plantation. The agriculture feasibility study identified 
the need to improve the drainage of the Mulindi tea plantation as a resilience measure to cope with the 
increasing occurrence o f flooding in recent years due to erratic and intense rainfall events. Unusually for tea, the 
plantation is located in an upland marshland valley. The area is also affected by droughts and there is an 
increasing issue of rainfall variability and extreme dr y years with increasing dry spell duration. Irrigation is 
considered an essential adaptation measure to reduce tea farmer’s vulnerability to climate variability and avoid 
production losses and livelihood deterioration.  
The feasibility study team proposed a  marshland irrigation scheme to alleviate flooding and to improve 
the availability of water. Controlling water flows in the marshland will mitigate flooding caused by over bank 
flows of the river or feedback from the Ugandan portion of the marshland during  the wet season and will provide 
a supply of water to tea fields in the dry season. Construction works for the marshland drainage will entail; an 
open trapezoidal central drain, with lateral drains, which will serve the purpose of both the surface and sub - 
surface drainage system. Primary and secondary surface drains are also planned which will work as a secondary 
canal during the dry season and as a drain during the wet season. These interventions, if not well designed, 
have the potential to destabilise th e receiving downstream users and temporary destabilise the  ecosystem  
dependent on the current river flow. During the dry season, water will be drawn from the stream thereby reducing


---
*Page 77*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 93  
 
 
flow quantities, changing flood flows and affecting biodiversity downstream. The ESIA has recommended that 
the irrigation design shall:  
 avoid modification of hydrological flows for downstream users of Mulindi river  stream;
 cater for ecological flows that can sustain the existing aquatic ecological life in the river stream, specifically diversion 
structures will incorporate release of ecological flows from the central drain to maintain a specific water level downstream that 
can sustain the existing aquatic ecological life in the river  stream;
 ensure a proper drainage network allowing for return flow from the plantation plots into the stream during the dry  season;
 consider measures to avoid destructive flooding events, such as the possibility of occurrence of  floods in 20, 50 or 100 years 
and ensure a proper drainage network allowing for return flow from the plantation plots into the stream during the dry season ; 
and
 cater for measures to minimise water logging, salinization, siltation or scouring of drains or  canals.
During implementation, the ESIA recommends that:  
• Water Users’ Associations (WUA) are established to manage distribution, maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure and 
resolve arising conflicts over water distribution within the  marshland; 
 Phytolaca  decocandra  is planted  along  the shores  of the river to destroy  Bilharzia  snails  that serve  as hosts of  shistosomiasis; 
 a green buffer zone planted with Bamboo species is established at least 2m from the central drain and primary side canals of 
the irrigation scheme to prevent destruction of central drain boundaries and open canals by tea farmers;  and
 water losses from leakage of open irrigation canals are prevented through, regular canal inspections and lining of Irrigation  
canals with pervious so ils to prevent ground seepage of water into the  soil.
These recommendations have been included in the final design, workplan and budget.  
Social assessment  
The ESIA has identified a number of potential social risks and impacts which are all covered in the 
published report . The main risk stems from the need to expropriate 20 ha of agricultural land for the Kangia 
settlement. A comprehensive Abbreviated Resettlement action plan (ARAP or RAP) and livelihood Resettlement 
action plan (LRP) will be completed to th e satisfaction of National laws and GCF E&S safeguard policies.  
Moreover, compensation at full replacement cost with reference to Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be 
provided for each person before construction works begin and not go beyond the 120 days  from cut -off date. In 
addition, to avoid income losses from missed cultivation due to delays in compensation and construction of the 
settlement:  
 Affected agricultural land owners shall be allowed to cultivate their land with only seasonal crops as 
they wait for compensation  and further  as stated  in the National  expropriation  law, an additional  120 
days after they have received compensation;  and
 Full replacement compensation shall be expedited with 120 days of the cut -off date.
Other social risks include:  local resistance against proposed watershed protection interventions on their private 
land; occupational health hazards during construction and operation of settlements and production facilities; and 
the potential for poor employment conditions especially  child labour and exclusion of women from employment 
for certain jobs and training.  
Gender analysis  
The gender analysis identified a number of gender barriers and inequalities in Rwanda and Gicumbi 
District and has provided entry points and recommendations  to address these issues to ensure the interventions 
are gender -inclusive and –responsive during implementation. Understanding and championing —as opposed to 
ignoring and underestimating —the tremendous expertise of women is a key aspect of this approach. On e of the 
critical barriers that the project will tackle is that typically men have greater access to, and control over monetary 
benefits resulting from the livelihoods that the project will support (tree nurseries, woodlots, bee -keeping, brick 
making, tea plucking etc.) while women’s access to these activities are limited and hinder their ability to generate 
substantial income thus perpetuating their poverty and dependence on men. The project includes a range of 
costed measures to ensure the equitable parti cipation of women and men in the project, these have been listed 
separately in a Gender Inclusion and Action Plan and include:  
• interventions that prioritise accessible and equal training opportunities for women and men and ensure that they 
participate equa lly—fully and effectively, as well as address the differentiated knowledge and experiences of women 
and men;  
• equal access to all employment opportunities created through the project (requests for proposals will ensure that 
gender parity is a requirement) a nd enforcement of the relevant provisions of the 2009 labour  law; 
• specific targeting of women headed households with young children in the allocation of social housing in Kabeza 
and Kaniga recognising that these households are particularly vulnerable to climate  change;  
• the introduction of services and amenities in the two settlements to enhance the lives and livelihoods of women and 
men in the community,  in particular  biogas  and water  harvesting  that significantly  reduce  the burden  on women  and 
children having to walk long distances for water and fuelwood;


---
*Page 78*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 93  
 
 
• addressing the multiple barriers to women accessing financial  capital;  
• integration of specific gender sensitive indicators and targets into the results framework so that progress can be 
measured during  implementation;  
• establishing a Community Consultation Committee for the project, which will have the sector and/or cell woman’s 
focal point  participating;  
• coordination with Rwanda’s  national level gender machinery and local women’s organisations, in particular the 
National Women’s Council and the VSLA, to ensure that gender is mainstreamed throughout the timeline of a 
project and that women’s collective voice is represented;  
• gender s ensitisation sessions and training for stakeholders, implementing agencies and partners (including District 
officials)  to build  the capacity  and understanding  of women’s  rights,  gender  issues,  the linkages  with climate  change.  
The project will use the GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standard and comply with the 
GCF’s Gender Policy and Action Plan. The PMU will supplement the Safeguard standard and Gender policy 
with additional elements where appropriate to improve  Project Performance and the performance of individual 
projects or initiatives. Issues raised in the EIA (attached at Annex 1) will be tracked throughout the life of the 
project so that the project will be subjected to ongoing periodic review of the issues  raised in the EIA. This is in 
line with the conditions set out by GCF in accrediting MOE. The general and more comprehensive compliance 
with ESS will rely on equivalence assessments of national ESS standards with IFC performance standards (PS 
2- 8) that a re planned as a quality assurance measure for Rwanda’s ESS standards. Gender disaggregated 
indicators have been incorporated into the results framework to ensure effective tracking of progress and 
outcomes in line with GCF’s Gender Policy and Action Plan.  
The project includes specific measures to ensure that women benefit from the training and livelihood 
opportunities and includes gender sensitive indicators in its M&E system. For example, women and 
vulnerable groups will be explicitly targeted for particip ation in capacity development and the establishment and 
use of the demonstration nurseries and plots, and, from that wider engagement in management planning for 
protective forest and the forestry roll -out more generally. An annual gender assessment will tr ack progress 
against targets in the Gender Inclusion and Action Plan and monitor the evolving adaptation strategies of women 
and men as well as assess the influence of project interventions on changes in gender roles and power relations 
and how this affect s women’s vulnerabilities to climate change in Gicumbi. The assessment will also ensure that 
interventions are gender sensitive using the results from monitoring of the gender disaggregated indicators in the 
project framework to ensure gender parity in the  distribution of project benefits. The mid term and end of project 
evaluation will also incorporate a vulnerability and gender analysis to assess the performance of the project 
against specific targets and to build a narrative around the effects of the int erventions on different groups. The 
project will also build the capacity for national evaluators to be involved in the M&E activities to facilitate learning 
and uptake of best available practices in Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) and Gender stand ards.  
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, disbursement methods and auditing.  
Financial Management  
The GoR has well defined robust, transparent and accountable public financial management systems in 
place and these are essential elements for the effective, accountable management of the project. In general the 
project will follow the Government of Rwanda  procedures for planning, budgeting and accounting, which are 
outlined in:  
• Organic law n° 12/2013/ol of 12/09/2013 on state finances and property (Official Gazette n° Special of  05/11/2013);  
• Ministerial order n°001/16/10/tc of 26/01/2016 relating to financial regulations (Official Gazette n° Special of 03/02/2016);  and 
• supporting operational manuals issued by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning  (MINECOFIN).  
MINECOFIN has adopted the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) approach to planni ng and 
budgeting : funds received by MOE are “on budget” as far as the Government is concerned and will be included 
in the MTEF process, which results in the presentation of the annual budget to Parliament. In its accounting 
system, the GoR has adopted the International Public Sector Accounting Standard (IPSAS) related to modified 
cash accounting principles issued by the International Federation of Accountants.  
The primary entities receiving and managing project funds (MOE, FONERWA and the District of Gicumb i) 
use the Government’s financial management systems and procedures including the computerised 
Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) which embeds key internal controls (such as 
mandatory payments against budget and commitment recording ) into operations. The budget classification used 
within IFMIS facilitates production of Government accounts which are consistent with the internationally  
recognised UN system of national accounts Classification of the Functions of Government (COFOG). 1. B ased


---
*Page 79*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 93  
 
 
on the under LAW Nº 6/2012 of 22/05/2012 FONERWA operated under MOE (the accredited entity) with the 
Permanent Secretary of MOE as the Chief Budget Manager (CBM). Under the new Law revised in 39/2017 OF 
16/08/2017, FONERWA as an autonomous institution will be assessed for financial management capacity. This 
will also be required for Gicumbi District.  
Project funds from the GCF will be received into a dedicated MOE bank account he ld at the National 
Bank of Rwanda (BNR) in US Dollars. The project intends to make grants to partner institutions to implement 
some project activities. Accounting for the advance of grants will be managed through IFMIS. Additional reports 
from the accounti ng systems of the respective partner institution on the status of such grants and unused 
balances will be obtained by FONERWA.  
The selection of partner institutions will be managed by FONERWA’s Fund Management Committee. The 
pre-selection of partner entiti es to receive grants will include assessment of the capacity of their financial 
management systems to manage, properly disburse funds and account for grant funds. Legally binding grant 
management agreements will be prepared and signed in all cases and the accounting arrangements will be on 
an “open book” basis. All implementing partners will be required to provide quarterly financial reports on grant 
status and annual audited accounts. No loans will be made under the project. The existing financial manageme nt 
systems for the project will be strengthened by the appointment of a number of key posts for the duration of the 
project. These include, inter alia: 
1. An accountant based in the PMU to manage financial accounting and reporting  arrangements;  
2. An internal auditor (based in MOE) to undertake systematic risk assessment and with the remit to cover funds and systems in all 
entities – including partner organisations – receiving or using from project  funds;  
3. A procurement  specialist;  
4. A financial management specialist with an IFAC -recognised qualification and the requisite experience;  and 
5. A legal  advisor.  
These post holders will work with their institutional counterparts and will ensure that fiduciary risk is 
identified and managed. All supporting financial r ecords will be properly filed and retained to facilitate internal 
control systems and the project will maintain its own asset register of all major items procured for the project. 
The location, condition and custodianship of assets will be periodically che cked on a sample basis. Financial 
reporting to MOE will take place quarterly although key internal controls (such as production of expenditure 
reports and bank reconciliations) will be monthly. Consolidated financial reports will be presented to the Projec t 
Steering Committee every three months.  
Financial reports will be provided to the GCF in accordance with Clause 17 of the AMA which states:  
( a ) on a semi -annual basis within sixty (60) days after 30 June or 31 December of each year (or such 
other frequency agreed in the  FAA):  
(i) the dates and amounts disbursed for Funded Activities, for the period reported and 
cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded Activity, and  compliance 
with financial  covenants:  
(ii) the actual expenditures for the Funded  Activities for the period reported and  cumulative 
amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded  Activity;  
(iii) (A) the date on which any Funded Activity is financially closed, (B) the final amount 
disbursed for such Funded Activity, (C) the amount of an y unused funds from such  Funded 
Activity and (D) the amount of such unused funds paid to the Fund, for the period reported, 
broken down by each such Funded  Activity;  
(iv) the dates and amounts of any Reflowed Funds received by the Accredited Entity from 
Funded Activities, as well as the amount of such Reflowed Funds paid to the Fund for  the 
period reported and cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded 
Activity; and  
(v) a statement of Investment Income earned on GCF Proceeds, as well as the amou nt of such 
Investment Income paid to the  Fund;  
( b ) within  two (2)months  after the end of the GCF  Fiscal Year,  an unaudited  annual  financial  statement 
for each of the Funded Activities and the GCF Account containing the information required under 
Clauses 17.02(a)(i), 17.02(a)(ii) and 17.02(a)(v) with specific Funded Activities listed in a separate 
annex, and within four (4) months after the end of the GCF Fiscal Year, an audited annual financial 
statement for each of the Funded Activities and the GCF Accou nt containing the same  information;  
( c ) within two (2) months after expiration or termination of this Agreement, an unaudited final  financial


---
*Page 80*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 93  
 
 
statement for the GCF Account, and within fo ur (4) months after expiration or termination, an audited 
final financial statement for the GCF Account, in each case regarding the period since the last period 
covered by the statements referred to in Clause 17.02(b) above; and  
(d) such other reports related to funds disbursed by the Fund to the Accredited Entity, as may 
reasonably be requested by the Fund from time to time.  
Internal Audit  
An internal auditor is provided for as part of MOE’s oversight role. This will be a full time post funded through the 
AE fee. This person will supplement MOE’s and FONERWA’s internal audit capacity, with a mandate to assess 
the internal control systems in any implementing entities in receipt of funds under the project. Project funds will 
be subject to internal audit, which will be implemented through a compliance based annual Internal Audit (IA) 
workplan. To ensure that there is regular and sufficient assessment of the internal control environment of the 
financial management systems used to receive, manage and report o n GCF Funds the following activities will be 
carried out:  
• Appoint an Internal Audit Committee in accordance with the Internal Audit Charter included at Annex  18 
• An Internal Auditor will be recruited for the duration of the project, in accordance with the terms of 
reference included in the PIM. The Internal Auditor will be contracted by FONERWA but will report 
findings  to the Internal  Audit  Committee  not to the Project  Management  Unit to provide  the necessary 
independence;  
• The Internal Auditor’s scope of wo rk will include the  following:  
o The assessment  of the financial  management  systems  of all entities  receiving  GCF  funds  either 
for their own use or for onward transmission to third party  entities114; 
o All procurements carried out under the project, by MOE, FONERWA or other entities receiving 
GCF  Funds;  
• In carrying out his work the Internal Auditor  will: 
o Prepare  an annual  internal  audit  workplan which  will be updated  on a rolling  quarterly  basis  and 
which will cover all PFM and Procurement activities and will  be designed to assess whether 
internal controls (as designed and implemented) are likely to prevent or detect errors and 
whether all procurements are likely to be free and fair and result in value for  money;  
o Ensure that the annual workplan responds to pri ority areas of  risk; 
o Where  particular  areas  of concern  or increasing  risk are found,  amend  the workplan  to respond 
accordingly;  and 
o Present  results  to the Internal  Audit  Committee  together  with recommendations  to improve 
financial  management.  
Public services entities are required to maintain internal audit functions. All budget entities must comply with the 
Organic Law and the associated financial regulations providing the legal framework for the management and 
accounting for State finances and proper ty. The procedures are laid out in the manual of Government Policies 
and Procedures for Financial Management and Accounting. This framework is the environment for internal 
control and for the management of all state resources.  
The Internal Auditor appointe d by the project will be allowed access to internal audit workplans and internal and 
external audit reports of all public sector entities in receipt of GCF Funds. Key internal audit reports include:  
• an annual  internal  audit  report  prepared  by the Internal  FONERWA  on project  implementation  processes 
for submission to  MOE;  
• a bi-annual  internal  audit  report  prepared  by the Internal  Audit  Committee  on project  implementation 
processes for submission to the  PSC;  
• a consolidated  audit  report  for all project  entities  prepared  by FONREWA,  and also including  audited 
financial statements for the activities directly implemented by FONERWA for submission to  MOE;  
• audited annual financial statements for the project prepared by OAG/External Auditor for submission  to 
 
114 To ensure that this duty can be discharged all Memoranda of Understanding and contracts between the executing and other 
parties will contain provision for internal Auditor to have access to the financial records of the other parties for the purp oses of 
assessing how well the financial management environment are functioning, whether funds are being used for the intended 
purpose and whether procurements are complying with the principles set on in Paragraph 9.1 of this manual


---
*Page 81*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 93  
 
 
MOE;  
 an internal audit of the procurement process assesses whether national guidelines are adhered  to;
 internal audit of PFM systems and  procedures. 
External Audit  
MININRENA and the District of Gicumbi are audited annually by the Office of the Auditor General for 
State Finances (OAG), in accordance with internationally recognised auditing principles. FONERWA – which 
already receives funds from other development partn ers (KFW and DFID) – is additionally subject to periodic 
financial audit by independent auditors appointed by these institutions. The OAG presents his reports to the 
Public Accounts Committee. Provision can be made for additional audits to be commissioned by the GCF and 
conducted in accordance with GCFs audit policies and procedures. In line with the AMA, the project will be 
audited annually by independent external auditors.  
The project has defined a transparent grievance mechanism which allows any direct o r indirect beneficiary 
to submit a complaint or grievance at the local level and which can be escalated through a number of levels to 
the Office of the Ombudsman if the complainant isn’t satisfied by the response at lower levels. Officers working 
on the pr oject are expected to comply with the Government’s Presidential Order N°45/01 of 30/06/2015 which 
establishes a Code of Professional Ethics for Public Servants. In addition senior management staff are required 
to disclose and register their valued assets w ith the Office of the Ombudsman on an annual basis to establish 
the rate of asset accumulation is commensurate with expected income levels.  
Project procurement  
Procurements will be conducted under the regulatory regime in Rwanda which applies directly to a ll 
Government entities including MOE, FONERWA and the District of Gicumbi. Relevant regulation includes:  
• Law n° 12/2007 of 27/03/2007 on public procurement as amended to  date;
• Ministerial order n° 001/14/10/tc of 19/02/2014 establishing regulations on publ ic; and procurement, standard bidding documents 
and standard  contracts. 
These regulations embed the principles of fairness, transparency, accountability and the promotion of 
competition economy and efficiency. In addition, because some procurements will be  made by the recipients of 
grant funds the project is implementing a pre -award due diligence process to ensure partner organisations have 
in place appropriate procurement systems which ensure that same principles will be applied as exists in the 
public sec tor regulations. FONERWA’s procurement function will be supplemented by a small procurement 
function to help deliver services such as technical advisory to project recipients and on -going capacity building 
sessions that are regularly provided to staff with in public institutions.  
More details on the project’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing are provided in the Project Implementation Manual (Annex 5).


---
*Page 82*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 93  
 
 
  G.1. Risk Assessment  Summary   
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be elaborated  in G.2.  
The Team Leader and the Component Leads will assess and update the risk factors and mitigation measures 
as part of the project reporting. The most significant risks are considered to be associated with low awareness 
and a lack of capacity of the district authority to engage fully with the project but the pr oject design has 
incorporated detailed mitigation measures to ensure these do not adversely impact of project implementation. 
A comprehensive risk assessment with a description of risk factors and mitigation measures is included in the 
Project Implementati on Manual.  
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the project  objectives 
from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Low capacity of farmers and communities to invest in adaptation actions 
where public benefits dominate jeopardises project objectives.  Social/ 
environmental  High Moderate  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Community Adaptation Facility is intended to enhance the uptake of the proposed watershed protection measures. The Facili ty will 
function as delivery mechanism whereby communities receive grants for either community -level or household investments providing 
public goods. The CAF115 will be established through the project and managed (with assistance) by communities themselves, to:  
• provide an incentive for investment and participation in project activities yielding public  goods;  
• instil community ownership in project activities and, through community members active participation;  and 
• build awareness and understanding of the benefits of the project  interventions.  
The project will also use demonstrat ion plots and learning exchange visits to raise awareness of the benefits of watershed 
interventions. Moreover, by training and deploying a skilled team of field staff, the project will establish high quality far mer and 
community engagement from the outset . This risk mitigation measure is expected to reduce the probability of the risk occurring to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
6 years is insufficient time to prove benefits from adaptation.  Operational  Moderate  Moderate  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The focus of the projects is on low -regret options, and these provide immediate benefits in relation to productivity. This will allow 
several years of data from the initial implementation, although the values may be affected by normal climate variability (e.g. if there is a 
particularly bad year). This would allow to identify emerging problems and opportunities for enhancing climate change respons e from  
both the public and private sectors. This risk mitigation measure is expected to reduce the probability of the risk occurring to low.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
High costs of improved cooking technologies deter households from  
investing. This would affect the targets for carbon savings and result in 
continuing health impacts from indoor pollution.   
Financial   
High  
Moderate  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The investment in the promotional activities will demonstrate the savings that can be achieved with the new technology. The 
Implementation planning clearly identifies and matches technologies and beneficiary groups available resources. The project w ill 
provide grant and subsidy finance and targets appropriate groups. Thi s risk mitigation measure is expected to reduce the probability of 
the risk occurring to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Operational targets for each component not included in District Imihigo 
framework. Project activities then become deprioritised by District staff 
and activities are not delivered to time/quality, and capacity to manage  
the activities is not developed.   
Institutional   
High  
Moderate  
 
115 Community grants for the CAF will be provided by FONERWA (no GCF finance will be used for the grants, GCF finance will 
only be used to provide the TA to support the set up and operation of the  fund)


---
*Page 83*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 93  
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project planning will be aligned with GOR systems. Project workplans are communicated to all stakeholders. District staff  will be 
fully engaged in the planning of activities. Activity reporting is included in District Executive Management M eeting. The project will 
support the recruitment and training of additional district staff to support the delivery of project interventions. This risk  mitigation  
measure is expected to reduce the probability of the risk occurring to low.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
The project will also monitor emerging risks that may arise during the lifetime of the project. These include:  
1. Contracted service providers maintain BAU and do not follow best practice . This would severely impact on the adaptation 
and mitigation potential because many of the results depend on the uptake of improved technologies and approaches. This would 
also compromise the project’s value for money. The component leads and the PMU will ensure that contracts contain necessary 
standards  and conditions and will monitor and enforce these standards. The project will also recruit a high calibre TA team to 
manage interventions and supervise operations. There is also provision to provide technical training and capacity development  for 
service providers and the project will work closely with key enforcement agencies (RHA, RWFA and REMA) to ensure standards 
are inherent in all procurement and contractual  agreements.  
2. Women and vulnerable groups do not participate in, or benefit from, project. Women and vulnerable groups will be 
specifically targeted in awareness raising, capacity development, employment opportunities and demonstration works. The resul ts 
framework includes gender disaggregated indicators and targets to ensure the equitable distr ibution of benefits. The project will 
invest in capacity strengthening for Central and Local Government staff and communities to achieve a gender balance in the 
value chain. All implementation arrangements and contracts will require suitable facilities for  women and vulnerable  groups.  
A full and comprehensive risk register is included in the Project Implementation Manual and will be updated on a quarterly ba sis as part 
of the project reporting cycle.  
 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
Please specify the logic framewor k in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under the Results Management  
Framework . 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level116 
Paradigm shift objectives  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development1 This proposal addresses existing climate risks, but also implements early actions that start building for future 
climate change in key economic sectors that are expanding the fastest such as agriculture, energy and 
construction. GCF finance wi ll restore critical watershed functions that support the majority of Gicumbi’s 
mostly rural population and hence strengthen the climate resilience of those most vulnerable to climate 
change. It will also invest in climate resilient agriculture to support s mallholder farmers and improve the 
management of forest resources using best practice. This will facilitate a shift away from subsistence farming 
of marginal lands into more productive and sustainable livelihoods.  
An explicit objective of the project is to  inform scale up. The project has a high potential to cost effectively 
scale up, replicate and sustain the results of the project interventions beyond project completion due to the 
strong GoR ownership of the project’s design and delivery. By using existin g delivery channels and the 
machinery of GoR institutions such as RAB and Gicumbi District to implement the project along with well 
established private sector national agencies and charitable foundations such as NAEB and the Wood 
Foundation, the results of  the interventions as well as the knowledge and experience developed during 
implementation are much more likely to be internalised to GoR’s existing and future projects, plans and 
policies than if this project was executed by a multilateral agency. This in vestment therefore has the potential 
to have wide reaching impact across national planning and policy processes. Moreover, because Rwanda 
will be using it’s own climate financing infrastructure, i.e. the national climate fund, FONERWA, to manage 
the projec t, there is a huge potential to replicate successful approaches across Rwanda’s existing climate 
change projects and also in the design of future climate  investments.  
The project includes a strong focus on best practice, building local capcity and the tech nologies promoted by 
the project are financially viable, utilise local natural resources, are easily transferable, and will be delivered 
through community based approaches so there is strong potential for these activities to continue beyond the 
end of the project.  
 
Expected Result   
Indicator  Means of  
Verification 
(MoV)   
Baseline   
Target   
Assumptions  
    Mid-term  Final   
Fund level impacts  
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  3.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent reduced 
as a result of Fund - 
funded  projects  Project 
reports  0 31,176  
See note 2  133,674  
See note 3  District provides the 
necessary land for building 
works and competent firms 
are contracted to deliver best 
practice in low carbon 
building design and 
construction.  
 
116 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at  the following link (Please note that some indicators are under 
refinement): http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 84*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 9 3 
 
 
      Tea factory provides 
necessary co - finance and 
undertakes implementation.  
Incentives and take - up at 
national level effective.  
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land 
use, deforestation, 
forest degradation, and 
through sustainable 
management of forests  
and conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks  4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) as a 
result of Fund -funded 
projects/projects – forest 
and land -use sub -indicator  Project 
reports  0 62,362  
See note 4  140,046  
See note 5  District and private land - 
owners make land available 
for project interventions. High 
uptake of improved practices.  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities, and 
regions  1.2 Number of males and 
females benefiting from 
the adoption of diversified, 
climate - resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  Project 
reports  0 75,000  
(39,225  
women)  150,000  
(78,450  
women) 
See note 6  Vulnerable groups and 
women are effectively 
targeted and are enabled to 
participate in the project.  
 
Notes:  
1. Proposed assessment based on a combination of quantitative and qualitative information that goes beyond simple aggregation of  the results’ 
indicato rs. Elements to be considered include the overall contribution to low -carbon development pathways, consistent with a temperature 
increase of less than 2 degrees, the degree to which knowledge and learning are achieved, extent to which the enabling enviro nment is 
created or enhanced, and extent to which the regulatory framework and policies are  strengthened.  
2. Includes reductions 20,981 t CO2eq for tea factory efficiency at Mulindi and national adoption, 9,118 tCO 2 from cookstoves and biogas 1,077  
tCO2e from biogas at the IDP  villages.  
3. Includes reductions of 59261 tCO2eq for Energy biomass, 70,105 t CO2eq for tea factory efficiency, and 4308t CO2eq from bioga s at the 
IDP villages  
4. Includes reductions from 1) Agroforestry 21,557 t CO 2eq; and 2) Fores try 40,805t  CO 2eq 
5. Includes reductions from Agroforestry 70,060 t CO2eq; Forestry 69,986 t  CO 2eq 
6. Includes 27,456 people adopting RWH, 49,733 people benefitting from agro -forestry, 9,240 people benefitting from CRA, 14,261benefitting 
from off -farm livelihood  opportunities, 51,312 people (incl. 26,760 women) engaged in watershed protection and forestry; 880 vulnerable 
people (incl. 460 women and girls) benefiting from social housing and green infrastructure in Kabeza and  Kaniga.  
 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Act ivities and Inputs at Project level  
 
 
Expected Result   
 
Indicator   
 
Means of 
Verification (MoV)   
 
Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions  Mid- 
term 
(if 
applica 
ble)  
Final  
Project 
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions  M9.1 Hectares of land or 
forests under improved and 
effective management that 
contributes to CO 2 emission 
reductions  Project 
reports  0 5400  17,895  Communities supportive 
and adopt improved 
practices  
Increased use of 
innovative technologies 
and approaches to 
support low -emission 
development  Number of technologies and 
innovative solutions 
transferred or licensed to 
support low -emission 
development as a result of 
Fund support. See Not e 1. Project 
reports  0 11 11 Technologies and 
approaches applied 
successfully, yield 
positive results and 
stimulate demand  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public -sector 
services of Fund - supported 
tools, instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond to 
climate change and variability. 
(Households disaggregated by 
male -headed and female - 
headed). See Note 2.  Project 
reports  Very 
limited use 
of tools et c. 
to respond 
to climate 
variability  At least 40% of 
target HH 
report the 
adoption of one 
or more tool, 
instrument, 
strategy or 
activity to 
respond  to At least 80% of 
target HH 
report the 
adoption of one 
or more tool, 
instrument, 
strategy or 
activity to 
respond  to Target groups 
supportive and adopt 
tools etc. to respond to 
climate change and 
variability


---
*Page 85*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 93  
 
 
    climate change 
and variability  climate change 
and variability   
 
Project outputs   
Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Sub -catchment B of the 
Muvumba watershed 
restored and small scale 
tea and coffee farmers  
supported to adopt 
climate resilient practices  Area (ha) under erosion 
control  Maps 
Project 
reports  
 
 
 
Maps 
Project 
reports  
 
Maps 
Project 
reports 
Maps 
Project 
reports  
 
Maps 
Project 
reports  0 625 1250  Communities commit to 
soil erosion control 
measures  
 Area (ha) under (i) protective  
forest cover (ii) agro -forestry  0 (i) 450  
(ii) 3300  (i) 1375  
(ii) 9790  Communities supportive  
of protective forestry 
and agro -forestry 
interventions  
 Area (ha) of slope stabilised 
with napier grass  0 1874  1874  Land made available by 
the tea plantation  
 Area (ha) of higher elevations 
planted with tea/ coffee  0 0 50 (tea) /35 
(coffee)  Land made available by 
the tea plantation and 
supported by tea 
cooperatives / farmers  
 No. of smallholders trained in 
CRA through farmer field 
schools  0 4900  7430  Smallholders motivated 
to participate in FFS  
2. Communities  Area (ha) of forest renewed  Site 0 673 2261  Sufficient high quality  
supported to implement  with high quality plants and  surveys     seeds and plant  
sustainable forest  best practice establishment  Project     material available.  
management and adopt   report     Forest owners commit  
fuel-efficient cooking       to forest renewal. Forest  
methods       workers commit to best  
      practice  
 Area (ha) of seed stands  Site 0 20 30 Suitable sites identified  
 established and managed  surveys 
Project 
reports     
NTSC engage with and 
support interventions  
 No of high quality seedlings  Nursery  0 180,000  360,000  Sufficient high quality  
 raised in time for the start of  audits     seed available  
 planting season  Project 
report     
Nursery groups and 
workers adopt best  
      practice  
 No of community members  Project  0 1800  3960  Demand for nursery  
 trained in tree nursery  reports     products continues to  
 management      grow  
 No. of Tree Nurseries, Tree  Proof of  7 21 40 Individuals and  
 Growers and Bee Keeping  registration  (at least  (at least 50% of  (at least 50% of  communities interested  
 cooperatives or associations  Business  20% of  members and  members and  in setting up  
 operational. See note 3.  plans  members  50% of  50% of  cooperatives /  
  Members  and 10% of  committee  committee  associations  
  records  committee  members are  members are   
  (disaggreg  members  women)  women)   
  ated by  are    
  gender)  women)     
 No. of households or  District and  0 stoves  8000 stoves tier  23,400 stoves  HHs and institutions can  
 institutions installing and  program  tier 1 and 2  1 and 2  tier 1 and 2  be motivated to invest in  
 operating efficient energy  records  800 1200 domestic  1700 domestic  improved energy for  
 technologies for cooking   domestic  biogas units  biogas units  cooking  
 (stoves tier 1 and 2; domestic   biogas  4 institutional  5 institutional   
 biogas units; institutional   units  biogas units,  biogas units,   
 biogas units, gasifier stoves   3 1000 gasifier  3900 gasifier   
 tier ¾; large stoves for   institutional  stoves tier ¾  stoves  tier ¾   
 institutions)   biogas  20 large stoves  40 large stoves   
   units  for institutions  for institutions   
   0 gasifier     
   stoves tier     
   ¾    
   0 large     
   stoves for     
   institutions     
 Reduced CO 2 emissions from  Energy use  0 20,981  70,105  Tea factory owner and  
 Mulindi tea factory and  audit     managers support and  
 national dissemination


---
*Page 86*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 93  
 
 
      invest in efficiency 
measures  
3. Human settlements 
developed and/or 
modified to increase 
climate resilience  No. of rainwater harvesting 
tanks, cisterns and ponds 
installed    (i) 1620  tanks  
(ii) 15 cisterns  
(iii) 70 ponds  (i) 3240  tanks  
(ii) 30 cisterns  
(iii) 90 ponds  Subsidies are sufficient 
to motivate households 
to invest.  
 No. of low carbon social 
housing units developed and 
occupied by climate vulnerable 
families (disaggregated by 
women headed households)  Project 
Reports  0 200 
(at least 40% 
WHH with 
young children)  200 
(at least 40% 
WHH with 
young children)  The GoR provides the 
necessary infrastructure 
to the site  
 No. of storm -water 
management structures 
installed (gully plugs/check 
dams, infiltration ditches, 
channels planted with 
trees/shrubs/bamboo  Surveys 
Project 
reports 
M&E 
reports  0 4000 gully 
plugs/check 
dams  
6000 infiltration 
ditches  
30km channels 
planted with 
trees/shrubs/ 
bamboo  10,000 gully 
plugs/check 
dams 
13,875  
infiltration 
ditches 
100km 
channels 
planted with 
trees/shrubs/  
bamboo  Suitably qualified 
service providers are 
available and procured 
in a timely manner  
4.Successful adaptation 
and mitigation 
approaches 
communicated and  
mainstreamed at the 
national level  Website developed, 
maintained and promoted to 
users  Project 
reports, 
web 
statistics  No website 
exists  Website 
developed and 
updated on a 
monthly basis  Website 
updated on a 
monthly basis 
and accessed 
regularly  Content is useful and 
easily accessed  
 No. of farmer -to-farmer 
participatory videos made and 
viewed by other farmers  Project 
reports  0 50 100 Farmers interested and 
able to share their 
experiences by video  
 No. of staff from GoR and 
NGOs trained in climate 
resilient forestry, watershed 
management and green 
settlements  Project 
reports  0 200 560  
 No. of people (women, men) 
trained in green and climate 
resilient construction. See note 
4. Project 
Reports  0 580 (incl. 313 
women)  580 (incl. 313 
women)  The housing sites 
developed and people 
will be interested and 
available for training  
 Number of climate resilience 
plans adopted and 
implemented  GoR policy 
and 
planning 
documents. 
Project 
reports  0 1 2 GoR and investors 
concerned and willing to 
act 
RAB undertake high 
quality research and 
analysis and results 
communicated 
effectively.  
 No. of tea/coffee policy 
changes or investment 
decisions influenced by 
climate information  GoR policy 
and 
planning 
documents. 
Project 
reports  0 1 2 Mulindi and new 
plantation investors use 
climate information  
1. These include technologies and approaches that are either new to or at the early stage development in Rwanda : 1) Compressed 
Soil Earth Bricks production using high pressure technology in Modulus factory; 2) Diaphragm brick wall technology; 3) Catalan 
vaulting; 4) slope stabilisation using Vetiver grass (rather than retaining walls); 4) incorporation of structural space ‘for  incremental 
infill’; 5) composite eucalyptus and plywood beams (to be made by local carpenters) for use in roof structures in housing; 6) 
Catalan vaulting; 7) Strawtec panels as ceiling panelling and insulator to protect from radiant heat; 8) install ventilation wood drying 
floor (tea factory Tier 1); 9) install Variable Speed Drive to boiler fan and dryers and install boiler efficiency controls and  insulation 
(tea factory Tier 1); 10) insulate all condensate pipework (tea factory Tier 1); 11) Trough efficiency  improvement  
2. This indicator is both qualitative and quantitative in nature and country -specific. The qualitative aspects will involve a scorecard 
approach and an in - depth analysis to determine the extent of  progress.  
3. For tree nurseries, at least 50% members will be women and at least 50% committee members will be women. For beekeeping, at 
least 65% members will be women and at least 40% committee members will be women. For tree growing, at least 40% members 
will be women and at least 10% committee members will be  women.  
4. Includes 580 jobs created in constructing houses and infrastructure (incl. 313 for women) in Kabeza and  Kaniga.  
 
 
Sub-components  Description  Activities  Description


---
*Page 87*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 93  
 
 
1. Watershed protection and climate resilient agriculture  
1.1 Strengthen community based 
adaptation  Support to increase the understanding by local 
stakeholders of the impacts of climate change 
and the value of conserving and protecting 
steep slopes and riparian buffer  zones as well 
as the benefits of productive agro -forestry and 
forestry to build support for proposed 
interventions.  
Initial surveys and assessments will be 
participatory and community -based. This will 
build the capacity of local people to identify the 
specific interventions for investment in 
improvements and promote integrated land 
and water management. The participation of 
local communities in these initial assessments 
will foster ownership of the findings and 
planned interventions. It will also ensure th at 
any interventions are appropriate to local 
conditions and provide an opportunity for 
dialogue, consensus building and capacity 
development on climate adaptation.  1.1.1  Selection of target areas and  target 
groups for  support  
1.1.2  Awareness raising of climate change  
issues  
1.1.3  Training of project staff and community 
volunteers in gender sensitive adaptation 
planning  
1.1.4  Community based survey of project 
area and prioritisation of interventions with 
communities, water and agricultural experts 
and other  stakeholders  
1.1.5  Community meetings and planning 
workshops  
1.1.6  Development of local adaptation plans 
with zonation of land for agriculture, pasture, 
perennial crops/grasses etc. (based on 
District Land Use Plans and sub -catchment 
plans) with community and agricultural 
experts  
1.1.7  Developmen t of Community  Adaptation 
Facility   
1.2 Reduce slope erosion to 
sustainable levels  Promotion of soil conservation and stabilisation 
measures to reduce erosion and land 
degradation improve soil and water quality, 
reduce run -off and improve infiltration. This will 
include terracing as well as other measures.  
Where slopes are greater than 40o, the project 
will work with communities to phase out tillage 
systems and restore permanent vegetative 
cover to reduce erosion. Where grass cover 
alone is insufficient to prevent erosion, filter 
strips or wattling or brush layering will be 
installed to break the slope into short segments 
and dissipate the flow of water over the 
surface.  
The interventions in each area will take into 
account climatic information (rainfall variability 
etc.), soil type (pH, nutrient levels and texture), 
plant species and competitive ability, aspect 
and topography (slope stability and angle) as 
well as an assessment of the local surface 
erosion. The project will support farmers to 
assess the a ppropriate land preparation  
(contours, contour trenches, ridges, percolation 
ditches etc.) required before seedling planting.  1.2.1  Consultation with Rwanda Agricultural 
Board (RAB) and district agronomists, land 
officers on zoning of land for agriculture, 
pasture, perennial crops/grasses etc. with 
community and agricultural  experts  
1.2.2  Awareness campaign on erosion 
control and improved soil management 
practices  
1.2.3  Introduce erosion control measures on 
1250ha (850ha of progressive terraces and 
biological control me asures and 400ha of 
radical  terraces)  
1.2.4  Capacity building of local authorities to 
support the committees and maintain records 
of functionality and utilisation of  infrastructure  
1.2.5  Matching crops and permanent 
vegetation (grasses, shrubs etc.) to soils and 
farmi ng methods to the  terrain  
1.2.6  Re-planting of steep slopes with 
perennial grasses and shrubs, wattling, 
brush layering.   
1.3 Stabilise rivers, roadsides 
and steep slopes with protective 
forestry  Support to establish protective forests on river 
banks, roadsides  and steep slopes to stabilise 
slopes and reduce the reduce riparian 
degradation and reduce erosion around roads. 
The aim is to retain permanent cover and avoid 
clear -felling and focus on tree species that  
provide a range of benefits including timber, 
fuel, fodder, fruits etc.  1.3.1350 ha of steep slopes where plots are 
greater than 2ha  
1.3.2  140 ha at Mulindi tea estate which is 
vulnerable to  landslides  
1.3.3  885 ha on rivers, roadsides and steep 
slopes (on small plots  <2ha)   
1.4 Integrate agro -forestry into 
farming systems on 9790 ha of 
the watershed  Support to to increase the use of agro -forestry 
systems to reduce reduces soil erosion and 
increases organic matter, soil fertility and soil 
water holding capacity, thereby enhancing 
climate resilience and productivity. Five 
agroforestry technologies or practices are 
proposed: (i) Contour hedgerows on terraces;  
(ii) Boundary planting; (iii) Trees scattered in 
crops; (iv) Home gardens; and (v) Fodder 
banks. Within the farm landscape, trees and 
shrubs will be planted to stabilise terraces and 
ditches and reduce soil erosion and storm 
water run -off as well as providing a range of 
goods and services for households and 
farmers, including nitrogen fixation (improving 
soil fertility), fodder, bean stakes, poles, timber, 
and me dicinal products.  1.4.1  Planting trees/shrubs on existing 
radical terraces (non -fruit trees) 3700  ha 
1.4.2  Planting trees/shrubs on progressive 
terraces (non -fruit trees) 1351  ha 
1.4.3  Boundary Planting (non -fruit trees) 450 
ha 
1.4.4  Planting trees and shrubs within crops 
(non-fruit trees) 901  ha 
1.4.5  Establishing fodder banks with napier 
grasses 2937  ha 
1.4.6  Planting trees in home gardens (fruit 
trees) 450 ha  
1.5 Support 1800 smallholder 
crop-livestock farmers to adopt 
agro-ecological approaches to 
increase climate resilience  Support for 1800 smallholders to adopt agro - 
ecological approaches to increase climate 
resilience. The focus will be on techniques 
which increase soil fertility, reduce soil erosion 
and maintain moisture content of the soil  1.5.1 Building capacity of secto r and district 
technicians in climate resilient techniques for 
smallholder farmers


---
*Page 88*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 93  
 
 
 making farmers more resilient to prolonged dry 
seasons, improving crop productivity and 
ultimately household nutrition and farmer 
income. The project will work through the 
existing GoR extension programmes including 
the Twigire Muhinzi which uses Farmer 
Promoters to spread the use of improved 
farming practices across Rwanda. In total, 300 
Farmer Promoters across 9 target sectors will 
receive extensive training on agro -ecological 
practices which will enable the project to reach 
1,800 smallholder farmers with climate -resilient 
approaches and technologies.  1.5.2  Building capacity of farmer promoters 
in climate resilient techniques for smallholder 
farmers  
1.5.3  Supporting smallholder farmers to 
adopt climate resilient  techniques  
1.5.4  Establishing on -farm and community 
demonstration sites and field visits to 
showcase climate -resilient livestock 
management  techniques.  
1.5.5  Distribution of disease/drought resilient 
forage species and animal health  inputs   
1.6 Increase climate resilient 
farming practices with tea 
cooperatives in Mulindi (with 
planting for future climate 
change) - targets 4900 
smallholders  Introduction of climate resilient agriculture to 
4900 smallholder tea growers to address the 
current weather -related risks – and start 
preparing for future climate change - at the 
Mulindi tea estate.  
A series of targeted low -regret adaptation 
interventions  are proposed to reduce the 
exposure of small -holder tea growers to current 
climate variability and shocks, by enhancing 
water management, reducing soil erosion and 
flooding and reducing landslide risks in high 
risk zones.  
The first set of activities will introduce low cost 
low regret adaptation around the plantation, 
with grass strips, tree belts and culverts to 
reduce flooding, soil erosion and landslides. 
The second set of activities aims to make the 
tea plantation climate -resilient, i.e. looking at  
more  transformational investments for the tea 
industry.  1.6.1  Improved water management (culverts) 
and small -scale ‘green’ irrigation to enhance 
resilience to flooding and  droughts  
1.6.2  Planting grass strips (napier grass) to 
reduce erosion and enhance soil stabilisation  
around the 1874ha tea  estate  
1.6.3  Establishing tree belts on 50ha to 
reduce flooding and landslide  risks 
1.6.4  Introducing shade trees in tree estate 
(inter -cropping) in lower (more vulnerable) 
areas (25 ha)  
1.6.5  Upslope tea planting at higher elevation 
(50 hectares) to ensure climate resilient 
expansion of  tea 
1.5.6 Planting new resilient tea clones   
1.7 Integrate climate resilient 
practices into local extension 
services  Strengthening the capacity of local extension 
services to support tea and coffee farmers to 
adopt CRA. The project will introducing climate 
resilient activities into the curriculum of an 
existing the extension programme and include 
climate resilient demo plots in the 50 tea 
farmer schools that currently exist for the  two 
co-operatives. This will provid e the training to 
allow farmers to introduce field interventions.  1.7.1  Farmer field schools (FFS) with Mulindi 
tea cooperatives (2 coops, 40 ToT, reaches 
4900  farmers)  
1.7.2  Farmer Field Schools – with 2500 
Coffee farmers in  Gicumbi/Watershed   
1.8 Provide weather and climate 
services for tea and coffee 
farmers to increase productivity 
and reduce losses from weather 
and climate variability  Development of new weather and climate 
services (W&CS) for the tea and coffee 
sectors, with these interventions being 
developed in Gicumbi. These services will 
provide critical information to farmers, 
improving productivity and reducing losses 
from weather and climate variability, and have 
extremely high benefit to cost ratios .They 
include short -term forecasting (daily up to 
weekl y) to help farmers (and government) with 
farm management activities (planting, ongoing 
management, harvesting, and post -harvest 
activities) as well as climate services, i.e. 
monthly, seasonal and multi -year climate 
forecasting (through to climate change), and 
include the supporting infrastructure and 
activities (climate data sets and  monitoring,  
forecasting and prediction, information systems 
and dissemination).  1.8.1  Developing the weather and climate 
metrics of relevance for tea and coffee and 
including in data  sets 
1.8.2  Undertaking participatory consultation 
on W&CS with tea and coffee farmers in 
Gicumbi  
1.8.3  Developing the farmer field school 
curriculum to include  W&CS  
1.8.4  Building the capacity and monitoring 
infrastructure for met services to collect and 
process relevant  information  
1.8.5  Developing the ICT and approaches for 
dissemination for farmers and  government.   
1.9 Increase capacity for pest 
monitoring, surveillance and IPM 
to address current and future 
climate change  Development of integrated pest management 
by targeting  the key climate relevant pests and 
diseases for the coffee and tea sectors, and  
developing new IPM approaches and 
demonstrating these approaches in Gicumbi.  1.9.1  Surveillance and monitoring of targeted 
climate sensitive pests and  diseases  
1.9.2  Developing IPM with pest and disease 
controls   
1.10 Increase climate resilient 
practices with 1000 coffee 
growers to reduce susceptibility 
to climate change and protect 
slopes in the watershed (planting 
for future climate change)  Support for climate resilient coffee 
developm ent in Gicumbi. As well as improving 
rural incomes, this will provide a template for a 
paradigm shift for the Rwandan coffee sector  1.10.1  technical assistance to develop new 
climate resilient coffee in Gicumbi (35  ha) 
1.10.2  Introducing resilient coffee varieties 
for this development  
1.10.3  Introducing succession climate 
resilient agriculture - 50 ha  Gicumbi   
2. Sustainable forest management and sustainable energy  
2.1 Increase forest productivity 
and sustainable forest 
management - targets plots  
>2Ha  Fully transform current  forestry practice across 
forest management and operational processes, 
transforming the quality and productivity of the 
forest estate in Gicumbi. Includes importing  2.1.1 Support the provision of nationally 
available sources of high quality seed and 
plant material


---
*Page 89*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 93  
 
 
 high quality seed and plant material (there is a 
lack of available high quality seed and plant 
material in Rwanda) and the use of more 
drought tolerant species to support forest 
renewal.  2.1.2  Demonstration /trial forestry  plots  
2.1.3  Roll-out renewal of  forests.   
2.2 Strengthen forest 
management skills to sustain 
investments in forestry and 
watershed management  Development of the necessary capacities and 
capabilities are developed for the long term 
maintenance, sustainability and scale up of the 
forestry and watershed interventions. Includes 
a comprehensive and extensive suite of 
capacity strengthening approaches and 
activities to ensure skills and management 
competency, raise aware ness and build 
ownership of new species, practices and 
techniques to support and improve the  
livelihoods of women and men for a more 
positive outcome.  2.2.1  Technical skills  training  
2.2.2  Training of forestry core  groups  
2.2.3  Learning exchange  visits   
2.3 Establish, restore and 
manage degraded woodlots 
across 297 ha of the watershed 
(<2 ha)  For small woodlots (<2ha), the project will 
support farmers to enhance and diversify tree 
production by providing high quality 
germoplasm and training to enable 
smallholders to develop and implement 
improved management plans. The work will 
involve establishing and maintaining improved 
farmer woodlots over 297ha (approximately 5%  
of Gicumbi’s woodlots) to revitalise degraded 
Eucalypts woodlots with alternative species.  2.3.1  Technical a ssistance to improve farmer 
woodlots  
2.3.2  Site identification and  validation  
2.3.3  Establish and maintain improved 
farmer woodlots - 297ha   
2.4 Strengthen community 
capacity to provide forest 
products and services  Provides support for income generation from 
forestry. Comprises a series of targeted 
interventions aimed at supporting livelihoods 
around forest products and services for poor 
households living in the target areas.  2.4.1  Establish community tree nurseries and 
capacity  support  
2.4.2  Establish woodlot  cooperative s 
2.4.3  Strengthen bee keeping  operations  
2.4.4  Increase access to  finance   
2.5 Increase the use of biogas 
and efficient cookstoves to 
reduce deforestation of the 
watershed  Support to reduce the harvesting of wood for 
household cooking and energy use to reduce 
pressure on forest and wood resources, 
reducing vulnerabilities associated with 
deforestation and degraded forest cover. It 
comprises a series of targeted interventions 
and subsidies aimed at reducing household  
demand for biomass in the target areas.  2.5.1  Increase the use of biogas by 
households engaged in dairy  activities  
2.5.2  Promotion and provision of of cleaner 
cookstoves and  fuels.   
2.6 Reduce the demand for 
fuelwood and GHG emissions at 
Mulindi tea factory through 
energy efficiency measures  Provision of technical assistance (TA) to 
deliver a series of energy efficiency 
improvements at the Mulindi factory, with co - 
financing for the capital costs of energy 
efficiency equipment provided from The Wood 
Foundation / Mulindi Factory Company Limited 
(Tier 1), pl us some grant support to  
demonstrate a series of advanced energy 
efficiency and PV options (Tier 2).  2.6.1  Technical assistance (TA) to deliver a 
series of Tier 1 energy efficiency 
improvements at the Mulindi  factory  
2.6.2  Technical assistance (TA) and financial 
suppo rt to deliver a series of Tier 2 energy 
efficiency improvements at the Mulindi 
factory.   
3. Climate resilient settlements  
3.1 Manage surface water run -off 
from settlements to reduce gully 
formation, floods and landslides  Interventions to reduce run -off and increase 
infiltration on the ridge and the upper slope to 
reduce climate related risks; and reduce 
downhill and lowland flooding, siltation and silt 
damage as well as sediment loads in water 
courses. All work will be contracted through the 
cash for wor k schemes used elsewhere in 
Rwanda which increase employment 
opportunities and target the poorest 
households. Support will also be provided to 
establish cell watershed management 
committees and provide training for 
committees on surface water management 
techniques and rainwater  harvesting  3.1.1  Construct soft drains (5000  m) 
3.1.2  Construct soak -away pits (21,324  soak 
away pits - 1 per HH for 60%  HH) 
3.1.3  Construct check dams/ gully plugs 
(10,000)  
3.1.4  Establish footpath runoff control 
(100km)  
3.1.5  Establish soil erosion/infiltration  ditches 
(62.5ha ditches with 222 ditches  /ha) 
3.1.6  Training for community  members   
3.2 Increase rainwater capture 
and storage to counter inter - 
annual rainfall variability  This includes investments in small -scale water 
collection and storage structures at the  
household and community level in upland areas 
to increase water conservation and reduce run -
off and erosion during heavy rainfall. Three 
methods of rainwater harvesting will be 
promoted: 1) roof top harvesting, 2) 
underground cisterns and 3) communal pond s. 
Roof top harvesting will entail using a subsidy 
scheme to assist women and men in  
settlements and on steep slopes to acquire and 
set up, use and maintain rainwater harvesting  3.2.1  Demand survey of target  area 
3.2.2  Identification and sensitization of 
beneficiaries  based on social  categories  
3.2.3  preliminary study and mapping of 
location for cisterns across the 9  sectors  
3.2.4  Subsidise tanks for poor  households  
3.2.5  construct 300 underground  cisterns  
3.2.6  Excavation of 90 ponds to manage 
storm water


---
*Page 90*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 93  
 
 
 facilities. To ensure the sustainability of the 
small -scale infrastructure, the project will 
establish committees at the sector and cell 
level to select the sites, manage and maintain 
the structures.  3.2.7 Formation  and support of committees 
to manage small scale infrastructure   
3.3 Construct green social 
housing development in Kabeza 
to reduce the number of 
vulnerable households living in 
high risk zones (100 houses + 
green infrastructure)  Construction of 100 new homes and 
infrastructure at existing green village site 
Kabeza. The homes will be available for 
vulnerable families currently living in areas at 
risk from flooding and landslides. The “green 
infrastructure” utilises renewable energy, water 
and waste recycl ing strategies designed to 
work with the Rwandan topography to reduce 
emissions, increase resilience to climate 
change and protect the surrounding 
environment.  
A modified IDP masterplan (see Annex 1) has 
been developed for the site which improves on 
the gr een infrastructure in the village to 
promote enhanced climate resilience with 
gentle sloping, 'soft landscaping' to adsorb 
water, reduce soil erosion, improve storm 
water management and irrigate surrounding 
agriculture, all forms of adaptation to help 
address the increasing risks of heavy 
precipitation from climate change. Each 
dwelling will include rainwater harvesting to 
cater for 9 months of water supply and reduce 
vulnerability to changing weather patterns.  
During the 3 month dry season a communal 
rainw ater collection system will be constructed 
to collect water from the soft landscaping 
system via a sand -bed water filter and 
underground water tanks. A communal biogas 
chamber (to supply gas for cooking), cow 
sheds and two cows per household have also 
been  included in the design. The masterplan 
also includes landscape terraces shared 
between two houses, the top terrace for trees, 
the lower for beehives, a wormery and 
compost and remaining terraces for food 
production.  3.3.1  Selection of target households and 
prioritise households for resettlement with 
community and local  authorities  
3.3.2  Construct 100 low carbon  houses  
3.3.3  Provide 2 cows for each  household  
3.3.4  Site clearance, cut and fill, murram 
road, side pavements  
3.3.5  Install hard storm -water Control - Hard 
Drains  
3.3.6  Install soft storm -water Control - 
Swales along roads and swales with checker 
dams down road  
3.3.7  Install waste water biogas treatment 
system and cooking facilities with gas 
Pipework to houses  
3.3.8  Install home water harvesting  tank 
3.3.9  Install communal rain water collection 
and sand bed  filter 
3.3.10  Landscaping - Terracing for  soil 
stabilisation  
3.3.11  Construct 21 cow sheds with  channels 
to biogas  
3.3.12  Construct ponds (for livestock 
watering - one per  village)  
3.3.13  Establish kitchen garden (one per 
house)  
3.3.14  Establish operation and maintenance 
structure for green infrastructure (incl. 
establishing O&M committee, O&M training, 
equipment, travel and allowances, training 
materials) per green  village  
3.3.15  Facilitation and/or provision of of 
technical support for construction, operation 
and maintenance   
3.4 Constr uct green social 
housing development in Kaniga 
to reduce the number of 
vulnerable households living in 
high risk zones (100 houses + 
green infrastructure)  Construction of 100 new homes and 
infrastructure at a new green village site, 
Kaniga. The homes will be available for 
vulnerable families currently living in areas at 
risk from flooding and landslides. The “green 
infrastructure” utilises renewable energy, water 
and waste recycling strategies designed to 
work with the Rwandan topography to reduce 
emissions , increase resilience to climate 
change and protect the surrounding 
environment.  
A modified IDP masterplan (see Annex 1) has 
been developed for the site which improves on 
the green infrastructure in the village to 
promote enhanced climate resilience with 
gentle sloping, 'soft landscaping' to adsorb 
water, reduce soil erosion, improve storm 
water management and irrigate surrounding 
agriculture, all forms of adaptation to help 
address the increasing risks of heavy 
precipitation from climate change. Each 
dwelling will include rainwater harvesting to 
cater for 9 months of water supply and reduce 
vulnerability to changing weather patterns.  
During the 3 month dry season a communal 
rainwater collection system will be constructed 
to collect water from the soft land scaping 
system via a sand -bed water filter and 
underground water tanks. A communal biogas 
chamber (to supply gas for cooking), cow 
sheds and two cows per household have also 
been included in the design. The masterplan 
also includes a Community Hall, Youth Centre, 
Health Post and Pharmacy, Early Childhood  
Centre as well as landscape terraces shared 
between two houses, the top terrace for trees,  3.4.1  Selection of target households and 
prioritise households for resettlement with 
community and local  authorities  
3.4.2  Cons truct 100 low carbon  houses  
3.4.3  Provide 2 cows for each  household  
3.4.4  Site clearance, cut and fill, murram 
road, side pavements  
3.4.5  Install hard storm -water Control - Hard 
Drains  
3.4.6  Install soft storm -water Control - 
Swales along roads and swales with checker 
dams down road 
3.4.7  Install waste water biogas treatment 
system and cooking facilities with gas 
Pipework to houses  
3.4.8  Install home water harvesting  tank 
3.4.9  Install communal rain water collection 
and sand bed  filter 
3.4.10  Landscaping - Terracing for  soil 
stabilisation  
3.4.11  Construct 19 cow sheds with  channels 
to biogas  
3.4.12  Construct ponds (for livestock 
watering - one per  village)  
3.4.13  Establish kitchen garden (one per 
house)  
3.4.14  Establish operation and maintenance 
structure for green infrastructure (incl. 
establishing O&M committee, O&M training, 
equipment, travel and allowances, training 
materials) per green  village


---
*Page 91*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 93  
 
 
 the lower for beehives, a wormery and 
compost and remaining terraces for food 
production.  3.4.16 Facilitation and/or provision of of 
technical support for construction, operation 
and maintenance   
4. Knowledge development and transfer  
4.1 Communicate project results 
and lessons learned  Analysis of project results and production of a 
range of knowledge products including policy 
briefs and case studies to demonstrate the 
benefits of the project interventions. Includes 
the development of a communications strategy, 
production of briefing notes for policy makers 
to create a positive environment for  scaling up. 
The intervention sites will be used to showcase 
best practice. The aim is to promote dialogue 
and learning between the project participants 
and other stakeholder as well as for the 
ongoing replication of adaptation strategies 
country -wide.  
The additional value generated by the 
approaches to increase climate resilience will 
be assessed with a cost benefit analysis to 
determine the value added by the project 
compared with existing approaches and 
practices so that scaling up can be justified. 
Peer -to-peer learning where community 
representatives meet other community 
representatives from areas where successful 
interventions have taken place will be used to 
support scaling up and replication elsewhere. 
Dialogue and learning at workshops will ensure 
horizontal scaling up and the project will use a 
website, site visits, and the media  4.1.1  Preparation of briefing notes for local 
and national decision makers (quarterly from 
mid term international consultant 8  days)  
4.1.2  Develop a communication  strategy  
4.1.3  Develop a kn owledge management 
strategy  
4.1.4  Farmer -to-farmer fora (cross visits, 
community meetings etc. - 1 group from each 
sector quarterly from Yr  2) 
4.1.5  Develop participatory  videos  
4.1.6  Prepare media articles in  newspapers, 
journals, newsletters,  radio  
4.1.7  Develop and maintain  website  
4.1.8  Conduct an ex -post cost benefit 
analysis to determine the value added by the 
project compared with existing approaches 
and practices  
4.1.9  Develop knowledge products including 
summary of project results, case studies and 
slides on SFM, watershed protecti on, CSA 
and green  settlements  
4.1.10  Disseminate knowledge products on 
SFM, watershed protection, CSA, green 
settlements  
4.1.11  Workshops on SFM, watershed 
protection, CSA and green social housing 
and infrastructure approaches  for 
sharing results and lessons learned  
4.1.12  Document and disseminate results of 
energy efficiency measures for tea  factories  
4.1.13  Prepare guidelines on best practice 
on energy efficiency in tea  factories   
4.2 Awareness building, 
promotion and advocacy to 
support replication and scale up 
in other distric ts Awareness raising to increase understanding 
of best practice approaches successfully 
implemented by the project to support the 
adoption and replication of successful 
approaches and technologies at scale. It will 
target other district authorities, and 
cooperatives and will highlight benefits of 
successful approach and communicate lessons 
learned. This will include building awareness of 
all project interventions including: watershed 
protection; sustainable forest management; 
good CRA practice; IPM; and cli mate risks to 
settlements and measures to increase 
resilience. This will be achieved  through  
national and local workshops and the 
production of guidelines, posters and leaflets.  4.2.1  National workshops, posters, leaflets 
and guidelines on watershed  management  
4.2.2  National workshops, posters, leaflets 
and guidelines on sustainable forest 
management  
4.2.3  National workshops, posters, leaflets 
and guidelines on climate resilient  agriculture  
4.2.4  National workshops, posters, leaflets 
and guidelines on  IPM 
4.2.5  National workshops, posters, leaflets 
and guidelines on climate resilient 
settlements   
4.3 Increase capacity of local 
institutions and communities to 
sustain investments in watershed 
protection and climate resilient 
settlements  Development of local capacity to plan for 
climate change and to increase resilience 
through watershed protection. It will also 
include capacity support for sustainable forest 
management and green building technologies 
and settlement design and maintenance to 
ensure that human settlements are more 
resilient to climate change. Enhancing 
capacities for planning, coordination and 
implementation at the local level is critical to 
ensure effective climate adaptation. The 
project will target the training towards key staff 
in the local authority at District , Sector and Cell 
levels as local authorities currently have limited 
capacity to support project  beneficiaries.  4.3.1  Capacity building of local institutions to 
plan and implement climate resilient land and 
water management regimes and scale up 
effective adaptat ion strategies at the national 
and local  levels  
4.3.2  Building capacity in watershed 
protection approaches  
4.3.3  Building capacity in sustainable  forest 
management  approaches  
4.3.4  Building capacity in green construction 
technologies (CEB, timber roof construction; 
house construction (for beneficiaries in 
Kabeza); operation and maintenance of 
biogas digesters, sand bed water filters, 
water harvesting)


---
*Page 92*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 93  
 
 
4.4 Mainstream climate resilient 
approaches into existing forestry 
programmes and practices to 
support scale up and replication  This sub -component will support RWFA to 
integrate good forest management practices 
into existing national planni ng. It will draw on 
the lessons learned during implementation of 
forest renewal and management interventions 
as well as experience from supporting nursery 
development and investments in forest 
products and services. It will also link in closely 
to the acti vities under 4.3 building on the 
strengthened capacity to mainstream best 
practice into annual planning and programming 
across the sector.  4.4.1  An Initial analysis of barriers to uptake, 
identification of entry points and appraise 
mainstreaming  options  
4.4.2  Mainstre aming support for integration 
of new approaches and technologies into 
plans and programmes  
4.4.3  Mobilsing funding for scale up and 
mainstreaming  
4.4.4  Assessing and evaluating the 
mainstreaming  actions   
4.5 Mainstream approaches to 
climate resilient agriculture for 
smallholders into existing plans 
and programmes to support 
scale up and replication  Mainstream evidence generated by the project 
into policies and plans at the national level to 
create an enabling environment so farmers are 
empowered to implement adaptatio n 
measures. The agro -ecological approaches 
and techniques rolled out to 1800 smallholder 
farmers under 1.5 will also be disseminated via 
improved extension training materials along  
with practical and theoretical training with 
Provincial level technicians.  4.5.1  Developing extension training materials 
that incorporate climate resilient  approaches  
4.5.2  Delivering training to extension  staff  
4.6 Mainstream climate resilient 
approaches into existing 
agriculture extension 
programmes to support scale up 
and replication  Mainstreaming of lessons from the Gicumbi tea 
and coffee interventions into national strategy 
and programmes, to disseminate knowledge 
and ensure that the project has a 
transformational effect. Specifically, the project 
will integrate climate resilient agric ulture into 
the national farmer field school (FFS) 
programme for tea, extending the curriculum to 
include climate information and climate resilient 
agriculture advice for smallholder farmers. This 
will be targeted at 12 existing tea co -operatives 
(8 000 te a farmers), developing the  curriculum  
with climate risk assessments (technical 
assistance).  4.6.1  Mainstream climate resilient resilience 
into the tea and coffee extension services 
and FFS  curriculum  
4.6.2  Mainstream climate resilient planning 
into national tea sector  development  
4.6.3  Mainstream weather and climate 
services and IPM into the national extension 
curriculum  
4.6.4  Disseminate information  through 
national  workshops   
4.7 Mainstream energy efficiency 
into the tea industry to support 
scale up and replication  This sub-component will promote the uptake of 
energy efficiency in the industrial tea sector in 
Rwanda, using the lessons from the Mulindi 
tea factory, to ensure green growth is 
mainstreamed in current and future tea sector 
development policy. It will undertake  existing 
analysis to assess the potential for energy 
efficiency in the industry and hold a national 
workshop (under 4.1) to promote energy 
efficiency in existing tea factories, using the 
Mulindi tea factory as a best practice example. 
It will then introdu ce a mainstreaming 
programme into national tea strategy and 
programmes, using technical assistance to 
provide advice on energy use and options in 
tea factories one energy efficiency, to 
encourage the uptake of Tier 1 (good practice) 
energy efficiency impro vements across  the 
industry.  4.7.1  Current and Potential Technology and 
Demand  Survey  
4.7.2  Audits  
4.7.3  National Workshop energy efficient tea 
factories  
4.7.4  Promotion of best practice through 
NIRDA  
4.7.5  Prepare energy efficiency standards for 
new tea  factories   
 
 
 
 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project specific institutional setting and implementation 
arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please indicate how the interim/mid -term and final evalu ations will be organized, including the 
timing.  
Implementation arrangements for Monitoring and Evaluation  
The project will utilise and adapt FONERWA’s established and operating framework and M&E procedures that 
have been used for other development funds su ch as DFID, KfW and UNDP. Detailed workplans are developed 
under a logical framework structure within which activities are linked to defined and quantified outputs, under 
outcome themes and connected to higher level impact statement and indicators. Clear a nd coherent output, 
outcome and impact statements are developed and key indicators identified for measuring and assessing progress, 
together with time -bound milestones and targets.  
The M&E systems will provide systematic reports of progress against both pr ocess and performance objectively 
verifiable indicators (OVIs) and will be used to identify areas for specific management attention and will result in 
revision to annual implementation plans and, where necessary in -year plans and budgets. Implementing part ners 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation


---
*Page 93*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 93  
 
 
will be responsible for reporting against the agreed indicators, under the oversight of the dedicated PMU supported 
by the FONERWA M&E team. Future disbursements will be considered in the light of the assessment of 
performance against the milestones. The M&E systems will also contribute to learning and review of approaches in 
light of experience throughout the project lifetime to optimise performance and impact.  
FONERWA cu rrently has two M&E Specialists and two additional posts are proposed  
1. An internationally experienced M&E professional to design detailed M&E systems, develop detailed operational guidelines, 
assess progress and to work with technical specialists to develop  corrective actions for “at risk” components where necessary 
and to provide capacity  building  
2. An M&E officer, based in the District of Gicumbi at the point of service provision. to undertake data collection and first le vel 
quality  assurance  
The M&E Specialists will conduct six -monthly field visits/‘spot -checks’, with a particular focus on ‘at risk’ projects.  
Progress reporting  
Quarterly physical and financial progress reports  against workplan and budget will be developed to ensure 
continuous monitoring of the project using the existing indicators and to allow for corrective measures in due time. 
These reports will provide an update on progress on the delivery of work stream an d activities outputs contributing 
to the achievement of the project outcome and can be submitted to the GCF. The progress reports will be used to 
update work plans and budgets for the next quarter. The reports shall also describe progress on implementation  as 
well as lesson learning, a risk update and management and an ongoing assessment of sustainability and 
acceptance of project interventions by the stakeholders particularly the beneficiaries.  
At the end of each year an Annual Progress Review  (APR) or les son learning exercise to assess provisional impact 
will be undertaken at programmatic and project level. This is an internal exercise to be carried out by project 
implementers with support from the M&E Specialists as needed and may be outsourced for some a ctivities (eg an 
annual gender assessment, for which the Gender Monitoring Office will approached). The APR is likely to include a 
stakeholder workshop, site/community visit and case studies and will report on progress made against the 
indicators and targe ts in the project logframe, delivery of project outputs, and lessons learned. IN line with the AMA, 
the APR will  be submitted  to the Secretariat  on an annual  basis  for the period  ending  on 31 December  within  sixty 
(60) days after the end of the relevant annual period. The assessment report will be incorporated into the end of 
year quarterly report. The PMU will prepare an annual work plan which will include proposed activities, detailed 
plans, and budgets for the operation of each component. Draft work plans wil l be submitted to the steering 
committee for review and approval. The project logframe will provide a complete set of indicators for monitoring 
project progress against key targets, both in terms of results and  impact.  
Project evaluations will assess the e ffectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of interventions and partner 
institutions. Performance and impact will be assessed through:  
• data compiled in the management information systems of implementing  partners;  
• baseline and follow -up surveys to collect impact data;  and 
• mid-term and final evaluations that will use a range of indicators to assess the effectiveness, efficiency, relevance, sustainabi lity and 
impact of  interventions.  
Baseline and Independent Evaluations  
In the first quarter of the project a baseline assessment  will be conducted. An independent mid term evaluation will 
be conducted at the end of Year 3 to assess project performance. It will also determine whether or not the strategy 
articulated in the project proposal is achieving the project purpose, was appropriate and whether the assumptions 
made were relevant. It will critically review progress towards the paradigm shift objectives and suggest areas for 
development. It will focus on the effectiveness of delivery, timelines and efficiency of  implementation, and risk 
management. It will present the initial lessons of project design, implementation and management and make 
recommendations for greater enhancing the project’s efficiency and effectiveness to maximise value for money. The 
findings w ill be used to enhance implementation during the final half of the project’s term and to share lessons 
across the FONERWA programme. An independent Final Evaluation  will be conducted 3 months before project 
closure and will focus on the impact and sustaina bility of project results. The report will summarise the results 
achieved (outcomes, outputs), lessons learned, and make recommendations on any actions needed to ensure 
sustainability, replicability and scaling up. All monitoring and evaluation activities will align with Monitoring and 
Accountability Framework.  
Methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project  
The M&E system will track and assess the extent to which supported interventions result in changes that are 
systemic, lar ge scale and sustainable. The system will include provision for the use of theories of change as well as 
consideration of unintended negative effects. Monitoring will include internal qualitative and quantitative data 
collection with external mid term and end of project evaluations, will promote an adaptive and responsive approach 
and ensure balance between breadth and depth, and bias in selecting only success stories. Monitoring will be


---
*Page 94*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 93  
 
 
based on the annual work plans, the logic framework, theory of change and results -based indicators. The result 
measurement will also include a focus on value for money (across economy, efficiency, and effectiveness 
indicators) as well as impact of sup ported interventions.  
Lesson Learning and Replication  
The results from the M&E system will inform the replication and scaling up of project interventions. Data and 
quantitative information collected will be transformed into knowledge and learning products linked to organising, 
reflecting and using information gained. The knowledge management system will generate lessons, best practices, 
success stories, and other feedback coming from stakeholders and project partners. The results from the M&E 
system will in form the replication and scaling up of project interventions. Data and quantitative information collected 
will be transformed into knowledge and learning products linked to organising, reflecting and using information 
gained. The quantitative data will be combined with qualitative assessment and beneficiary feedback from the 
knowledge management activities carried out under each component to generate lessons, best practices, success 
stories, and other feedback coming from stakeholders and project partners.


---
*Page 95*
---

I ANNEXES   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 93  
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 
 
List of all  preparatory study reports supporting this proposal  
 
File Name  Document  
1 REPORT 1 – component 1 —PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.pdf  Component 1 summary report  
2 Report 1a SFM feasibility Study – PPF-MINERNA -Mar-2017.pdf  Annex 6  
3 Report 1a.1 SFM Management Model  Cashflow and CBA PPF -MINIRENA 
March 2017 .xls  SFM Management Model Cashflow and CBA  
4 Report 1a.2 Eucalyptus One Hectare Model.xls  Eucalyptus One Hectare Model Spreadsheet  
5 Report 1a.3 Pine One Hectare Model.xls  Pine One Hectare Model Spreadsheet  
6 Report 1a.4 Protection Forest One Hectare Model  Protection Forest One Hectare Model Spreadsheet  
7 Report 1a.5 Annex 2 - Tree Plantation Establishment and Management 
Manual.pdf  Tree Plantation Establishment and Management Manual for 
Rwanda  
8 Report 1a.6 Annex 3 - Tree Harvesting Techniques.PDF  Tree Harvesting Techniques Manual For Rwanda  
9 Report 1b Watershed Protection Plan PPF -MINIRENA  Annex 7: Watershed Protection Plan Report  
10 Report 1c Business Development Report PPF -MINIRENA  Annex 8: Business Development Report  
11 Report 1d Energy Analysis and Action Plan PPF -MINIRENA  Annex 9: Energy Analysis and Action Plan Report  
12 Report 1e Capacity Strengthening PPF -MINIRENA  Annex 10: Capacity Strengthening Report  
13 REPORT No 2 – Component 2 - Tea and Coffee resilience – PPF- 
MINIRENA -Mar-2017  Component 2 summary report  
14 Report 2a Component 2 - Tea (and Coffee) Resilience Climate Change 
Assessment.pdf  Supplementary technical report  
15 Report 2b Component 2 -Tea (and Coffee) Technical Analysis.pdf  Weather maps and charts  
16 Report 2c Component 2 – Tea (and Coffee) resilience Mulindi Tea Factory 
Efficiency  Tea Factory energy efficiency technical report  
17 REPORT 3 – Low carbon climate resilient settlement -PPF-MINIRENA - 
Mar-2017  Component 3 summary report  
18 Report 3a Topographic -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.doc  Topographic surveys peri -urban and rural low carbon 
developments  
19 Report 3b Geothermal -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.doc  Geothermal survey for peri -urban and rural low carbon 
developments  
20 Report 3c Masterplan -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.doc  Masterplans for peri -urban and rural low carbon developments  
21 Report 3d Green industry -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.docx  Engineered Timber production facility  
22 Report 3e Options Analysis -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.pdf  Options  Analysis  
23 Report 3f Green infrastructure - PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.pdf  Energy, Water and waste options peri -urban and rural low 
carbon developments  
24 Report 3g Detailed Development Plan -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017  Meeting Minutes  
25 Report 3h Detailed Cost Plan-PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.xls  Detailed cost plan  
26 Report 3I Detailed budget - PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.xls  Budget spreadsheet peri -urban and rural low carbon 
developments  
27 Report 3I.1 Detailed budget -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.x;s  Carbon savings  
28 Report 3J Detailed delivery plan -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017.cls  Detailed delivery plan  
29 Report 3k Risk -MINIRENA -PPF-Mar-2017  Risk matrix  
30 REPORT NO 4 -Economic and Financial Feasibility Analysis - 
PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017  Economic and Financial summary report  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(If applicable)  
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable)  
Map indicating the location of the project  
Timetable of project implementation  ☒ 
 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ Agreement, Annex I  NDA No -objection Letter 
Feasibility Study  
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable) 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (If applicable)  
Project Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) – see the Accreditation Master  ☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL


---
*Page 96*
---

I ANNEXES   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 93  
 
 File Name  Document  
31 Report 4a Technical -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017: Supplementary technical 
report: Ecosystems.pdf  Supplementary analysis  
32 Report 4b Technical -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017: Supplementary technical 
report.Kabeza.pdf  Supplementary analysis  
33 Report 4c Financial and Economic Analysis: Watersheds.xls  2 excel deliverables combined into one file. Full range of analysis  
34 Report 4d Financial and Economic Analysis: Kabeza.xls  2 excel deliverables combined into one file. Full range of analysis  
35 Report 4e Financial and Economic Analysis: Tea Factory.xls  2 excel deliverables combined into one file. Full range of analysis  
36 Report 4f Financial and  Economic Analysis: Energy.xls  2 excel deliverables combined into one file. Full range of analysis  
37 Report 4f Financial and Economic Analysis: Periurban.xls  2 excel deliverables combined into one file. Full range of analysis  
38 REPORT NO 5 Gender study -PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017  Gender study and annexes  
39 REPORT NO 6 ESIA – PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017  ESIA study and Annexes. NB ESIA is not uploaded here but 
presented in Rwanda (it has been previously uploaded and has 
not changed)  
40 REPORT NO 7 Legal Study  – PPF-MINIRENA -Mar-2017  Legal study and annexes. Please note specimen contracts 
MoA with District, contracts from Developer to new owner of 
houses and Developer to new owner of self -build plot  
41 Emissions Methodology and Estimates Rwanda Gicumbi project  14 
Jan 2018  XLS summarizing the method and emission reductions for 
interventions


---
*Page 97*
---

 
 
 
 
GCF/B.19/22/Add.15  
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 98*
---

 
 
 
 
GCF/B.19/22/Add.15  
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 99*
---

 
 
                                                          GCF/B.19/22/Add.15  
Page 1  
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern 
Rwanda  
Accredited entity  Ministry of Environment, Rwanda  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS)  category  Category B  
 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on  
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  ENGLISH , KINYARWANDA  
Link to disclosure  http://www.minirena.gov.rw/index.php?id=257&tx_ttnews%5Btt  
_news%5D=638&cHash=8815bd36527f9dc8e5234eb59d6d2651  
Other link(s)  http://  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESM P) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on  
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  ENGLISH , KINYARWANDA  
Link to disclosure  http://www.minirena.gov.rw/index.php?id=257&tx_ttnews%5Btt  
_news%5D=638&cHash=8815bd36527f9dc8e5234eb59d6d2651  
A management plan (ESMP) consistent with the requirements for a category 
B project is contained in the ESIA.  
Other link(s)  http://  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on  
accredited entity’s website  Not applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  RESETTLEMENT POLICY FRAMEWORK  
Date of disclosure on  
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-18 
Language(s) of disclosure  ENGLISH  
Link to disclosure  http://www.minirena.gov.rw/index.php?id=257&tx_ttnews%5Btt  
_news%5D=638&cHash=8815bd36527f9dc8e5234eb59d6d2651