=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Rudo Matsheza
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/CreationDate: D:20180206145442+09'00'
/ModDate: D:20180206145442+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

 
   
 
Meeting of the Board  
27 February  – 1 March  201 8 
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 15 GCF/B.19 /22/Add.13  
6 February 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum XIII 
Funding proposal package for FP071  
 
 
  
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Scaling Up Energy Efficiency 
for Industrial Enterprises in Vietnam ”; 
b) No-objection letter  issued by the national designated authority(ies) or  focal  
point(s); and  
c) Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme Title:   Scaling Up Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises in  
Vietnam  
 
Country/Region:   Vietnam / East Asia and Pacific (EAP)  
 
 
Accredited Entity:   The World Bank  
 
 
Date of Submission:   August 8, 2017


---
*Page 5*
---

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section  A PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section  B FINANCING / COST  INFORMATION  
 
Section  C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section  E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT  CRITERIA  
 
Section  F APPRAISAL  SUMMARY  
 
Section  G RISK ASSESSMENT AND  MANAGEMENT  
 
Section  H RESULTS MONITORING AND  REPORTING  
 
Section  I ANNEXES  
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate i nformation into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal  document.  
• The total number  of pages  for the funding  proposal  (excluding  annexes)  is expected  not to exce ed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 6*
---

A GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 52   
 PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme title  Scaling Up Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises 
in Vietnam  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  Vietnam / East Asia and Pacific  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI)  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  The World Bank  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  □ Direct  ☒ International  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing  Entity:  
• Ministry of Industry and Trade (MoIT):  responsible 
for the overall project coordination and supervision 
as well as the implementation of the components on 
the risk sharing facility and TA/capacity  building  
• State Bank of Vietnam (SBV): will represent the 
Socialist Republic of Vietnam in the Loan Agreement 
with the World Bank and supervise performance of 
participating financial institutions  (PFIs).  
• Ministry of Finance (MoF): allocate credit lines  to 
PFIs, and monitor subsidiary loan agreements  
between the MoF and  PFIs.  
Beneficiaries include:  
• Ministry of Industry and Trade  (MoIT)  
• Participating financial institutions  (PFIs)  
• Industrial enterprises  (IEs)  
• Energy service companies  (ESCOs)  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  □ Micro (≤10)  
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  □ Small (10<x≤50)  
□ Large (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☒ Mitigation  ☐ Adaptation   ☐ Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  July 14, 2017  
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Thi Ba Chu, Energy Specialist, Task Team Leader 
Franz Gerner, Energy Sector Coordinator, Vietnam  
Organization  The World Bank  
Email address  tchu@worldbank.org; fgerner@worldbank.org  
Telephone number  +84 4 39367311  
Mailing address  World Bank Office, 63 Ly Thai To Street, Hanoi, Vietnam  
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
□ Energy access and power  generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
□ Low emission  transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid  bus system, etc.)  
☒ Buildings, cities and industries and  appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
□ Forestry and land  use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
□ Most vulnerable people and  communities


---
*Page 8*
---

A GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 52   
 PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 
 
 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
□ Health and well -being, and food  and water  security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
□ Infrastructure and built  environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
□ Ecosystem and ecosystem  services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
The World  Bank  (the Bank)  has agreed  with the Government  of Vietnam  (GoV)  to adopt  a holistic  approach  to scaling  up 
energy  efficiency  (EE) in the high-energy  intensive  industrial  sector  aiming  to unlock  the huge  potential  for energy  savings 
and greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions. The proposed Scaling up Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises 
in Vietnam (“the Project”) will substantially contribute to achieving Vietnam’s Nationally Determined Contribution  (NDC);  
i.e. 25% GHG  emission  reduction  compared  to the Business -As-Usual  scenario  with international  support,  under  the Paris 
Agreement.  
Overall, the Project comprises an integrated package of credit risk m itigation, technical assistance and capacity building 
activities to various stakeholders from public entities to local financial institutions and industrial enterprises, 
complemented by an IBRD credit line project. This will reduce EE investment market bar riers, such as lack of access to 
finance and capacity of stakeholders, high project risk perceptions, and the existence of an insufficient policy and 
regulatory framework that governs EE in the industrial sector.  
The Project comprises two interrelated and closely coordinated components:  
• Component 1: US$78 million GCF Risk Sharing Facility  (GCF -RSF)  
• Component 2: US$10 million World Bank and GCF Technical Assistance (WB/GCF -TA) 
The Project is complemented  by: 
• IBRD Loan project: US$100 million World Bank Energy Efficiency Credit Line - Vietnam Energy Efficiency for 
Industrial Enterprises Project  (WB-VEEIE)  
The joint implementation  of the two components  and the IBRD  supporting  project  will promote  a market -driven  approach 
to industrial energy efficiency and  opening up the commercial lending market to local banks and non -bank financial 
institutions  developing  a new EE product  line. With financial  and technical  support  from the World  Bank  and the GCF,  the 
Project and the supporting IBRD Loan will mobilize approximately US$ 407.3 million of EE investments, supporting over 
100 industrial  companies  to reduce  energy  consumption  and generate  about  120 MtCO2eq  of GHG  emission  reductions 
over the lifetime of the  investments.  
Ultimately,  the Project  will contribute  to a paradigm  shift in the nascent  EE market,  by providing  know  how and experience 
and by strengthening of capacity and creating an enabling environment for local financial institutions and industrial 
enterprises to scale up investments in energy  efficiency.  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if applicable)  31/3/2018  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  N/A 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/09/2018 
End: 31/08/2023  
Project/programme lifespan  15 years 0 months


---
*Page 9*
---

B GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 52   
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme  
The Project consists of two interrelated and closely coordinated components, and is complemented by an IBRD loan to 
support energy efficiency investments in the industrial sector as below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1) WB and G CF financing will be provided in USD. Part of financing from PFIs/IEs will be in VND; the table presents USD equivalent figur es. 
2) PFIs: Participating financial institutions, representing the amount of co -financing (in the case of IBRD loan) or loans (in the case of GCF RSF) 
provided for investment in energy efficiency  
3) IEs/ESCOs: Industrial enterprises and energy service companies, representing 20% equity for each investment  
4) Total EE Investment: Amount directly invested in EE transactions, excluding amount for the risk sharing facility and TA/capacity building  
5) Total Financing includes not only EE investment but also financial resources used to mobilize EE investment, e.g. grant, guar antee  
6) This is considered as parallel financing.  
7) Financing to be provided by GCF to IBRD for the guarantee to be provided by IBRD (as an Accredited Entity of GCF) to the RSF (IBRD/GCF 
Guarantee)  
8) This is considered as complementary financing.  
 
 
Component  1 - GCF  Risk  Sharing  Facility  (GCF -RSF)  seeks  to mobilize  US$251  million  from PFIs and IEs through  the 
Risk Sharing Facility, to be capitalized by US$3 million of grant and US$75 million of guarantee. The guarantee will 
provided by IBRD, as an Accredited Entity of the GCF (the IBRD/GCF Guarantee), to the  Program Implementing Entity 
(PIE) of the RSF, in an amount of up to $75 million to be financed by GCF (IBRD/GCF Guarantee). The GCF -RSF will 
provide PFIs with partial credit risk guarantees to cover loans extended to IEs for EE investments. It is expected  that 
these  loans  would  be funded  from PFI’s  own local currency  financing  resources,  and not from the USD  financing  sources 
provided through the IBRD loan1. All investments mobilized under Component 1 are additional to the investments made  
under the IBRD supporting project, since the loans provided under the IBRD Loan are not eligible for the partial risk  
coverage  offered  by the Facility.  The IBRD/GCF  guarantee  will only be available  to loans  or tranches  of loans  (in case  of 
parallel  financing with  the IBRD supporting  project)  made  to IEs by PFIs using  their own resources.  
Any default  on loan repayment  to PFIs will be covered  by the GCF -RSF,  expected  to be 50 percent  of the loss on average 
during the project life. The Program Implementing Entity (PIE) managing the RSF will have flexibility in setting the 
coverage ratio based on market demand. A guiding principle in setting the coverage amount is not to over - or under 
guarantee commercial lending but to provide an optimal level of coverage to encourage P FIs to lend while at the same 
time requiring them to have “skin in the game” through risk sharing. Based on market sounding, a 50 percent coverage 
level would be considered acceptable by the market, although the coverage ratio in the first 1 -2 years of the  project may 
need  to be higher  to increase  the attractiveness  of the guarantee  product  to PFIs.  After  the ramp -up period,  and assuming 
that PFIs have become comfortable with lending for EE projects, the guarantee coverage is expected to be reduced to 
50 percent  or less to mobilize  more  commercial  financing.  The RSF will cover  losses  pro rata (not as a first loss)  with the 
PFIs and the guarantees will amortize along with the underlying  loans.  
The GCF -RSF grant will cover administrative start -up costs and operating expenses for the first two years, and provide 
initial seed capital for possible sub -guarantee payouts during the early stages of the operation. After an initial ramp -up 
period, the GCF -RSF is designed to operate on a cost recovery basis so that s ub-guarantee fees collected from PFIs 
would be sufficient to cover GCF -RSF operating expenses, IBRD/GCF guarantee fees, and guarantee payouts for  
expected losses from the covered loan portfolio. The GCF -RSF issues partial credit guarantees (or sub -guarante es) to  
 
 
 
1 During market sounding activities, PFIs expressed interest to apply for the guarantee using their own financing resources.  Component/parallel project   
Currency1) GCF  World 
Bank   
PFIs2) IEs/ 
ESCOs3) Total EE 
Investment4) Total 
Financing5) Guarantee7) Grant  
1. GCF-RSF US$ m  75 3 - 2016) 506) 251 329 
2. WB/GCF -TA US$ m  - 8.3 1.7 - - - 11.9 
WB-VEEIE (IBRD co -financing)  US$ m  - - 1008) 258) 31.38) 156.3  156.3  
TOTAL  US$ m  75 11.3 101.7  226 81.3 407.3  495.3


---
*Page 11*
---

B GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 52   
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
 
PFIs to extend loans to IEs for eligible projects. For greater efficiency and simpler administration, the GCF guarantee in 
turn is not issued  directly  to the PFIs but to the GCF -RSF as a whole  as reserve  capital  to be used  in downside  scenarios 
(see guarantee  issuance  diagram  below).  In the base  case,  the IBRD/GCF  guarantee  is not expected  to be called  as long 
as actual losses are kept below the expected losses, which are to be recovered by a pool of the seed capital and the 
reserve cap ital coming from the collected guarantee fees. The above -mentioned cost recovery principle in guarantee 
pricing would allow for the GCF -RSF to generate sufficient revenue to pay for guarantee claims. The IBRD/GCF 
guarantee would be called if actual losses (i.e. guarantee payouts) PFIs incur on their loans to IEs (i.e. if IEs default on 
their scheduled principal and interest payments) exceeded expected losses and the GCF -RSF was unable to meet calls 
for guarantee payouts from its loss reserve account (see gu arantee payout  diagram below).  
Recognizing the significance of appropriate risk management practice for the effective use of WB and GCF resources, 
an Operations Manual (OM) along with a Risk Management Framework (RMF) will be developed before implementation 
begins  to provide  the Program  Implementing  Entity  (PIE)  with detailed  rules  and guidelines  on day-to-day operations  and 
risk management  practices  of the GCF -RSF.  Throughout  the development  of the OM and RMF,  GCF  will be consulted  to 
reflect  the appropriate  risk appetite.  Some  of the key elements  to be included  in the OM and RMF  have  been  in discussion 
with the GCF Secretariat, which is summarized in Annex 11. Based on experience and market feedback, the OM and 
RMF will be open for further rev iew during project implementation, and any revisions will be made in consultation with 
GCF.  
Sub-guarantee issuance  
 
 
Sub-guarantee payout sequence  
 
 
*Would  be expected  to happen  only if actual  defaults  resulting  in guarantee  claims  from PFIs exceeded  the expected  defaults.  
The proposed GCF -RSF design was informed by IBRD’s Articles of Agreement (Article 1(ii), reflected in the applicable 
IBRD policy OP 10.00, which states that guarantee instruments are intended to promote private foreign investment and 
not be used to support lending from public sources, including multilateral development banks . Given that Component 1 
will be implemented  within  these  policy  limits,  the IBRD/GCF  Guarantee  cannot  therefore  be used  to backstop  repayment 
of loans  PFIs extend  to IEs using  the IBRD  loan.  As a result,  the GCF  financing  provided  through  the GCF -RSF has been 
designed to be fully additional to the resources mobilized through the IBRD loan. The IBRD supporting project seeks to 
mobilize PFI co -financing in a ratio of 1: 4 to the IBRD loan and additionally IEs will be required to contribute 20 percent 
of the EE project cost as equity. Component 1 will guarantee PFI co -financing which is additional to the 20 percent 
required  under  the IBRD  loan or PFI financing  covered  entirely  from their  own resources  for eligible  EE projects.  
Component 2 - World Bank and GCF Technical Assistance (WB/GCF -TA), (Bank US$1.7 million/GCF US$8.3 
million),  provides  TA and capacity  building  to promote  EE in the industrial  sector.  More  details  of the activities  are provided 
in section  C.3. As a separately  processed  but coordinated  activity  KOICA  expects  to provide  US$1.9  million  of TA funding.  
IBRD Loan project - Vietnam Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises Project (WB -VEEIE) finances US$156.3 
million  of EE investments,  of which  US$100  million  comes  from the  Bank,  US$25  million  from PFIs,  and US$31.3  million 
from IEs that implement  investments.  GCF  will not play any financing  role for the IBRD  supporting  project  although  some  
subprojects may receive parallel financing support under Component 1 (GCF -RSF).  The Bank IBRD loan will be  on-lent 
through the MoF to PFIs, which will extend loans to IEs from the blended financing of the on -lending and PFIs’ own


---
*Page 13*
---

B GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 52   
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
 
resource at a ratio of 4:12. The contributions from IEs are estimated based on equity participation, which is around 20% 
of the total investment cost.  
The Bank  loan product  chosen  by the MoF is a LIBOR -based  U.S. dollar  deno minated  single  currency  for US$100  million, 
on IBRD terms. The MoF will on -lend to the PFIs at the same financial terms and conditions and will not provide any 
interest subsidy to the PFIs. The PFIs will be fully responsible for debt service and will bear all financial risks associated 
with the Bank loan. The PFIs can extend the loan to the IEs either in U.S. dollars or Vietnamese dong. If the loan to the 
IEs is in U.S. dollars,  the PFIs will decide  the interest  rate to the IEs, on commercial  basis  by adding  a margin  that will be 
determined  by its cost,  subproject  risk, and sub-borrower’s  creditworthiness.  If the loan to the IEs is in Vietnamese  dong, 
the PFIs will carry FOREX risk and the interest rate to the IEs shall be determined on commercial basis  by adding up 
FOREX risk premium to the margin. The Bank Board approved the IBRD Loan project and WB TA part of Component 2 
on April 14, 2017. Two PFIs, Bank for Investment and Development of Vietnam (BIDV) and Bank for Foreign Trade of 
Vietnam (VietcomBank), were selected by SBV/MOF for the participation in the  WB-VEEIE.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  88 million USD ($)   
 
 
 
 
 
(b) GCF financing 
to recipient  (i) Senior  Loans  
(ii) Subordinated  Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable grants  * 
(vi) Grants  * ……………  
……………  
…………… 
75 
……………  
11.33 Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  ( ) years 
(  ) years  (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
Economic and financial justification for the concessionality is provided in section F.1.  
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  86.3 million USD ($)   
 
 
 
 
(c) Co -financing 
to recipient  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior Loans  1.7 million USD ($)  World Bank  25 years  IDA terms  senior  
 
 
 
 
2 It is assumed that the PFIs will provide co -financing of $25 million for the $100 million IBRD portion of the project.  
3 Includes a US$3 million grant for seed capital funding for the RSF  
4 Includes US$201 million lending under the VEEIE RSF where PFIs use their own funds and are eligible for the IBRD/GCF 
Guarantee and the US$50 million co -financing requirement under the IBRD loan which is not eligible for use of the IBRD/GCF 
Guarantee  
5 US$31.3 million in e quity is attributed to the US$100 million IBRD portion with US$25 million co -financing from PFIs; US$50 
million in equity is attributed to equity requirement under loans made by PFIs using their own resources, using IBRD/GCF 
Guarantee.


---
*Page 15*
---

B GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 52   
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
 
 
Lead financing institution: World Bank; KOICA co -financing in parallel  
* Provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
 
(d) Financial 
terms between 
GCF and AE (if 
applicable)  The proposed  financial  terms  of IBRD/GCF  guarantee  are described  in Annex  5. As stated  in Annex 
5, the requested Accredited Entity Fee is seven percent (7%) of the GCF grant funding and three 
percent (3%) of the IBRD/GCF guarantee funding, subject to finalization of the AMA and FAA. The 
GCF  interim  policy  on fees indicates  the cap is seven  percent  (7%)  of the GCF  funding  for large  scale 
public  sector  projects/programs.  It should  also be noted  that the Accredited  Entity  Fee is not included 
in the project budget in section (b)  above.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
Sector overview. Vietnam’s financial system is as a bank -based system. According to the SBV, by the end of 2015 the 
banks’ assets were almost 3.8 times of GDP and accounted for more than 90 percent of financial sector’s total assets. 
By the end of 2016, the banking sector consisted of 97 banking entities including 4 fully state -owned commercial banks, 
33 joint-stock  banks,  51 foreign  banks  and branches,  and 2 policy  banks.  The top 10 banks  account  for approximately  78 
percent of the assets of the entire banking system. Much of the rapid credit growth in recent years has occurred through 
the banking system. Accor ding to Central Bank data, credit growth was at approximately 18 percent in 2016, compared 
to the targeted 15 -18 percent in the beginning of the year. However, continuing weaknesses include undercapitalization 
and a suboptimal allocation of resources. The level of non -performing loans (NPLs), which was high in the past, has 
lowered  through  recent  debt restructuring.  The NPL ratio across  the sector was  around  2.8%  at the end of 20166. 
Capital  markets  in Vietnam  remain  small  and underdeveloped  but growing.  As reported  by the MOF,  by the end of 2016, 
the combined stock market and bond capitalization was 71 percent of GDP, compared to 56.5 percent in 2014. 
Capitalization remains low compared to other countries in the region, such as 106 percent in Thailand and 1 36 percent 
in Malaysia in 2014. Total Government bond issuance volume in 2016 was estimated to reach VND280 trillion (i.e. more 
than USD12  billion).  Vietnam’s  formal  market  is highly  retailed  in nature  with more  than 98 percent  of accounts  registered 
with the Vietnam Securities  Depository.  
Macroeconomic setting. Over the past few years, the monetary policy measures of the SBV – aimed at controlling 
inflation, easing interest rates, and restoring liquidity in the banking system – have provided reliable condi tions for credit 
institutions to lower their lending rates. At the same time, it administratively required banks to consider reducing interest  
on existing loans to share the borrowers’ burdens. This measure has dual impact, inducing the banks to increase t heir 
capital  controls  and improve  credit  risk management  capabilities.  As a result,  bank  liquidity  has been  gradually  improved, 
which  in turn helped  stabilize  financial  markets  and meet  capital  needs  in the economy  at more  sustainable  interest  rates, 
in harmony with current economic  conditions.  
The SBV planned  to consolidate  the banking  system  and the introduction  of new rules  on prudential  ratios  under  Circular 
36 (effective  February  1, 2015)  and the revision  by Circular  06 (in May 2016)  are commonly  viewed  to benefit  the sector. 
Consolidation should improve efficiency through better economies of scale and reduce supervisory burden. The SBV 
announced  plans  to approve  banking  mergers  and acquisition  deals  in 2015  to reduce  the number  of banks  from around 
40 to between  15 and 17 by 2017.  However,  implementation  may be a challenge  while  such  long-term structural  problems 
such as weak asset quality, poor transparency, and low capital buffers remain. The bulk of the consolidation wave is 
expected  to comprise  weak,  smaller  banks  merging  into large  state -owned  commercial  banks.  The impact  on state -owned 
commercial  banks  should  be manageable  as potential  targets  remain  small  relative  to their suitors’  total assets,  although 
absorbing weaker banks could heighten asset quality and execution risks in the near  term.  
Interest  rate trends  and liquidity.  Interest  rates  have  been  on a downward  trend  since  2013  and they stabilized  in 2016. 
While the caps on deposit rates were removed, deposits of 6 months and below are still subject to a cap of 5.5 percent 
per annum. Recently, a few banks have attempted to cut deposit interest rates owing to favorable macro -conditions, 
including good liquidity and low inflation, but smaller banks have kept the higher rates to m aintain or expand market 
shares.  Low inflation  and declining  deposit  rates  may also motivate  many  retail  depositors  to switch  to higher -yield 
investment channels such as stocks and properties. The SBV used several monetary policy tools for lowering lending  
 
 
 
6 National Financial Supervisory Commission, 2016, Financial Sector Overview Report


---
*Page 17*
---

B GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 
52  
 FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
 
interest rate, such as (i) requiring credit institutions to reduce lending rates by cutting and managing operation costs (ii) 
keeping  low discount  rates,  encouraging  low interbank  rates.  To date,  Vietnamese  dong  lending  rates  to prioritized  sectors 
are commonly set at 6 -9 percent p.a. for short -term loans, while medium - and long -term rates charged by state -owned 
commer cial banks remain in the 8 –10 percent p.a. range; lending rates to normal manufacturing/business sectors 
commonly range of 7 -10 percent p.a. for short terms and 9 -12 percent p.a. for longer terms. To put this into perspective, 
current  lending  rates  have  now become  even  lower  than the past levels  during  the booming  period  of 2005 –2006.  System 
liquidity has been stable and banks normally do not have to use short -term deposits for medium and long -term loans up 
to the threshold set forth by the  SBV.  
Credit growth and dynamics. Since 2015, credit activities have developed strongly, a positive sign for monetary and 
banking  operations  with the economy’s  continued  turnaround.  The growth  pattern  has been  maintained  with credit  growth 
almost surpassing 2016  targets (18 percent). Banks’ lending rose quickly in the last few months of 2016, reflecting 
strengthened  domestic  demand  as well as accommodative  monetary  policy  of the authorities  in order  to support  economic 
activities. However, quick credit growth raises concerns on the quality of lending. This trend should come as no surprise 
since many enterprises had been expecting further economic recovery and factoring it in. Some bank executives have 
been quoted as saying that many sources had predicted that e conomic performance would improve, so they expected 
good credit growth. Both lending and deposit rates are at stable and lower levels as outlined above, which also fueled 
credit growth. The SBV’s new policy of allowing lenders to use up to 60 percent of sh ort-term deposits for long - and 
medium -term loans  has also contributed  to credit  growth  (however,  this ratio will be gradually  revised  down,  especially  to 
50% starting 2017 according to Circular 06/2016/TT -NHNN which amended Circular 36/2014/TT -NHNN).


---
*Page 18*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
C.1. Strategic Context  
Country Context. Vietnam is one of the most energy -intensive countries in East Asia. Its energy intensity of GDP is 
steadily increasing, and its energy elasticity of GDP is estimated at 2, compared to less than 1 for most countries.7 As a 
result, the final energy consumption tripled over the past decade. Industrial growth has been one of the key drivers of 
Vietnam’s increasing energy intensity, accounting for 48 percen t or almost half of the final energy use. Vietnam Energy 
Statistics 2013 shows that cement and constructional materials and food processing industries consumed most energy. 
Because industry is the most energy -intensive economic sector, this increase in the  industrialization of Vietnam’s 
economy by itself contributes to the increase in Vietnam’s overall energy intensity.  
Vietnam’s emissions are expected to increase dramatically by 2030. Between 2010 and 2030, Vietnam’s overall GHG 
emissions will increase fiv efold, per capita emissions fourfold, and the carbon intensity of GDP by 20 percent8. The 
government recognized the importance of green growth and passed the Vietnam Green Growth Strategy for the period 
2011 –2020  with vision  to 2050,  which  aims  to restruct ure and improve  economic  institutions  toward  more  efficient  use of 
natural  resources  and improved  competitiveness  of the economy,  which  will be achieved  through  increased  investments 
in technological innovation, natural capital, and economic instruments. This will contribute to responding to climate 
change,  reducing  poverty,  and addressing  sustainable  economic  development  challenges.  One of the important  strategic 
objectives is to encourage energy efficiency (EE), with a 2020 target to reduce the intensity  of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions by 8 –10 percent as compared to the 2010 and reduce emissions from energy activities from 10 –20 percent 
compared to business -as-usual  case.  
Vietnam has also pledged, in its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submitte d to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), to reduce 8 percent of the greenhouse gas (GHG) emission by 2030 
compared  to the business -as-usual  scenario  and to further  aim at 25 percent  reduction  with support  from the international 
community. One of the measures to achieve the mitigation target is to “improve effectiveness and efficiency of energy 
use; reducing energy consumption”, with a particular focus on manufacturing industries where energy consumption is 
high.  Vietnam  has ratified  the Paris  Agreement  of the UNFCCC,  through  Resolution  No 93/NQ -CP on October  31, 2016.  
As part of an overall Bank engagement in Vietnam, the Bank has been providing various forms of support including 
technical assistance and financing res ources for achievement of Vietnam’s climate change and green growth agenda. 
The Clean Production and Energy Efficiency Project (CPEE), financed by the Global Environment Facility, provided 
technical assistance on assessment of EE potential in key industria l sectors and development of a voluntary agreement 
mechanism for EE performance. Vietnam’s Low Carbon Development and Policy -Marginal Abatement Curve study 
supported by the Bank identified low carbon options and provided policy recommendations for scaling up RE and EE. 
The Fossil Fuel Subsidy and Power Sector Financial Recovery studies give insights of sectorial issues and 
recommendations for sustainable development of Vietnam power sector. Also, the Bank is providing technical and 
financial  support  to solar  PV development  and regional  interconnection,  promoting  RE investment,  regional  power  trading, 
to change VN’s coal trajectory. The Bank’s financing resources have been provided through related energy and climate 
change projects including the Renewable  Energy Development Project, Power Reform and Climate Change Policy 
Lending series, and in particular the upcoming Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises (VEEIE). The latter will 
contribute to achieving RE/EE national targets and NDC’s  commitments.  
Vietnam has witnessed impressive economic growth and poverty reduction in the past 25 years. The country’s gross 
domestic product (GDP) has grown from about US$33.6 billion in 2000 to US$185.3 billion in 2014. Access to electricity 
services, which was below  10 percent in 1986,9 has grown to 98 percent in 2014, contributing to reducing poverty and 
boosting  shared  prosperity.  Expanded  grid electrification  of rural households  was mirrored  by a sustained  increase  in the 
value  of GDP  per capita.  Rural  electrification  has been  a critical  component  of the government’s  program  to eliminate  
poverty, redress imbalances in development, and improve overall welfare levels by providing reliable energy sources,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 World Bank. 2014. Vietnam Low Carbon Study.  
8 World Bank, 2014, Vietnam Low Carbon Study  
9 Van Tien, H. 2010. Vietnam Rural Electrification Program . World Bank.


---
*Page 20*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 
52  
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
better living conditions, health care, and rural services.10 Using the extreme international poverty line of US$1.25 per 
person per day, the extreme poverty headcount in Vietnam fell from 64 percent in 1993 to less than 3 percent in 2012.  
The development of the energy sector has been a key factor in the recent industrialization process, creating jobs and 
increasing shared prosperity. While the energy access agenda drove electricity demand expansion in the 1990s, the 
industrial  sector  has taken the lead in the past decade.  In the period  2000 –2011,  industrial  demand  grew  8.2 percent  per 
year, more than any other sector. Employment by industry has grown substantially by 7 percent per year. According to 
the General  Statistics  Office,  the number  of ‘Plant  and Machine  Operators  and Assemblers’  and ‘high -level professionals’ 
is sharply  on the rise, more  so than any other non -managerial  job category  at 18 and 29 percent,  respectively.  
Growth  in the number  of skilled  professionals  in the industry  sector  runs parallel  to the strengthening  of small  and medium 
enterprises (SMEs), which are the cornerstone of the Vietnamese economy. Currently, SMEs represent roughly 97 
percent  of the overall  number  of businesses,  employ  77 percent  of the workforce,  and account  for 80 percent  of the retail 
market. Electricity supply to industry and SMEs has been a crucial contributor to employment growth and with that to 
increased prosperity. In fact, the income of the bottom 40 percent grew 9 percent on average over the last decade. The 
main  centers  for industrial  growth  and proliferation  of SMEs  are the greater  Hanoi  area and the greater  Ho Chi Minh  City 
area.  The rapid  industrialization  of the economy,  along  with the high rate of urbanization,  has led to massive  requirements 
for energy in these urban  areas.  
Sector context. Electricity demand has grown at a rapid pace, averaging 15 percent per year between 2008 and 2010 
before  dropping  to 9 percent  in 2011  due to the growth  slowdown  and increasing  to 11 percent  in 2012.  Vietnam’s  energy 
sector is facing two major challenges to meet future energy demand: (a) resource constraints and energy security;  and 
(b) high energy  demand  and huge  financing  needs.  Vietnam  has achieved  98 percent  electricity  access  rates  connecti ng 
over 20 million  households  and industry  and commercial  customers  – this is a remarkable  achievement.  Today’s  biggest 
energy challenge is to provide those customers with reliable electricity services and meet future demand. Per capita 
electricity  consumption  remains  relatively  low (that is, one-third of China),  and it is anticipated  that electricity  demand  will 
continue to grow fast for the next two decades. Current demand projections show a dramatic increase from 32 GW of 
installed capacity in 201 3 to 70 GW in 2020 to 120 GW in  2030.  
Vietnam has limited domestic energy resources and will rely increasingly on imported coal to meet future energy needs. 
Most of the larger hydropower projects are developed, and Vietnam will need to improve the regulatory and pricing 
framework to further develop smaller hydro and largely unexplored solar and wind potential. There is potential to bring 
more  gas into the market  from domestic  fields.  However,  these  resources  will not materially  alter the dependence  on coal 
for power generation and industrial usage in the near to medium term. Therefore, increasing reliance on energy sources 
from abroad  over the next decade  raises  issues  of energy  supply  security,  vulnerability  to international  price  fluctuations, 
and subsequent impacts on domestic energy prices. The cost of energy to Vietnam’s consumers currently amounts to 
around US$14 –15 billion per year. In the power sector alone, the financing needs are about US$5 -6 billion annually to 
meet future demand for genera tion and network  investments.  
The 2009 Prime Minister Decision 21 initiated the electricity tariff reform process, establishing both the principles of a 
market -based  mechanism  to annually  adjust  the tariffs  for the period  2010 –2012  and a subsidy  regime  aimed  at protecting 
vulnerable and poor consumers. This decision was further reinforced by an updated 2011 PM Decision 24, which allows 
the tariff to be adjusted  during  the course  of a year to reflect  changes  in uncontrollable  costs  (e.g. fuel, rate of exchange). 
Through the application of these mechanisms, the average electricity tariffs have increased steadily and have started to 
be revised more than once per year. The PM Decision 2165 from November 2013 approves an average electricity retail 
tariff brack et in 2013 –2015  between  a price  floor of VND  1,437/kWh  (US¢  7.2/kWh)  and a price  ceiling  of VND  1,835/kWh 
(US¢  9.2/kWh),  demonstrating  the government’s  commitment  to further  adjust  electricity  prices.  
The industrial sector is the largest energy consumer. The electricity consumption accounts for 53% of total electricity in 
the country. Electricity retail tariff for industrial consumers follows time of use (TOU) mechanism by voltage level. The 
maximum  tariff now for manufacturing  industries  is VND  2,735/kWh  (US¢  12/kWh)  during  peak  hours  and VND  1,518/kWh 
(US¢ 6.7/kWh) during normal hours, and at voltage of  6kV. 
 
 
 
10 Khandker, S. R., D. F. Barnes, H. A. Samad. 2013. Welfare Impacts of Rural Electrification: A Panel Data Analysis 
from Vietnam. Economic Deve lopment and Cultural Change 61 (3): 659 –692. The University of Chicago Press.


---
*Page 22*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
Gas consumption  in the power  sector  accounted  for 83% of total Vietnam’s  gas consumption  in 2015  and gas in Vietnam  
is currently priced on the basis of bi -lateral negotiations between project proponents and PetroViet (PVN). Existing gas 
pricing appears also to be driven by a perceived need to achieve low electricity prices. Most of the gas sources are located 
in the so uthern offshore fields. The prices for gas up to take -or-pay quantities for power plants in the southeast region  
are set by negotiation  between  PVN/PVGas  and the power  plant  owners.  A pricing  formula  is set out at the Office of the 
Government Directive 2175/VPCP -KTTH for (i) gas quantities exceeding take -or-pay quantities for power stations in the 
southeast, (ii) gas delivered to power stations in the southwest region, and (iii) the Phu My fertilizer plant. The formula 
includes a ramp up of the market pr ice from 70% of MFO (monthly average fuel oil price of Singapore market) MFO in 
2014 to 100% from January 1, 2015: (Gas price for user = Market gas price plus transportation and distribution charges). 
For industrial users, PVN sets annual gas pricing schem es based on the pricing of alternative fuels (FO, LPG) and market  
acceptance  
Vietnam,  previously  a coal exporter,  imported  10.5 million  tons (mt) of coal in the first nine months  of 2016,  surging  140% 
compared to the same period of the previous year, as co al exploitation has not been able to meet the higher demand 
required  by the power  plants.  The country's  power  sector  is the largest  coal consumer,  consuming  about  33.2 mt in 2016 
or about  67% of the estimated  total coal consumption  in the year.  Historically,  the coal sector  has been  subject  to export 
restrictions and price controls. In the past years, coal sold to power sector was lower than production cost, but recently 
this subsidy was substantially phased out and coal prices now largely reflec t market prices, and imported coal price is 
competitive to domestic  coal.  
Meeting  future  energy  demand  by improving  EE is the single  best and lowest  cost option  to improve  energy  security,  help 
consumers save and cope with potential rate hikes, reduce pollution, and mitigate climate change. If stronger programs 
and policies were put in place, current wasteful practices could be reduced and more efficient energy use technology 
could be adopted. This can meet a sizable portion of the business -as-usual dem and for increased energy services, at 
costs  which  are typically  one-fourth  the cost of additional  energy  supply.  The Bank’s  Low Carbon  Study  has demonstrated 
that Vietnam  could  save  up to 11 GW of new generation  capacity  by 2030  if comprehensive  demand -side EE investments 
are carried  out. 
The Vietnamese  government  passed  a Law on Energy  Efficiency  and Conservation,  issued  a series  of decrees  to promote 
EE by the prime minister, and set a target of 5 –8 percent of energy savings from 2012 to 2015 compared to the forecast 
energy demand. The Vietnam Energy Efficiency Program (VNEEP) is a national target program and the first ever 
comprehensive plan to institute measures for improving EE and conservation in all sectors of the economy in Vietnam. 
VNEEP  Phase I (VNEEP -I) from 2006 to 2010 aimed to actively start up all components of the program, and VNEEP 
Phase II (VNEEP -II) from 2011 to 2015 aimed to expand each component, based on lessons learned from Phase I. In 
addition  to the government’s  national  programs,  a number  of parallel  efforts  have  been  initiated  in direct  cooperation  with 
donor agencies. Also, to promote efficient use of electricity and reduce consumption, the government has introduced 
time-of-use electricity tariffs for medium and large cu stomers and developed an EE standard and labeling road map. A 
pilot demand side response program using the time -of-use tariff was implemented by the Ho Chi Minh City Power 
Company (PC) under the Distribution Efficiency Project financed by the World  Bank.  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
Rationale for Public Sector Financing and Engagement: Despite a number of various initiatives for EE from both the 
government and donor community, significant barriers remain to implement energy -saving measures. The constraints to 
EE investments are usually not due to the financial viability and maturity of EE technologies but to market failures and 
barriers, which include:  
a) Low or subsidized energy pricing. The cost of energy consumption has been low and subsidized. The share of the 
energy cost represents a small share of operating costs, which has led to consumers’ low interest in energy 
conservation. This issue is currently being addressed through a series of energy pricing and electricity tariffs 
reforms. The Government of Vietnam adopted the Power Sector Reform Roadmap, which has been supported 
by the World Bank through a series of development policy operations. The Power Sector Reform Development 
Policy Operations (PSRDPO) 1, 2 and 3 were implement ed over 2010 -2015, supporting four policy areas 
including development of competitive power market, power sector restructuring, electricity tariff reform and 
improving  demand -side  energy efficiency and quality of  service. PSRDPO  4  is  currently under  preparation,  
planning  to introduce  market -based  tariff mechanism  and improve  the transparency  of tariff determination,  among


---
*Page 23*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
other  measures.  The average  tariff has gradually  been  increased  from VND1,053/kWh  in 2010  to VND1,622/kWh 
in March 2015. With continuous support through PSRDPO 5 and 6, the ongoing sector reform is expected to 
achieve full cost recovery tariffs, which will help  address one of the major barriers, low electricity pricing, to 
promote investments in energy  efficiency.  
b) Lack of institutional champions due to the fragmented nature of EE measures. The EE policies and measures 
remain fragmented and lack institutional cha mpions and accountability to enforce national -level EE targets. The 
objectives of EE policies and programs are not duly incorporated into sector master plans, which prevents 
allocation of financial resources to support achievement of the expected results. Despite the established 
mandatory reporting requirements, no established systems exist for monitoring and reporting on the achieved 
results of energy savings and emission  reductions.  
c) Limited financing for the up -front capital expenditure . Despite high financial viability of EE investments in the 
industrial sector, access to finance has been limited for the majority of industrial enterprises with high energy 
intensity. Most local financial institutions lack the required technical expertise to appraise EE  investments, and 
view EE lending as risky. Credit risk associated with EE lending is perceived high by most of local financial 
institutions, and often leads to high collateral requirements. In particular, the concept of project -based financing 
that focuse s on the cash flows from energy savings has not yet been widely accepted by financial institutions. 
The lack of expertise, interest, and confidence in EE financing on the part of financial institutions leads to 
insufficient supply of financing for the capi tal expenditure of EE  investments.  
d) Lack of EE awareness and capacity to identify and develop EE projects. Industrial enterprises, the main 
beneficiaries of EE investments, have inadequate information on their energy consumption and efficiency 
measures  that can be adopted.  Furthermore,  only a few experts  are capable  of identifying  opportunities  of energy 
saving and conservation in each subsector and developing technical designs suitable for the operating 
environment. Only in a few cases have consumers invested in EE and benefited as a result. These success 
stories have not been widely shared with other potential consumers with equally high energy intensity and 
opportunities  to save  from EE investments.  This will be addressed  via Component  2 of the IBRD  VEIEE  project.  
International  experience  demonstrates  that the development  of ESCOs  and a functional  Energy  Performance  Contracting 
(EPC) market would be critical to scale up energy efficiency investments. However, the ESCO market in Vietnam is at a 
nascent  stage. There are currently about 70 related energy services providers (EESPs) which could potentially be 
considered as ESCOs but they are very small and lack the necessary experience and capacity to access financing for 
project  implementation.  Existing  legislation  does  not encourage  ESCOs’  operation,  and the 5 year implementation  review 
of the Law on EE recently stated that new regulations need to be prepared to support ESCO activities for scaling up EE 
investment.  
Unless other measures to address these ex isting barriers are carefully designed and implemented, the market failure 
would persist, and unlocking the energy saving potential in the energy intensive industries would not be scaled up or at 
least would be delayed for a long time, exacerbating the cha llenges of energy security and climate change.  
Scaling  up Energy  Efficiency  for Industrial  Enterprises  - Project  Development  Objective:  The Project  Development 
Objective  is to improve  energy  efficiency  in Vietnam’s  industrial  sector.  The project  would  thereby  contribute  to achieving 
the government’s energy efficiency and GHG reduction  objectives.  
The primary beneficiaries will be industrial enterprises (IEs) and participating financial institutions (PFIs). The IEs would  
benefit from adopting improved te chnologies and optimization of production, thus reducing energy consumption and 
production  costs  and increasing  their overall  competitiveness  in the domestic  and international  markets.  The PFIs would 
benefit from the creation of new loan products for indus trial EE, thereby building technical capacity for EE investment 
appraisal and monitoring, enabling them to scale up EE lending to industries. Participating government agencies would 
be supported in the development of the relevant EE regulatory framework, s tandards, and guidelines. The results of the 
Project  will be measured  upon  a set of performance  indicators,  which  are explained  in more  detail  in section H.1.2.  
Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes: The Project will contribute to the government’s objective 
of Vietnam’s National Energy Development Strategy up to 2020 with vision to 2050; Vietnam Green Growth Strategy 
period 2011 –2020, vision to 2050; the Law on Energy Efficiency and Conservation; Vietnam Power Development Plan 
VII perio d 2010 –2020, vision to 2030; and the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement.


---
*Page 25*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
The Project  is consistent  with the World  Bank  Country  Partnership  Strategy  for 2012 –2016  and contributes  directly  to the 
‘Sustainability’ pillar. Furthermore, the project addresses the cross -cutting theme of ‘resilience’ by reducing energy 
consumption and cont ributes to climate change mitigation. The cross -cutting nature of the operation reflects its direct 
support to the following Country Partnership Strategy outcomes: (a) Outcome 1.2: Improved Quality and Efficiency of 
Infrastructure Services and (b) Outcome 2.2: Climate Change Mitigation: CO2 emissions reductions associated with 
investments  supported.  
The Project  contributes  to the Bank’s  ‘twin goals’  strategy  of eliminating  extreme  poverty  and promoting  shared  prosperity 
through economic growth in the bottom  two quintiles. The Project is expected to generate positive poverty reduction by 
comparatively lowering energy bills for consumers, reducing air pollution and CO2 emissions, and mitigating climate 
change  impacts.  The Project  is closely  aligned  with the World Bank  Energy  Strategy  and contributes  to the Bank’s  Energy 
Engagement Strategy for Vietnam to support supply - and demand -side EE, which is a key engagement pillar. It will 
leverage the ongoing Clean Production and Energy Efficiency (CPEE) Project that p rovides the analytical underpinning 
of the Bank’s EE engagement in industrial  enterprises.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
The Project comprises two interrelated and closely coordinated components and is complemented by a parallel IBRD 
Loan project:  
• Component 1: US$78 million GCF Risk Sharing Facility  (GCF -RSF)  
• Component 2: US$10 million World Bank and GCF Technical Assistance  (WB/GCF -TA) 
• IBRD Loan project: US$100 million World Bank Energy Efficiency Credit Line - Vietnam Energy Efficiency for 
Indust rial Enterprises Project  (WB-VEEIE)  
The Project  has been  designed  to help remove  the principal  barriers  to investments  in industrial  EE projects.  The TA and 
capacity building activities will address the knowledge, institutional, and capacity -building needs  of the banking and 
industrial sectors, mitigate risk concerns of enterprises, and strengthen government supervision of industrial EE and 
energy  conservation.  Those  efforts  will be accompanied  by an IBRD  financial  intermediary  lending  program  for EE, which  
will demonstrate viable mechanisms for financing industrial EE investments, in direct support of the government’s EE 
targets and green growth strategy. The establishment of a risk sharing facility, backed by the IBRD/GCF guarantee 
instrument, will further  address concerns of local financial institutions on performance of EE investments and mitigate 
credit  risk of loans  extended  to industrial  enterprises  for EE, and thus encourage scaling -up of EE loans  in the market.  
The Project will support financing for various subprojects under energy intensive industries such as cement, iron and 
steel, and pulp and paper, public and private; using potential energy saving measures such as: (a) adoption of energy 
saving industrial technologies (e.g., efficient industrial boilers, kilns, and heat exchange systems); (b) recovery and 
utilization of wastes and waste heat; (c) installation of highly efficient mechanical and electrical equipment (e.g. motors, 
pumps, heating and ventilation equipment); and (d) industrial system o ptimization to reduce energy use. Use of RE 
sources to decrease fuel and/or electricity consumption in IEs may also be considered. Investments may include (a) 
cogeneration facilities or process furnaces and stoves and (b) solar water heaters for sanitary h ot/warm preparation, 
and/or  power  PV. Eligible  subproject  criteria  will be detailed  in the Operations  Manual  (OM).  Component  1 and the IBRD 
Loan  project  will share  the eligibility  criteria  for subprojects  as well as target  industrial  sectors  and technologies,  and PFIs 
can use either Component 1 or the IBRD Loan for eligible projects. More details on industrial subsectors and EE 
technologies  to be supported  under  the Project  are provided  in section  F.2 and Annex  2. 
Component  1: GCF  Risk  Sharing  Facility  (US$329  million,  of which  US$201  from  PFIs  and US$50  million  from  IEs 
for EE investments; on average 50%11 of the PFI loans will be guaranteed by the Facility using a US$3 million 
GCF grant and a US$75 million IBRD/GCF guarantee as  capital)  
The GCF  Risk Sharing  Facility  mobilizes  additional  lending  from PFIs own resources  by mitigating  credit  risks associated 
with commercial  loans  to industrial  enterprises  for energy  efficiency  purposes.  The objective  of the Facility  is to issue  
 
 
 
11 Depending  on the actual risk -sharing ratio on average, the amount of mobilized investment from PFIs and IEs 
would vary.


---
*Page 27*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
partial credit risk guarantees to mobilize private sector lending and equity, and contribute to opening up a market for 
commercially financed energy efficiency investments. Global experience shows that providing partial credit guarantees 
can be effective in enhancing creditworthiness and easing collateral requirements of potential borro wers, incentivizing 
banks to lend at more attractive terms. Currently, financial institutions’ lack of understanding and perceived high risk on 
energy efficiency investments make it difficult for IEs to borrow for such projects than for normal business pur poses. 
Eligible industrial enterprises would be borrowers under the Facility and they would benefit from access to financing at 
more competitive terms and at lower collateral requirements than would be available to them on a stand -alone basis. 
PFIs as lend ers under the component would benefit from low cost credit risk mitigation and access to new lending 
opportunities  in the area of industrial  energy  efficiency.  The expected  impact  of the Facility  would  be to crowd  in additional 
investment  in EE, expanding  the EE market  beyond  what  the IEs can financed  through  the IBRD  Loan  project.  
PFIs would have the flexibility to use Component 1 or the IBRD Loan for three types of EE sub -projects: (i) “IBRD Loan 
only” sub -projects where the PFI is comfortable taking the full credit risk and for which it needs liquidity from the IBRD 
Loan; (ii) “RSF guarantee only” sub -projects for which the PFI would be willing to pay for credit enhancement but for 
which it does not need external liquidity; and (iii) “blended IBRD/RSF” su b-projects for which PFIs would need both risk 
mitigation and funding support from the two facilities. In the third type, subprojects would receive support from both the 
IBRD Loan and RSF, as long as the two facilities were supporting separate debt tranche s. Especially if the loan size is 
large,  a PFI could  be incentivized  to finance  some  of it through  the IBRD  Loan,  including  co-financing  as appropriate,  and 
financing the balance from its own resources with risk mitigation support from the GCF -RSF. By combining two different 
tranches, PFIs can access for a single subproject both liquidity through the World Bank Loan and lower cost through 
credit  risk mitigation  from the  Facility,  with the extent  of such  benefits  set by the size of the individual  tranche s. 
While part of subprojects submitted for guarantees under Component 1, particularly the above -mentioned second type, 
could be marginally less creditworthy than those under the IBRD Loan, the same appraisal and credit standards will be 
applied for both Component 1 and the IBRD Loan to ensure that all projects meet the minimum requirements. Under 
Component 1, PFIs will only be given partial guarantees to enable risk sharing between them and the Facility and to 
incentivize the PFIs to undertake the loan ap praisal as diligently as they would for any loan.  
The decision  on which  modality  of support  to use ultimately  falls on the PFIs.  All EE sub-projects  need  to meet  the same 
eligibility  requirements  to be considered  for either  Component  1 or the IBRD  Loan  but their financing  needs  can vary.  The 
IBRD Loan provides relatively longer -term financing in US Dollars whereas more price compression can be expected 
through the RSF. PFIs will need to assess the needs of candidate EE subprojects and their own constraints before 
seeking support from the RSF or the IBRD  Loan.  
A separate  Operations  Manual  (OM)  along  with a Risk Management  Framework  (RMF)  will be prepared  for the GCF  Risk 
Sharing Facility. It will build on the Operations Manual for the IBRD project incorporati ng many of the arrangements, 
especially sub -borrower and sub -project eligibility, and appraisal requirements. The RMF particularly will include risk 
management practices and corrective actions at different loss levels to guide the PIE for portfolio risk ma nagement over 
the life span of the GCF -RSF. Some of the key elements for the RMF, which have been in discussion with the GCF 
Secretariat,  are summarized  in Annex  11. A professional  program  implementing  entity  (PIE),  such  as a commercial  bank 
or similar entity, will be competitively selected by MoIT to manage the Facility under the supervision of MoIT. In this 
capacity, the PIE will issue RSF sub -guarantees to  PFIs.  
The Facility would be capitalized with a seed funding grant of US$3 million and backstoppe d by a guarantee of US$75 
million issued by IBRD with funding from GCF. The grant would be used to pay for operating expenses associated with 
the Facility in the first two operating years and provide funding for expected guarantee payouts. The guarantee wo uld 
disburse to the Facility only if needed as additional capital. GCF would have the option of clawing back disbursed 
guarantee  payments  should  the Facility  be able to recover  some  of the losses  being  guaranteed.  IBRD,  as an accredited 
entity  of GCF,  will enter  into a guarantee  agreement  with the PIE, and the PIE in turn will issue  sub-guarantees  under  the 
RSF to PFIs as described  below.  
The Facility would be managed by the PIE and it would issue partial credit guarantees (or “sub -guarantees”) to eligible 
PFIs to support their loans for eligible EE subprojects undertaken by IEs. Guarantee coverage would only be available 
for loans  made  from the PFIs’  own resources,  made  in addition  to the minimum  co-financing  requirement  under  the IBRD 
funded loans, if any,  and would be partial to enable risk sharing with the PFIs and incentivize them to carefully  appraise  
the underlying loans. It is expected that guarantee coverage over the life of the project would on average be 50 percent,


---
*Page 29*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
but the PIE would have flexibility to set the coverage ratio based on market needs, with the expectation that higher than 
50 percent  guarantee  coverage  may be needed  in the initial  years  of the program.  The sub-guarantees  would  only cover 
credit risk arising from defaults on underlying loans. PFIs would be required to pay a sub -guarantee fee to the facility 
towards  costs  associated  with program  implementation  and IBRD/GCF  guarantee,  and also towards  expected  guarantee 
calls resulting from possible borrower defaults on the covered loans. The objective of sub -guarantee pricing is to enable 
Facility  cost recovery  while  keeping  the sub-guarantees  attractively  priced  for PFIs.  The preliminary  pricing  also assumes 
that a US$3  million seed grant from GCF would be available towards Facility operating costs and guarantee payouts in 
the initial  years.  
The Facility would pay sub -guarantee claims to PFIs if the underlying credit risks materialized. The first sub -guarantee 
claims wou ld be paid from the Facility’s own resources to the extent funds would be available from the GCF seed grant 
and guarantee fee collections. If capital in the Facility fell short to meet all claims, which would only happen if actual 
losses  exceeded  expected  losses,  the IBRD/GCF  guarantee  could  be called  for up to US$75  million  to meet  the additional 
claims. However, the likelihood of the IBRD/GCF guarantee being called is expected to be small due to robust 
requirements to be set for guaranteed loan appraisal and portfolio risk management, and therefore it is expected that in 
the base case the IBRD/GCF guarantee would not be  called.  
In practice, proactive risk management of the Facility would mean that the PIE would be expected to take corrective 
action if actual guarantee payouts exceeded expected payouts, for example by limiting the issuance of new guarantees. 
The requirements for guaranteed loan appraisal will be included in the Operational Manual but will include following the 
same appraisal procedures a s for the IBRD Loan and making sure that PFIs apply at least the same care and due 
diligence on IBRD/GCF -guaranteed loans as they would on their own loans. The partiality of the guarantee coverage 
should further incentivize PFIs to do that.  
The Risk Sharin g Facility  could  be easily  scaled  up if demand  for sub-guarantees  proved  strong  and actual  losses  stayed 
within  expectations.  The scale -up would  happen  through  leveraging  of the capital  base  from 100  percent  capital  backing 
to 50 percent or less, which would mean increasing the maximum guarantee portfolio size beyond the capital base 
available for payouts. For example, with 2 times leveraging, the capital base of US$78 million could support US$156 
million  worth  of sub-guarantees.  Even  in that scenario,  it would  be extremely  unlikely  for the capital  to be exhausted  as it 
would  mean  that 50 percent  of all loans  supported  would  result  in defaults.  The theoretical,  residual  risk above  the capital 
available could be borne by the Government of Vietnam or  PFIs12. 
Component 2: WB -GCF Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for Improving Energy Efficiency (US$10 
million, of which US$8.3 million from GCF, US$1.7 million from IDA)  
This TA and capacity -building component will assist (a) the MoIT and relevant govern ment agencies, which are 
responsible for EE policies and targets, to implement voluntary agreements with relevant industries, improve incentives 
for industry to carry out EE investments, and develop mandatory EE standards and benchmarks in the energy -inten sive 
industries; (b) PFIs to improve their knowledge, experience, and expertise in identifying, appraising, and implementing 
EE lending  projects  in the industrial  sector  and business  development  to generate  deal flows;  and (c) IEs and EE service 
providers (such as Energy Service Companies [ESCOs]) to develop bankable projects. This component will be closely 
linked with the ongoing Clean Production and Energy Efficiency (CPEE) Project on developing EE policies and industry 
voluntary  agreements.  
IFC is provid ing advisory  services  to VietinBank  and is working  with the World  Bank  to identify  a suitable  support  capacity 
mechanism once the PFIs are identified. Under the existing CPEE project, the Bank is providing TA to key energy - 
consuming IEs to develop volunta ry agreements, which could form a key part of the pipeline. In addition to the ongoing 
TA activities, this component will  support:  
1) TA and capacity  building  to the MoIT  will support  (a) assessment  of the National  EE target  program  period  2010 – 
2015 and preparation for implementation of the next phase EE target program period 2016 –2020; (b) 
strengthening  of the policy  and legal  and regulatory  framework  for EE in IEs; (c) development  of relevant  energy  
use standards and establishment of EE industrial benchmarks; and (d) development of the ESCOs, scaling -up 
 
 
 
12 Whether leveraging is possible and which entity would take the residual risk will be further explored during project 
preparation.


---
*Page 31*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
and encouraging EE voluntary agreement, and conducting a communication campaign to raise awareness on 
EE for IEs. In addition, the adoption of Energy Management Systems (ISO 50,001) is considered the most 
effective practice for industrial eco -systems to generate energy efficiency and GHG reduction projects on a 
sustaining basis, TA will support MOIT to promote and strengthen capacity of enterprises in application of ISO 
50 001 or Energy Management System.  
2) TA and capacity building to the PFIs include (a) b usiness startup, including creation, organization, staffing, and 
initial  business  plan of the EE lending  business  unit (or team);  (b) capacity  building  and training,  including  support 
for the development  of necessary  financial  instruments,  procedures,  and the creation  of an adequate  knowledge 
base to evaluate and extend EE loans; (c) marketing and development of an EE subproject pipeline; (d) support 
to due diligence of eligible EE subloans, including financial, technical, social, and environmental assessme nts; 
and (e) development  of energy -conservation -related  financing  instruments  and risk management  tools.  
3) TA and capacity  building  for IEs will include  support  to (a) identify  EE projects  and prepare  relevant  energy  audits, 
technical design, and EE project preparation and (b) raise awareness through a communication campaign 
organized jointly with relevant industry associations. Capacity building on safeguards for the PFIs, ESCOs, and 
IEs as well as on -the-job training will be provided. TA to ensure adequate capacity for the review and 
implementation of safeguard issues will also be  considered.  
A detailed TA and capacity -building program and plan for the MoIT, PFIs, and IEs and the associated procurement plan 
will be developed for the first 18 months. A Bank -executed grant from the Canadian Externally Financed Output is used 
to conduct a strategic sector study for the food processing industry in Vietnam and to support workshops and pipeline 
preparation, building upon an initial sector survey carried out under t he Vietnam -HCFC Phase -out Project (Phase I) as 
well as the IFC study from 2010.  
The Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA) expressed interest in coordinating their TA activities within the 
framework of the Project. US$1.9 million is expected to be allocated by the KOICA, through its own policies and 
procedures, to support industrial enterprises (IEs) and energy service companies (ESCOs) in Vietnam for identifying EE 
investment opportunities and developing implementation plans of EE investment, which  initially targets energy intensive 
industrial enterprises in Bac Ninh Province as a pilot site. The KOICA’s activity is expected to facilitate access to capital  
under  Component  1 of the Project  and/or  the IBRD  Loan  by making  the ESCOs  and/or  IEs ready  for accessing  the loans, 
of which process will contribute to enhancing business environment of energy efficient investment in the long term. The 
Project  will maintain  close  coordination with  the KOICA  to support  financing  of identified  EE opportunities  throug h PFIs.  
IBRD Loan project: World Bank Energy Efficiency Credit Line -Vietnam Energy Efficiency for Industrial 
Enterprises (US$156.3 million, of which US$100 million from the World Bank, US$25 million from PFIs, and 
US$31.3 million from IEs)  
This complementary project consists of an EE lending program of US$156.3 million over five years: (a) US$100 million 
is from World Bank debt financing; (b) PFIs will co -finance 20 percent of the loan extended from World Bank debt 
financing, which will be US$25 million; and (c) sub -borrowers (that is, IEs) will contribute 20 percent of investments as 
equity financing, or US$31.3 million, which is common practice for loan applications in Vietnam.  
A US$100  million  World  Bank  Loan  will be on-lent by the MoF to selec ted PFIs.  The PFIs in turn will lend the funds  to IEs 
and/or  energy  service  companies  for EE investment  subprojects.  Their  lending  rates  will be determined  based  on market 
conditions and will adequately cover the financing and operating costs and provide for a reasonable profit margin for the 
PFIs. The PFIs will be selected in accordance with financial and nonfinancial criteria. Nonfinancial criteria will include 
demonstrated EE lending strategy/commitment, experience, and ability to generate a solid EE pr oject pipeline. The 
selection of PFIs will fully comply with the World Bank’s OP 10.0 requirements. The World Bank funds will be allocated 
among selected PFIs based on the demonstrated pipeline and remaining funds will be allocated on a first -come, first - 
served  basis.  
The WB supporting project was approved by the WB Board on April 14, 2017 and the IBRD Loan would be effective in 
September 2017. Two PFIs were selected for on -lending the IBRD Loan, including the Bank for Investment and 
Development of Vietnam  (BIDV), and Bank for Foreign Trade of Vietnam (VietcomBank). The following sub -project 
pipeline was submitted by PFIs for consideration, but further due diligence needs to be carried out to ensure that the 
proposed subprojects are eligible for financing u nder the IBRD Loan.


---
*Page 33*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
The Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF), for which the World Bank serves a Trustee, signed a partnership Memorandum 
of Understanding  (MoU)  with the MoIT  in June  2016  to develop  a carbon  finance  program  to supplement  the VEEIE.  The 
results -based grant TA will pilot the implementation of energy efficiency benchmarks in industry in Vietnam with the 
objective to inform and facilitate adoption of more ambitious and effective sectoral GHG emission mitigation policies, 
using adequate combination of market -based instruments and  other policy  actions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Operations Manual (OM) for the IBRD Loan has already been prepared. It describes the selection criteria for sub - 
borrowers and subprojects, appraisal procedures, roles and responsibilities of the PFIs and the government, the PFIs’ 
internal  institutional  arrangement  for project  implementation,  technical  evaluation,  environmental  and social  assessment, 
procurement, and financial management frameworks that are consistent with the rules and procedures of the Bank and 
the Vietnamese government. During project implementation, the PFIs will be responsible for identifying, appraising and 
financing subprojects that meet the criteria in the OM and will bear all associated  risks.  
Several credit lines with the PFIs are und er implementation in Vietnam, including the World Bank -funded Renewable 
Energy  Development  Project  (REDP).  IFC has provided  a US$25  million  credit  line to Techcombank  for EE financing  and 
Techcombank has financed US$41.5 million for EE projects for SMEs. M any Vietnamese banks are familiar with credit 
lines although  the capacity  for implementation  remains  to be strengthened  further.  
International experience demonstrates that dedicated credit lines are effective at increasing the capacity, interest, and 
confidence of PFIs in mainstreaming the EE financing business line through learning -by-doing and helping them 
recognize EE investments as profitable. This approach can achieve a double leveraging effect by mobilizing substantial 
debt contributions  from the  PFIs and equity  financing  from end  beneficiaries  and then revolving  the loans  that are repaid 
to the fund. Evidence is accumulating that PFIs continue to provide EE financing after the completion of credit line 
programs.  The success  formula  for the credit  line instrument  is well established:  (a) careful  selection  of PFIs against  well- 
defined criteria; (b) inclusion of several PFIs so that developers can induce competition between them; (c) strong 
management commitment, dedicated teams at both headquarters  and branches, and incentives to staff within the  PFIs;  
(d) TA to support project pipeline development and capacity building of both PFIs and local project developers; and (e) 
aggressive  marketing  and business  development  as well as new financial  products  tailored  to EE financing  that are critical 
to generate sufficient deal  flow. 
Financial intermediation operations require special attention. The review of financial intermediary operations Bank -wide 
suggests  several  preconditions  for success,  including  the need  for a stable  macroeconomic  and financial  framework,  use 
of eligibility criteria for PFIs, and monitoring the PFIs and the subloans during implementation. A review of Vietnam’s 
financial intermediary portfolio mirrored the findings of the Bank -wide review while the recent financial turmoil has 
underscored  the importance  of constant  monitoring  of conditions  during  preparation  and implementation.  Experience  from 
the World  Bank -funded  Renewable  Energy  Development  Project  (REDP)  showed  that the project  pipeline  was adversely  
impacted when the financial market was volatile and interest rates sharply increased. In this operation, the MoF will   
No  
Name of EE subprojects   
Project Owner  Total 
Investment  
Cost (US$ ml)  Total Loan 
(US$ml)   
Implementation  Status  
1 Waste Heat Recovery System of Van Hoa Clinker  
Plant  VCM Ltd  15.9 10.9 Preparation Stage  
2 Bagasses Waste Power Generation for Quang Ngai 
Suger Plant  Quang Ngai Suger  55.5 38.8 Preparation Stage  
3 Modernization by LED lighting technologies  STROJE  136.4  90.9 Preparation Stage  
4 Replacement of agriculture production equipment  Phu Hung Ltd  0.2 0.1 Preparation Stage  
5 Waste Fired EE for cement factory  Chinfon  75.0 50.0 2016  
6 Replacement of water pumps and compressors  Khe Cham  Coal  Co., 0.9 0.8 2015 -2016  
7 Replacement of Paper Production Equipment  Thien Tri Co.,  2.5 2.0 Preparation Stage  
8 Installation of Waste Treatment System for textile  
production  Tan Quang  0.5 0.3 Preparation Stage  
9 Waste Heat Recovery System of Ha Tien 1 Plant  Ha Tien 1 Cement  Co. 40.0 30.0 Preparation Stage


---
*Page 35*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
extend  the World  Bank loan  to PFIs in U.S. dollars  and the U.S. dollar  rate is generally  stable  over the medium and  long 
term, making it suitable to EE  investment.  
 
Linkage to results. The Project will contribute to achieving the government’s energy efficiency and GHG reduction 
objectives.  The lifetime  energy saving  of the EE investments,  in either  electricity  saving  or reduced  coal consumption  for 
heat generation and industrial processes, will be evaluated and reported in a GWh -equivalent form. The GHG mitigation 
impacts of the EE investments will be accounted in CO 2-equivalent metric and mainly focus on CO 2 emission reductions 
due to reduced electricity consumption and improved energy efficiency of industrial processes. The transaction -related 
metrics, such as volume of finance leveraged, number of ba nkable EE projects developed, and number of IEs adopting 
EE technologies,  will be reported  through  PFIs to the MoIT  based  on actual  information  on subloans  to IEs and EE service 
providers.  Section  H explains  the outputs,  outcomes  and contribution  to GCF -level impacts  of the Project  in more  detail.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
Ministry  of Industry  and Trade  (MoIT):  The power  sector  falls under  the auspices  of the Ministry  of Industry  and Trade 
(MoIT). Through its General Directorate of Energy (GDE), it exercises all state management functions for the energy 
sector,  including  EE. The Department  of Energy  Efficiency  and Science  and Technology  support  the GDE  in supervising 
and monitoring  the implementation  of the EE and Energy  Conservation  law and related  regulations.  Within  the MoIT  and 
directly under its minister, the Electricity Regulatory Authority of Vietnam is responsible for licensing, technical codes, 
and performance standards for dist ribution and transmission and monitoring the electricity market, supply security, and 
compliance with technical and performance standards. Under the GDE, there is a Project Management Board (PMB) for 
the ongoing World Bank -financed Clean Production and Ene rgy Efficiency (CPEE) Project. This existing PMB has been 
effectively conducting project coordination activities under the CPEE project. The same PMB will coordinate the VEEIEs 
project  monitoring  and reporting  requirements  and implement  the capacity -buildi ng component.  
State Bank of Vietnam (SBV): The SBV as the central bank will represent the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in signing 
the Loan  Agreement  with the Bank.  The MoF will sign subloan  agreements  with each  selected  PFI that will be responsible 
for implementing the IBRD credit line project. The PFIs will have full responsibility for the EE lending process and 
approvals, following the agreed OM, and will bear all the associated credit risks. The MoIT is not involved in the 
review/approval  of the sublo an applications  of eligible  IEs. Each  PFI will form a Project  Implementation  Unit with dedicated 
teams supported by technical, environmental, social and procurement experts. The Project Implementation Unit will 
implement the sublending activities and act a s the PFI’s focal point to interact with the Bank, MoIT, MoF, and other 
stakeholders.  
Participating financial institutions (PFIs): The selection criteria of the PFIs was agreed with the MoIT, MoF, and SBV 
based on the Bank’s requirements and existing government regulations. The MoIT undertook an initial assessment of 
potential PFIs, and the MoF and SBV are responsible for final due diligence and selection based on the MoIT’s 
recommendation. The selection will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank and onl y becomes effective once the Project 
Agreement is signed between the PFI and the Bank and the Subsidiary Loan Agreement between the MoF and the PFI. 
Potential PFIs identified to date include the Bank for Investment and Development of Vietnam (BIDV), the Ba nk for 
Foreign Trade of Vietnam (VCB), the Vietnam Technological Commercial JS Bank (Techcombank), the Vietnam JS 
Commercial Bank for Industry and Trade (Vietinbank), Asia Commercial Bank (ACB), Sai Gon Hanoi Commercial Bank 
(SHB),  and Sai Gon Thuong  Tin Commercial  Bank (Sacombank).  Under  the IBRD  Loan,  two PFIs,  BIDV  and VCB,  have 
been  selected  for on-lending  IBRD  loan.  A summary  of the PFIs’  due diligence  is set out in Annex  7. 
Professional guarantee program implementing entity (PIE): A professional progr am implementing entity (PIE), such 
as a bank or  existing  guarantee  agency  will be appointed  by the MoIT  to manage  the Risk Sharing  Facility.  The need  for 
a professional program manager has been validated in the World Bank’s other risk sharing facility operations in the 
Philippines  and India,  where  dedicated  units  at commercial  financial  institutions  assumed  the program  management  role. 
The PIE will be competitively  selected  with a focus  on hiring  an entity  which  has the capacity  to assess  PFIs’  due diligence 
and manage the risks assumed by the  GCF -RSF.  
The PIE responsibilities include: i) review and evaluate guarantee applications; ii) underwrite and issue guarantees; iii) 
adjust guarantee terms based on market feedback, within pre -approved limits; i v) actively monitor and manage risk  
exposures and capital adequacy; v) verify guarantee calls and making payments to PFIs; vi) coordinate with PFIs and,


---
*Page 37*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
as necessary,  relevant  government  agencies  on loss recovery  efforts;  vii) make  a call under  the IBRD/GCF  guarantee  in 
case of capital shortfall; viii) participate in marketing efforts for the Facility; and ix) facilitate required TA and capaci ty 
building  activities.  The MoIT,  in cooperatio n with the Bank  and the SBV,  will ensure  that the selected  agency  has sufficient 
capacity  to fulfill all required  responsibilities  over the implementation  period,  up to 15 years.  The selection  process  will be 
launched and concluded by the MoIT before signing of the IBRD/GCF guarantee agreement, based on criteria to be 
determined with support from the  Bank.  
As the PIE will be responsible for the day -to-day operation of the GCF -RSF, MOIT’s main focus would be to supervise 
the activities and performance o f PIE, and review and revise operating procedures as needed. MOIT supervision would 
also be important to hold the PIE accountable for agreed performance goals. The figure below shows the sequence in 
individual sub -guarantee processing. The PIE will support  the PFIs in identifying suitable projects, but it is the PFI’s 
responsibility to appraise the EE projects based on the eligibility requirements set out in the OM. Subsequently, the PFI 
would apply for a sub -guarantee from the GCF -RSF, providing the requir ed documentation as listed in the OM. Subject 
to satisfactory review of the sub -guarantee application the PIE will issue a sub -guarantee for the relevant loan and the 
PFI can proceed with loan disbursement. The PIE would then supervise performance of the l oan throughout its life.  
 
Individual sub -guarantee application and approval  
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
Investment Need. The investment need in several key energy -intensive industries, such as cement, steel, pulp and 
paper, seafood processing and chemical, was estimated at up to US$3.6 billion, according to a recent study conducted 
by MoIT. The study estimated energy efficiency investment needs in these sub -sectors and calculated energy saving 
potential and GHG emission reduction, th rough literature review, existing research results, surveys and energy audits. 
The estimates also took into account relevant governmental regulations guiding the implementation of energy audits for 
industrial  facilities  thereby  determining  the energy -saving  solutions  for industry.  Also,  benchmarking  method  was applied 
which is widely used to forecast the potential of energy intensity reduction in the industrial sectors. From the total 
investment need, energy saving potential was estimated to be 8.29 million toe per year, and GHG emission reduction to 
be 43.47  million  tCO 2eq per year.  Annex  2-1 provides  more  detailed  information.  There  is no comprehensive  assessment 
for all industrial  sectors  yet, but the MoIT  intends  to carry  out such  assessments  going  forward.


---
*Page 39*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
The MoIT  has had remarkable  efforts  to strengthen  EE performance  and regulate  the energy  intensity  in industrial  sector 
by establishment  of energy  baseline  consumption  and sectorial  benchmarking.  The baseline  energy  consumption  will be 
expressed both in absolute terms (toe) and in terms of energy intensity or specific energy consumption (SEC). The SEC 
means the ratio of the net energy input into the boundary of the IE or the boundary of a system targeted by the energy 
efficiency measure (Ein) to the total quantity of output exported from the IE boundary (Eout). The SEC is calculated as 
per the formula expressed in terms of the metric ton of oil equivalent (toe)/per unit of product (SEC = Ein/Eout). EE 
Benchmarking and SEC have been established for chemical, beverage, plastic, steel, plastic and cement sectors as 
below table. With support of GCF technical assistance, MOIT can further strengthen regulatory enforcement, monitoring 
EE perfor mance  at IEs, and undertake  baseline  study  for setting  suitable  SECs  for industries.  
 
 
 
Specific energy consumption (SEC) for Industrial Sectors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financing Market. Despite government’s commitment to energy efficiency and  a number of initiatives supported by the 
Government and bilateral and multilateral donors, EE market is still nascent in Vietnam, due to the significant barriers 
discussed in section C.2. In the banking sector, only a few local financial institutions have  dedicated EE lending as part 
of their green financing business line, which also accounts for a small fraction of the loan portfolio. Most of the existing  
EE lending is focused only a small number of large industrial companies with high creditworthiness, w hich financial  Sector/products  Unit SEC 
Chemical sector (Circular 02/2014/TT -BCT by MOIT)    
Rubber material    
<5000t/year  kOE/ton  44 
5000 -10000t/year  kOE/ton  36 
>10000t/year  kOE/ton  28 
Fertilizer NPK    
<4000t/y  kOE/ton  14.8 
4000t/y -9000t/y  kOE/ton  16.8 
>9000t/y  kOE/ton  19.7 
   
Paint  kOE/ton  12.1 
Solvent paint  kOE/ton  17.7 
Plastic (Circular 38/2016/TT -BCT by MOIT, applicable from 2016 -2020)    
Bag plastic  kWh/kg  0.7 
Bottle Plastic  kWh/kg  1.96 
Packing plastic  kWh/kg  0.79 
Construction plastic  kWh/kg  0.46 
Tech -plastic  kWh/kg  1.27 
Brewery with capacity (Circular 19/2016/TT -BCT by MOIT, applicable    
>100ml  MJ/lh  140 
20-100ml  MJ/lh  215 
<20ml  MJ/lh  306 
Beverage    
Carbonated beverage products or both carbonated and non carbonated  MJ/lh  55 
Non carbonated beverages  MJ/lh  111 
Steel and Iron(Circular 20/2016/TT -BCT by MOIT, applicable 2016 -2020)    
Manufacture of coke coal  MJ/ton  4000  
Sintered iron ore  MJ/ton  2350  
Blast furnace iron making  MJ/ton  14000  
Steelmaking by converters (Basic Oxygen Furnace)  MJ/ton  150 
Electric arc furnace steelmaking  MJ/ton  2600  
Induction furnaces steelmaking  MJ/ton  2600  
Hot-rolled flat steel  MJ/ton  16500  
Hot-rolled flat lamination steel  MJ/ton  16000  
Cement    
Thermal SEC  MJ/t 3700  
Electric SEC  kWh/t  59


---
*Page 41*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
institutions are willing to provide with credit regardless of EE transactions. The majority of IEs and EE service providers 
currently  have  a very limited  access  to capital  from the local banking  sector.  Without  addressing  existing  barriers  properly, 
lack of understanding  and perceived  high risk on EE of both financial  institutions  and industrial  enterprises  would  persist, 
limiting  opportunities  to unlock  the energy  saving  and climate  mitigation  potential  of the industrial  sector.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
There is no license and/or permit that is specifically applicable to energy efficiency transactions in industry. PFIs will be  
selected, upon the selection criteria agreed with the MoIT, MoF, and SBV, among those that already have required 
licenses as financial institutions.  
Taxation: Taxation that could be relevant to industrial energy efficiency includes:  
• Enterprise income tax: Taxable income is defined as total revenue less deductible expenses (depreciation, cost 
of goods sold, research and development costs, interest). Losses may be carried forward up to 5  years.  
• Value  Added  Tax (VAT):  Applies  to most  goods,  uses  credit  method.  Exemptions  include  agricultural  production, 
salt, some imported equipment, credit, business services,  education.  
• Import duties: Levied on CIF price, average tariff is about 8%. Some exemptions for aid, goods in transit, 
education, research, for export processing, and  certain machinery & equipment. (Rates vary from 0% to 60%, 
with most in the 1%, 3%, 5%, 10%, 15%  brackets)  
• Export duties: Levied on a few items only (Oil: 4%.  Wood: 5 -20%.  Cashews:  4%) 
There  are tax incentives  and other  forms  of support  to be offered  by law to manufacturers  and producers  of EE products 
and technologies. Article 41 of the Law on Energy Efficiency and Conservation prescribes that “Organizations and 
individuals that manufacture energy -saving products and invest in production lines or expand  production with energy - 
saving technologies are entitled to incentives and supports” which include a) incentives on import and export duties and 
enterprise income tax under the tax law; b) incentives under the land law; c) concessional loans from various sources 
such as the development bank, the fund for science and technology development support, the national fund for 
technological renovation and the environment facility and supports from the national programs on hi -tech development 
and economical and eff icient use of energy; d) other incentives under this Law and relevant laws. Industrial enterprises 
investing  in EE products  and equipment  are expected  to benefit  from the cost saving  of the manufacturers  and producers.  
Foreign Exchange: Government’s decree  No. 74/2014/ND -CP 
details the implementation of several provisions of the Ordinance and 
the amended Ordinance on the foreign exchange, Article 15: Regime 
of Vietnamese Dong exchange rate.  
• Vietnamese dong exchange rate is formed on the basis of 
foreign cur rency demand and supply on the state -controlled 
market.  The SBV shall regulate  the exchange  rate through  the 
use of monetary policies and take measures to control 
transactions on the foreign currency  market.  
• Vietnamese  dong  exchange  rate system  is a managed  floating 
system that the SBV defines on the basis of a basket of 
currencies of countries that establish a cooperation of 
commerce, loaning, debt repayment and investment with 
Vietnam, which conforms to macroeconomic objectives in 
each  period.  
According to the regulations, Vietnam continues to operate a crawling  
peg system, aimed at helping exports and promoting foreign exchange market stability. Weakening trade balance and 
rising  expectations  of higher  interest  rates  in the United  States  have  exerted  downward  pressure  on the Vietnamese  dong 
in 2015.  In response  to a firmer  US dollar  and increased  devaluation  pressure,  the State  Bank  of Vietnam  devalued  its 
currency twice, in January and May 2015 by a cumulative 2 percent. After the SBV reaffirmed that there would be no


---
*Page 42*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
further dong/dollar exchange rate adjustment this year, the dollar exchange rate continued to fluctuate, traded at the 
lower end of the +/ - 1 percent band.  
Banks are regulated on the limit of lending denominated in US dollar. Circular 24/2015/TT -NHNN on foreign currency 
loans  granted  to the residents  by credit  institutions  and branches  of foreign  banks,  Article  3 states  that “credit  institutions 
shall consider  granting  the foreign  currency  loans  serving  certain  purposes”  which  include:  
• Short -term, mid -term and long -term loans used as outward remittance for imported goods or services, when the 
borrowers’  foreign  currency  derived  from their business  operation  is sufficient  to repay  such  loans;  
• Short -term loans granted to central petroleum importers who are given annual quotas on petroleum import by the 
Ministry  of Industry  and Trade  to pay for such import  when  the borrowers’  foreign  currency  derived  from their business 
operation is not sufficient to repay such  loans;  
• Short -term loans granted to meet domestic enterprises’ demands for short -term capital to serve the purpose of 
implementing their plans to manufacture and/or trade goods exported through Vietnam’s border checkpoints when 
borrowers’ foreign currency derived from the export turnover is sufficient to repay such loans; on receipt of loans 
disbursed by credit institutions, borrowers shall  sell such borrowed foreign currency to the lending credit institutions 
in the form of a foreign -exchange spot transaction, unless the loans borrowers are used by the borrowers to make 
payments in which foreign currency is compulsory as stipulated by laws.  This provision shall be effective till the end 
of March 31, 2016; the deadline is then extended until the end of December 31, 2016 by the Circular 07/2016/TT - 
NHNN.  
• Loans used as direct outward investments in important national projects which are subject to investment decisions 
made by the National Assembly, the Government or the Prime Minister, and have been granted the Outward 
Investment Certificate by the Ministry of Planning and  Investment.  
According to the regulation, financial institutions will be li mited to extending loans denominated in US dollar under the 
Project. Most of the lending are expected to be VND denominated loans.  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
The Project will be implemented over five years, with an option to be extended if demand is higher. The MoIT has the 
overall Project coordination and supervision responsibility and is responsible for the implementation of the capacity 
building  and TA component.  The current  Project  Management  Board  (PMB)  for CPEE  under  the GDE  will coordinate  and 
supervise the implementation of VEEIE, and partially supervise GCF -RSF component which will be managed by a 
professional Program Implementing Entity (PIE). This existing PMB has been effectively conducting project coordination 
activities under the CPEE project and will be doing the same for the WB -VEEIE and GCF -RSF. The PMB will also 
implement  the capacity -building  component  of the Project.  The MoIT  will select  an independent  external  auditor  to conduct 
the annual project audit; this  will be financed from the TA component. The MoIT has the main responsibility for signing 
the contract and coordinating the auditor’s  work.  
The PFIs will have  full responsibility  for the EE lending  process  and approvals,  following  the agreed  OM, and will bear all 
the associated credit risks. The MoIT will not be involved in the review/approval of the loan applications of eligible IEs. 
Each  PFI will form a Project  Implementation  Unit with dedicated  teams  supported  by technical,  environmental  and social 
and procurement experts. The Project Implementation Unit will implement the lending and guarantee activities and act 
as the PFI’s  focal  point  to interact  with the World  Bank,  MoIT,  MoF,  and other  stakeholders.  
The PFIs are responsible for appraisal and evaluation of projects and bear the associated risks regarding the 
unguaranteed portion of their loans to the IEs. The PFIs will supervise/monitor all loans to ensure they are implemented 
according  to Vietnamese  and Bank  requirements  and provide  periodic  reports,  including  fiduciary  and safeguards  reports 
to the MoIT,  MoF,  and the Bank.  Independent  auditors  will be selected  to conduct  annual  project  audit  on the performance 
of the PFIs and  IEs. 
A detailed  project  OM covering  technical,  fiduciary,  safeguards,  and management  requirements  and procedures  has been 
prepared  for the IBRD  Loan.  The OM is incorporated  into the project  agreements  between  the World  Bank  and PFIs and 
will be binding  on all participants.  The OM defined  the detailed  eligibility  criteria  for subprojects,  for example,  the minimum 
energy savings to be  achieved.


---
*Page 44*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
A separate Program Implementing Entity (PIE) will be selected by the MoIT for management of the GCF Risk Sharing 
Facility Component. For example, it could be one of commercial banks or an existing guarantee agency. The MoIT, in 
cooperation with the World Bank and the SBV, will ensure tha t the selected agency has sufficient capacity to fulfill all 
required responsibilities over the implementation period, up to 15 years. A separate OM along with a Risk Management 
Framework (RMF) for the GCF -RSF will be prepared, building on the OM prepared for the IBRD Loan. Compliance with 
the OM and RMF will be included as a covenant in the applicable legal agreements between the PIE and MoIT and the 
PIE and World Bank.  
The implementation arrangements for the Project are summarized in Figure 1. Both Compon ent 1 and the IBRD Loan 
mobilize PFI loans to support EE subprojects of IEs/ESCOs, through on -lending or risk sharing, respectively. As Figure 
1 shows,  PFIs can support  eligible  EE subprojects  in three  different  forms:  (i) through  WB-VEEIE  on-lending  and PFI co- 
financing only (Group 1), (ii) by combining IBRD on -lending, PFI co -financing and guaranteed PFI financing together 
(Group 2) or (iii) by providing only guaranteed PFI loans for eligible subprojects (Group 3)13. All three types of financing 
combina tion would  require  IEs to contribute  20 percent  of the total investment  cost in equity.  The Government  will play a 
central role in implementing and supervising both operations. TA and capacity building support will be provided for the 
benefit of the Govern ment, PFIs and IEs. Figure 1 also shows the basic flow of funds associated with the combined 
operations. It is important to highlight that only the GCF grant is initially disbursed into the GCF -RSF. The IBRD/GCF 
guarantee will remain available committed bu t undisbursed as stand -by capital, should sub -guarantee payouts exceed 
the losses that have been provisioned  for. 
Figure 1: Scaling up Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises in Vietnam (the Project) and IBRD Loan 
Overview of Implementation Arrangemen ts 
 
The following contractual arrangements are expected to be required for the Project:  
 
 
 
 
 
13 To illustrate with a hypothetical US$10M EE investment, projects in the first group could be financed with US$2M in equity, 
US$6.4M in IBRD on -lending and US$1.6M in PFI co -financing; projects in the second group could be financed with US$2M in 
equity, US$3M in guaranteed PFI lending (e.g. with US$1.5M guarantee coverage), US$4M in IBRD on -lending and US$1M in 
PFI co -financing; and in the third group, the wh ole debt balance of US$8M after a US$2M equity contribution could be funded 
through guaranteed PFI lending (e.g. with US$4M guarantee coverage).


---
*Page 46*
---

C GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 52   
 DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
 
 
1. Funded  Activity  Agreement  between  GCF  and IBRD : Providing  for the $75 million  for the IBRD/GCF  guarantee,  the 
$3 million grant for the start -up costs for the RSF; and the $8.3 million grant for TA, and all in accordance with the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA).  
2. GCF  Grant  Agreement  between  IBRD  and Vietnam:  Providing  for the downstream transfer  of the funds  (other  than 
RSF funds) to  the Government of  Vietnam  
 
Additional agreements for the RSF : 
3. Implementation  agreement  between  the PIE and the Government  of Vietnam : sets out the responsibilities  and 
obligations of the government and the PIE in respect of the  Project.  
4. IBRD/GCF Guarantee agreement between IBRD and the PIE as guarantee beneficiary : defines the terms and 
conditions  of the guarantee  offered,  including  covered  risks,  guarantee  amount  and term, payout  procedures  etc. 
5. Sub-guarantee agreements between the PIE and PFIs as sub -guarantee beneficiaries : defines the terms and 
conditions of the sub -guarantees offered, including covered risks, sub -guarantee amount and term, payout 
procedures,  etc. 
6. PFI loan agreements  between  PFIs and industrial  enterprises : defines  the terms  and conditions  of the loans  to be 
made  from PFIs and industrial  enterprises,  which  will be backed  by the relevant  sub-guarantees.  
7. IBRD/GCF  Cooperation  agreement  between  WB and the government : defines  key undertakings  to be made  by the 
government related to cooperation and information sharing to facilitate the implementation of the Project and 
ensure government ownership of the  Project.  
 
Figure 1A below summarizes these arrangements:


---
*Page 47*
---

D GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 52   
 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
 
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
The GCF -RSF,  to be capitalized  by the GCF,  is essential  for successful  scale -up of energy  efficiency  lending  in Vietnam. 
The provision  of partial  credit  risk guarantees  to PFIs will encourage  them  to extend  EE loans  from their own resources, 
beyond the WB -VEEIE credit line, and associated co -financing requirements, provided through the MoF and SBV. EE 
lending  is still considered  a high-risk product  line by financial  institutions  in Vietnam.  While  the TA and capacity  building 
activities seek to enhance PFIs’ understanding of EE opportunities with IEs, the GCF -RSF will provide them with the 
necessary  financial  risk mitigation  to alleviate  borrower  credit  concerns  and expand  lending  for EE. 
Based on the initial seed capital of US$3 million grant and US$75 million guarantee, the total sub -guarantee issuance 
during a 5 -year availability period would be US$100 million, assuming reissuance of exposure as covere d loans and 
associated  sub-guarantees  amortize.  Adding  the same  amount  of uncovered  PFI lending  and 20 percent  of equity  from 
IEs would bring the total mobilization of private financing to US$251 million in the base case. The resulting leveraging 
effect  of GCF -RSF financing  therefore  will be 3.2 times.  This is additional  to the US$156.3  million  of investment  mobilized 
through the WB -VEEIE, as the GCF -RSF does not offer guarantee to  World Bank -funded EE loans.  
Figure 2: Leveraging Effect of IBRD/GCF Guarantee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The IBRD/GCF guarantee represents a targeted solution to mobilize private financing. Sharing credit risk of EE loans 
offered  by PFIs is a key to address  existing  barriers  in the financial  sector  and to scale  up EE investment  in the industrial 
sector.  The IBRD/GCF  guarantee  can be used  to mitigate  credit  risk associated  with implementing  EE investments  using 
commercial  financing.  The IBRD/GCF  guarantee  is therefore  uniquely  positioned  to support  the commercial  transactions 
contemplated  under  the Project  and mobilize  additional  private  sector  investment  at volumes  which  otherwise  would  not 
be possible.  
The concessional  terms  of IBRD/GCF  guarantee  allow  PFIs and other  participants  in the market  to become  acquainted 
with the risks  of EE financing  at a lower  cost.  The benefit  of concessionality  will be passed  to end-users,  including  PFIs, 
IEs and EE service  providers  which  form the EE market.  Without  GCF  intervention,  it would  take considerably  longer  for 
existing  market  barriers  to be removed,  and in the meantime,  access  to finance  for EE investments  would  remain  limited  
to selected  borrowers  and more  costly  than many  borrowers  could  bear.  By expediting  market  development  and learning 
through  the concessional  risk guarantee,  GCF  would  help unlock  the considerable  potential  for energy  saving  measures 
and GHG emission reduction in  Vietnam.


---
*Page 49*
---

D GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 52   
 RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
 
 
 
The World Bank has experience in structuring similar risk sharing operations using other climate funds, including the 
Clean  Technology  Fund  (CTF)  in India  and Philippines  and the Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF)  in China  and Bulgaria. 
Building on such experience, the design of the Project reflects lessons learned from other countries and is aimed at 
minimizing risks to the IBRD/GCF  guarantee.  
D.2. Exit Strategy  
The Project has been designed to ensure that experience and exposure gained by PFIs, IEs an d EE service providers 
during  the implementation  will enable  them  to sustain  a market  in EE investments  after the 5-year project  implementation 
period.  Project  monitoring  by PFIs and GCF -RSF Program  Implementing  Entity  will continue  beyond  the implementation 
period until all loans and associated guarantees have been fully amortized. The PIE will remain under a contract with 
the MoIT  through year  15 when  the final guarantee  commitments  issued  in year  5 (with  10-year tenors)  are expected  to 
be completely amortized. The project is designed to cover all its costs from sub -guarantee fees during the monitoring 
period.  
After Project close, it is expected that EE lending will continue by PFIs and other financial institutions. Several studies 
conducted  by the MoIT confirmed the large potential for EE investment in the IEs, as well as the interest of commercial 
banks to develop an EE business line. Sustainability will be achieved through an integrated, two -pronged project 
approach: (a) operational engage ment of the PFIs making available loans for dedicated EE investments and (b) TA for 
capacity and market development to support EE lending activities and capacity building.  
During Project preparation and the early stages of implementation, it is critical to  develop a robust pipeline of sub - 
projects which are technically viable, financially attractive and allows for replicability and scale -up. Local banks will be 
supported in developing sound EE lending business models through hands -on assistance to identify  and develop 
demonstration  projects,  building  on experiences  gained  by other  local banks.  Dissemination  of the early  experiences  of 
the PFIs throughout  the banking  and industrial  sectors  should  result  in replication  of successful  initiatives.  It is expecte d 
that the PFIs will build expertise in EE lending to specific industries and project types, based on their project portfolios 
and target markets. Through these efforts, the PFIs should be able to build a sufficient knowledge base to target 
financially  sound  EE projects,  lower  transaction  costs  for evaluation  and appraisal,  and thereby  gain confidence  to scale 
up their EE business line. The overall replication potential is considerable due to the large size of the industrial EE 
market in Vietnam, especia lly in energy -intensive manufacturing industries such as steel, cement, textiles, food 
processing, and pulp and  paper.  
Based on experience in other countries, risk sharing facilities can be effective at increasing the capacity and interest of 
PFIs in ident ifying profitable EE financing opportunities. The proposed approach for a risk sharing facility allows for 
substantial  debt mobilization  from PFIs and equity  financing  from IEs, and enables  the capital  base  to be revolved  during 
the availability period. The project design is based on long -term sustainability with the globally tested expectation that 
PFIs continue  to provide  EE financing  after such  a risk sharing  mechanism is  completed.  
The proposed  Project  is based  on a number  of lessons  obtained  from other similar  operations.  These  include:  (a) careful 
selection of PFIs, IEs and EE projects against well -defined criteria; (b) inclusion of multiple PFIs to encourage 
competition in financing terms; (c) requirement for dedicated project -implementation staff with PFIs, with appropriate 
performance incentives; (d) provision of TA to support project pipeline development and capacity building of both PFIs 
and IEs; and (e) implementation of comprehensive marketing and business development  efforts.


---
*Page 50*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment fac tors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed 
where relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to c ontribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
The Project and the IBRD Loan are expected to avoid 12 MtCO 2eq of GHG emissions annually through improved 
energy  efficiency  in industrial  processes  and reduced  energy  consumption,  of electricity  and/or  heat.  Over  the lifetime 
of investment  hereby  assumed  10 years,  the estimated  GHG  emissions  avoided  would  be 120 MtCO 2eq. Total  energy 
saving  is estimated  2.36 Mtoe  per year,  including  electricity  saving  of 4.7 TWh  and coal saving  of 2.7 million  tons.  It is 
equivalent to the saving of 2,100 MW power generation capacity with 95% of capacity  factor.  
It is important  to note that given  the nature  of the Project  to support  a number  of EE sub-projects  through  PFIs,  the ex- 
ante estimates of energy saving and GHG emissions avoided would not be accurate and could change upon the 
composition of EE lending portfolio supported throughout the implementation. The calculation methodology take s into 
account  this uncertainty  and deploys  somewhat  conservative  approach.  Details  are in section  E.1.2.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF  
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be 
reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  12 MtCO 2eq 
Lifetime  120 MtCO 2eq 
Annex 2 -1, the study conducted by MoIT, examined EE investment opportunities in key energy -intensive industries, 
such  as cement,  steel,  pulp and paper,  seafood  processing  and chemical,  activity  by activity  in each  sub-sector.  In the 
minimum investment scenario under the study, annual energy saving potential and GHG emissions avoided were 
estimated at 2.3 Mtoe and 12 MtCO2eq, respectively, by i nvesting US$340 million in selected EE activities of six 
different industries. In the maximum scenario, all results were much higher given the investment potential of US$3.6 
billion. The expected results of the Project and the supporting IBRD Loan were est imated by extrapolating the results 
of the minimum investment scenario and reducing them by 15% to take conservative estimates, reflecting the 
uncertainty subject to the composition of EE investment types in the PFI lending portfolio. Annex 2 -1 provides mo re 
details on methodologies and assumptions used for each  industry.  
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Industrial energy efficiency has large potential for further scaling up and replication beyond the scope of the Project. 
The investment need was estimated at around US$3.6 billion in the key industries, and would be larger for the entire 
industrial sector. The Project is aimed at realizing only part of the identified potential, leaving bigger opportunities to 
be materialized.  
The Project  aims  to address  major  bottlenecks  in opening  up a sustai nable  market  for industrial  energy  efficiency  that 
is supported by the local financial sector. Through a combination of interventions under the Project and the 
complementary IBRD operation, including on -lending (IBRD Loan), risk sharing, technical assistan ce and capacity 
building, PFIs are expected to learn from experience and to become active market players that offer EE loans to IEs 
and ESCOs  with little need  for support  after the Project  is closed.  International  experience  demonstrates  that dedicated 
credit  lines are effective  at increasing  the capacity,  interest,  and confidence  of PFIs in mainstreaming  the EE financing 
business  line through  learning -by-doing  and at changing  their perceptions  so that they recognize  that EE investments  
are actually a profitable business. Risk sharing has been another effective tool in many  countries to reduce high risk


---
*Page 52*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
perception when the market is premature, and to increase capacity and confidence of PFIs in EE financing. PFIs will 
play a key role to launch and expand the industrial EE financing market, which has been limited in Vietnam so far, 
during and after the proj ect implementation.  
Other financial institutions that are not selected to be PFIs of the Project would be also able to find business 
opportunities in industrial energy efficiency from PFIs experience. Through the Project, more transactions would be 
known a nd proven to be commercially viable, being recognized as new business opportunities for non -participating 
banks  and non-bank  financial  institutions.  The Project  is flexibly  designed  and will remain  open,  so financial  institutions 
that do not participate  in the Project  from the beginning  will still be able to join during  implementation  through  the same 
selection procedures. This will enable further scaling up with a larger base of local financial institutions that are 
supportive to industrial  EE. 
IEs and ESCOs are also expected to become more capable of identifying investment opportunities and developing 
investment pipeline, through technical assistance, capacity building and learning from actual transactions. Through 
Component  2, workshops  will be offered  to raise  awareness  and share  good  practices  of other  companies,  and energy 
audit and training of auditors/energy managers will be provided for pipeline development. At the end of the Project, a 
number of trained auditors will be available in the market, i dentifying business opportunities and promoting EE 
investment  in the industrial  sector.  Furthermore,  technical  assistance  to be provided  to the MoIT  and other  government 
agencies  would  improve  the enabling  environment,  which  would  enhance  possibilities  of market  uptake.  
After the Project is closed, financing industrial EE is envisaged to be replicated as more PFIs and IEs have capacity, 
experience  and interest.  Taking  into account  the potential  growth  of EE opportunities  in other  sectors,  e.g. residential, 
commercial, public, etc., where some of the experienced PFIs might be willing to explore, the opportunities of  scaling  
up would be much larger.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Component 2 on technical assistance and capacity building will particularly contribute to knowledge sharing and 
learning. Lack of EE awareness and capacity has been one of the major barriers to scaling up EE in the industrial 
sector. To deal with this, the Project offers workshops and training for (i) PFIs to have suf ficient knowledge base to 
evaluate and extend EE loans and to conduct due diligence; and (ii) IEs/ESCOs to learn EE technologies and 
investment  opportunities  that are relevant  to their businesses  and to identify  and develop  pipeline  through  energy  audit 
and adequate safeguard considerations. Campaigns to raise awareness will be also organized and supported, with 
relevant industry associations. These activities will facilitate knowledge sharing among local stakeholders and EE 
experts and broaden the potentia l market base for industrial EE in the  country.  
MoIT  will also benefit  from technical  assistance  and capacity  building,  focusing  on policy  and regulatory  framework  for 
industrial EE. Lessons learned from Vietnam’s previous national EE programs as well as other countries will inform 
MoIT and other government stakeholders for improving enabling environment. Throughout the process, knowledge 
and learning will be shared with relevant government departments and  officials.  
The Program  Implementing  Entity  (PIE),  to be selected  to operate  the Risk Sharing  Facility,  will also create  knowledge 
and learning opportunities, particularly on the use of risk guarantee instruments, from risk assessment of each 
applications to risk and exposure management at the portfolio le vel, and its effectiveness to open up a new line of 
business,  like industrial  EE lending,  of which  the market  is less experienced  and the perceived  risk is high.  Experience 
and learning from the operations of PIE can be transferred to other institutions for replications not only for the same 
EE market but also for other new markets at the beginning  stage.  
The Project Management Board (PMB) is responsible for monitoring results of the Project and the IBRD Loan, using 
the results  indicators  defined  in Secti on H. All results  will be disclosed  to public,  and will inform potential  opportunities 
for scaling  up and replication.  Lessons  learned  from the Project  and the IBRD  Loan  operation will  be evaluated  after it 
is closed and shared for public  disclosure.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 54*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
The Project together with the IBRD Loan has been designed to create an industrial EE market which is commercially 
driven by local financial institutions, industrial enterprises and ESCOs. Limited access to finance and insufficient 
capacity, the major barriers of scaling up EE, will be resolved through market -based approaches within the market. 
The Project and the IBRD Loan a re expected to enable initial interventions to demonstrate market potential and to 
accelerate  the development  of the market  which  is still nascent  in Vietnam.  Experience  and market  conditions  created 
by the Project and the IBRD Loan will further enable commercially -driven EE financing for potential investors in EE 
technologies in the industrial sector after the interventions under the two operations are over. A sustainable EE 
financing market will be developed as a result in the  country.  
Technical assist ance and capacity building offered to the Government will support coordination among institutions, 
mainstreaming  of EE in sector  planning  and improving  policy  and regulatory  framework  for EE, among  others.  This will 
help market players to understand and fo llow clear messages and rules from the Government and to create market 
demand through incentives provided from relevant EE  policies.  
Low electricity pricing, another major challenge to expanding the adoption of EE technologies, is being addressed 
through  a series  of development  policy  operations  (DPOs)  supported  by the World  Bank.  DPOs  focus  on restructuring 
the power  sector  and adopting  a cost-reflective  tariff system  over time through  a number  of incremental  interventions.  
Through  a combination  of the proposed  Project,  IBRD  Loan  and other  parallel  operations,  the World  Bank  is supporting 
the Government and other relevant stakeholders to eliminate outstanding bottlenecks to unlocking EE potential in  the 
industrial  sector.  Collective  effort  for  well -coordinated  implementation  would  lead  to  the  creation  of  enabling  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
The Project will provide support to MoIT, through technical assistance and capacity building, for preparation for 
implementation of the National EE target program 2016 -2020; strengthening the policy and regulatory framework; 
development of energy use standards and industrial EE benchmarks; and development of ESCO market. By 
introducing new policy instruments and stren gthening the existing framework, the Government would provide clear 
incentives for EE investment in the industrial sector to support the market -driven approach to unlock EE potential.  
The series of DPOs that the World Bank has been supporting in parallel w ill also support the Government to address 
barriers  within  regulatory  framework.  With continuous  support  through  the DPOs,  the ongoing  sector  reform  is expected 
to achieve  full cost recovery  tariffs,  which  will help address  one of the major  barriers,  low electricity  pricing,  to promote  
investments in energy efficiency.  
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Environmental and Social Co -Benefits . By reducing demands for electricity generated from coal, oil or natural gas 
and demands for other primary fuels, this Project and the IBRD Loan will avoid the emission of local pollutants. It is 
challenging to estimate which and how  many local pollutant emissions will be avoided, as the actual set of EE 
investments supported by the Project and the IBRD Loan is not known in advance. Given the large quantity of GHG 
emissions avoided, estimated to be 120 MtCO2eq over the lifetime of inv estments, the reduction of local pollutant 
emissions associated with the GHG emission reduction is estimated to be enormous. The benefit derives from the 
increased life expectancy and reduced mortality that comes from a reduction in local toxic pollutants.  
Economic Co -Benefit. Investments in energy efficiency in the industrial sector not only contribute to GHG emissions 
reduction and climate change mitigation but also result in increased productivity, profitability and competitiveness of 
the firms  due to reduced  energy  cost.  The Project  will also support  growth  of a new market  of industrial  energy  efficiency 
in Vietnam. Therefore, sectors delivering energy efficiency -related goods and services, such as manufacturers of 
efficient industrial equipment and ESCO s, will find more business opportunities from the expansion of the market. In 
these  sectors,  increased  employment  is expected  to bring  positive  economic  co-benefit  to the society.


---
*Page 56*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
The Project and the IBRD Loan will reduce electricity demand, by about 4.7 TWh every year. Together with coal 
consumption reduction, the reduced energy consumption would allow to cancel or postpone construction of new coal 
fired power plants of about 2,100 MW with 95% capacity factor. The economic saving from cancelled or postponed 
generation units could be redirected to other investment need with urgency.  
Gender. The World Bank is conducting a gender analysis as part of social impact assessment. The assessment  is 
conducted to understand the potential impacts at community, organizational, and individual levels once introducing 
industry  EE investments  under  the proposed  project.  The specific  objectives  of the assessment  are to: (a) identify  and 
analyze the potential organizational impacts (positive and negative) and adaptation strategies of the concerned 
enterprises;  (b) identify  and analyze  the potential  impacts  (positive  and negative  with particular  attention  to gender  and 
ethnic minority groups) and adapt ation strategies of the employees working in the concerned enterprises; (c) identify 
and analyze the perception of men and women living in communities in surrounding areas of concerned enterprises, 
about the potential impacts (positive and negative) caused  by the proposed investments; and (d) provide 
recommendation/suggestion  to inform  the design  of World  Bank -funded  project,  ensuring  that impacts  (if any) on men 
and women, respectively, will be addressed. Based on the results of the gender analysis, specif ic action plans will be 
established to address identified gender gaps around the industrial sector that the Project will support. For example, 
the selection criteria of EE lending and/or risk sharing would include preference to sub -projects that improve wo rking 
conditions for women, or exclude any proposal that may have adverse impact on gender gaps. The details will be 
further developed during preparation and implementation of the  Project.  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of  the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Not applicable  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Despite  the rapid  industrialization  and the large  potential  of energy  saving  and GHG  emission  reduction  in the industrial 
sector,  EE market  in Vietnam  is still nascent,  due to significant  barriers,  including  limited  access  to finance,  insufficient 
capacity of financial institutions, industrial enterprises, ESCOs and government entities, among others. Local banking 
sector  is experiencing  undercapitalization  and suboptimal  resource  allocation,  therefore  capital  allocation  for new lines 
of business is limited. There have been a number of national initiatives of the Gover nment and support programs 
implemented by development partners, but they might not be sufficient to push the market forward beyond the early 
stage. The current environment in Vietnam requires a comprehensive package of multiple interventions that address 
major bottlenecks at the same time rather than a one -off remedy to a single  matter.  
The Project and the IBRD Loan will provide on -lending capital, risk sharing and technical assistance and capacity 
building to all layers of stakeholders, from government to financial institutions, industrial companies and ESCOs to 
remove existing major barriers altogether. Furthermore, other operations that the World Bank is taking in parallel will 
also contribute to tackling other issues that the proposed Project and the IBR D Loan would not be able to address, 
including electricity tariff, carbon monitoring and verification infrastructure, and so on. To deal with growing energy 
intensity and carbon emission of the industrial sector, the Government and local players are in nee d of this set of 
interventions to make a big push to open up the sustainable market of EE financing.  
E.5.  Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs


---
*Page 58*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
The Project  will contribute  to the implementation  of the Vietnam Green  Growth  Strategy  for the period  2011 -2020  with 
vision to 2050, which aims to restructure and improve economic institutions toward more efficient use of natural 
resources and improved competitiveness of the economy, which will be achieved through increased investments in 
technological innovation, natural capital, and economic instruments. One of the important strategic objectives of the 
Green  Growth  Strategy  is to encourage  energy  efficiency  (EE),  with a 2020  target  to reduce  the intensity  of greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions by 8–10 percent as compared to 2010 and reduce emissions from energy activities from 10 –20 
percent compared to business -as-usual  case.  
It will also help achieve  the pledges  of Vietnam,  in its Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (NDC)  of the Paris  Agreement 
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), to reduce 8 percent of the greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emission by 2030 compared to the business -as-usual scenario and to further aim at 25 percent reduction 
with support from the internationa l community. One of the measures to achieve the mitigation target is to “improve 
effectiveness and efficiency of energy use; reducing energy consumption”, with a particular focus on manufacturing 
industries where energy consumption is  high.  
The Project is aligned with the Vietnam Energy Efficiency Program (VNEEP) for the period 2016 -2020, which is a 
national target program and a comprehensive plan to institute measures for improving EE and conservation in all 
sectors of the economy in Vietnam. The Project w ill provide technical assistance to support the implementation of the 
VNEEP, and the results of the Project will contribute to the achievement of the Plan.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
The World  Bank  has been  engaged  in the energy  sector  of Vietnam  for a long time.  The Bank’s  engagement  has been 
positioned uniquely in providing customized support to address the country’s needs, ranging from sector restructuring 
and transmission and distribution infrastructure t o renewable energy and energy efficiency, which includes not only 
investment  support,  but also policy  support  through  DPOs,  knowledge  exchange  and technical  assistance.  In addition, 
the World  Bank  has successfully  supported  other  countries,  including  China  and India,  for scaled -up energy  efficiency 
applying customized holistic approaches. Therefore, the World Bank is well -positioned to be a strong partner for 
Vietnam to support the creation and expansion of sustainable EE  market.  
Ministry of Industry and Tr ade (MoIT) has a responsibility to manage, oversee and regulate the power sector of 
Vietnam, through its different arms such as GDE and ERAV. Under the GDE, there is a Project Management Board 
(PMB) for the ongoing World Bank -financed Clean Production and Energy Efficiency (CPEE) Project. This existing 
PMB has been effectively conducting project coordination activities under the CPEE project. The same PMB will 
coordinate the project monitoring and reporting requirements and implement the capacity -building c omponent.  
State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) is the central bank and will represent the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in signing the 
Loan  Agreement  with the Bank.  The MoF will sign subloan  agreements  with each  selected  PFI that will be responsible 
for implementing  the credit  line component.  SBV has experience  in channeling  financial  intermediary  loans  of the World 
Bank. Given its role to regulate and supervise the banking sector, SBV is well positioned to advise selection of PFIs 
and PIEs.  
Potential PFI s identified to date include Bank for Investment and Development of Vietnam (BIDV), Bank for Foreign 
Trade  of Vietnam  (VCB),  Vietnam  Technological  Commercial  JS Bank  (Techcombank),  Vietnam  JS Commercial  Bank 
for Industry and Trade (Vietinbank), Asia Commercial Bank (ACB), Sai Gon Hanoi Commercial Bank (SHB), and Sai 
Gon Thuong Tin Commercial Bank (Sacombank). The selection criteria of the PFIs have been agreed with the MoIT, 
MoF,  and SBV based  on the World  Bank’s  requirements  and existing  government  regulations.  Throughout  the selection 
process, MoIT and the World Bank will ensure that the selected ones have sufficient capacity to provide EE loans to 
IEs and ESCOs  and to build  their in-house  capacity  for continued  operation  after the Project  is over.  
A professional program implementing entity (PIE), such as a bank or existing guarantee agency will be appointed by 
the MoIT to manage and operate the Risk Sharing Facility. The need for a professional program manager has been 
validated in the World Bank’s o ther risk sharing facility operations in the Philippines and India, where dedicated units 
at commercial financial institutions assumed the program management role. The MoIT, in cooperation with the World  
Bank and the SBV, will ensure that the selected agen cy has sufficient capacity to fulfill all required responsibilities over


---
*Page 59*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
the implementation period, up to 15 years. The MoIT would be expected to supervise the activities and performance 
of PIE, and review  and revise  operating  procedures  as needed.  The selection  process  would  be launched  by the MoIT, 
upon  a set of criteria  to be predefined  in support  from the  World  Bank,  before  the Project  becomes  effective.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
The Project proposal has been continuously consulted with the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), the NDA, 
and the MoIT,  the line ministry for the energy sector, throughout preparation and development processes. MPI 
facilitated internal review from different ministries that are relevant to the Project, and issued the no -objection letter 
with great  support.  In addition,  MoF,  SBV and other  relevant  government  entities  have  been  extensively  engaged  while 
shaping the project  design.  
Throughout  project  preparation,  multiple  rounds  of stakeholder  consultation  have  been  held,  with government  entities, 
local banks and non -bank financial institutions, industrial associations and companies, ESCOs and development 
partners  to share  the project  design,  take feedback  and facilitate  discussions  among  different  stakeholders,  all of which 
then inform the modification of the project desig n. A few more consultations are still being planned before 
implementation  to make  sure the project  design,  particularly  the GCF  Risk Sharing  Facility,  will be of help both financial 
institutions and  IEs/ESCOs.  
There are several related donors’ fund project  and the World Bank discussed with other various donors including the 
government  of Israel,  Swiss  State  Secretariat  for Economic  Affairs  (SECO),  Danish  International  Development  Agency 
(DANIDA), GIZ, Nordic Development Fund (NDF), and United Nations Indust rial Development Organization (UNIDO) 
for potential cooperation on the EE agenda, leveraging donors’ effort to address EE barriers. The Israeli government 
has indicated its interest to support specific sectors and industries through targeted EE workshops a nd studies 
conducted  in parallel  to the VEEIE  project.  Similar  targeted  activities  are being  discussed  with UNIDO  and are closely 
coordinated with the MoIT. The following parallel operations will potentially contribute to the VEEIE and are being 
coordinate d closely by the Bank  team.  
International Finance Corporation (IFC) has provided advisory service to Techcombank and VietinBank for EE 
financing and is providing technical support for industrial zone on resources use efficiency, which contributes to 
develo pment of project pipeline.  
Nordic Development Fund (NDF) support an ongoing €1.5 million grant project that aims at improving Vietnam’s 
readiness to benefit from international climate financing by supporting scaling -up mitigation actions in the cement 
sector. The project will explore and address gaps in data availability and quality regarding sectoral GHG emissions, 
technical and institutional capacity, and potential barriers to implementing scaling -up GHG mitigation actions in the 
cement sector in Vietnam.  Special emphasis will be given to exploring opportunities to use new forms of international 
climate finance, including possible new market -based mechanisms in Vietnam’s cement and constructions sector, 
implying a results -based approach for provision of fu ture support. The project will close in December 2016; however, 
the NDF is in discussion with the Bank on potential parallel financing with the VEEIEs as a continuation of cement 
sector support.  
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) is  currently developing a TA program to promote EE 
boiler  adoption  and operating  practice  in Vietnam.  The TA aims  to develop  the relevant  regulatory  framework  to support 
boiler standardization, training, and capacity building for government agencies and boil er owners and demonstration 
of efficient  boiler  adaptation.  This TA will scale  up investment  in efficient  boilers  in industrial  sector.  
Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA) finances US$6.5 million of grant for an ongoing Low Carbon 
Transition  Energy  Efficiency  (LCEE)  project  that supports  Vietnam’s  micro,  small  and medium  enterprises  (MSMEs)  in 
the brick,  ceramic,  and food processing  sectors  adopting  EE measures  that will contribute  to the VNEEP  energy -saving 
targets  between  5–10 percent.  The project  provides  green  investment  fund and guarantee  facility  for investment  in EE 
technologies.  The project  can help SMEs  access  financing  facility  under  the VEEIEs.  This project  targets  smaller -scale 
lending,  about  VND  1 billion  (equivalent  to around  US$90,000)  in average,  to be extended  to support  MSMEs,  at a 
more favorable term  based on grant financing. In contrast, the  Project and the IBRD  Loan  will focus  on a different


---
*Page 61*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
market  segment,  consisting  of larger  industrial  enterprises  with high energy  consumption,  targeting  EE lending  of US$5 
million per project in average. The DANIDA also plans to scale up this project with GCF support. Both projects will be 
executed by the MoIT. The World Bank is in very close coordination with the DANIDA, and will seek possible 
opportunities  for further  collaboration  between  two projects,  for example  coordinating  TA and capacity  building  activities 
or sharing the Project Management Board (PMB) for  implementation.  
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
The Project and the IBRD Loan aim to mobilize a total of US$407.3 million worth investments in industrial energy 
efficiency, of which US$100 million from the World Bank and the rest US$307.3 million from the private sector, either 
PFIs or IEs/ESCOs.  US$78  million  of GCF  support  in a form of US$75  million  guarantee  and US$3  million  of grant  will 
offer partial credit risk guarantee to leverage US$251 million of private sector financing. As the original goal of the 
Project is to crowd in private sector financi ng, it would not be implemented successfully without private participation. 
GCF’s  concessionality  is offered  not in a form of low cost of capital  but in a form of risk capital  with higher  risk appetite. 
To overcome perceived high risk that PFIs have for energy efficiency based on limited experience and insufficient 
capacity,  the provision  of risk capital  that is willing  to share  the risk is critical  to start the market  and allow  PFIs to learn 
from actual transactions and adjust their perceived risk over  time.  
Considering  the large  impact  on GHG  emissions  avoided  to be achieved,  the effectiveness  and efficiency  of the Project 
and the IBRD Loan would be high. As estimated in Section E.6.5, the total investment to avoid one tonne of CO2 
equivalent GHG emissi on is only US$4.1. When it comes to the efficiency of GCF financing, it costs only US 70 cents 
to reduce  one tonne  of CO2 equivalent  GHG  emission.  Compared  to other  typical  mitigation  projects  such  as renewable 
energy or transportation, these figures present much higher efficiency of using scarce climate finance resources, 
proving that energy efficiency investment could be a low hanging fruit to reduce GHG emissions and to mitigate the 
threat of climate  change.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
By providing US$86.3 million, including US$11.3 million grant and US$75 million guarantee, GCF will mobilize 
additional US$410.9 million, of which US$101.7 million from the World Bank, US$226 million from PFIs, US$81.3 
million from IEs/ESCOs as equity and US$1.9 million from KOICA for parallel implementation of technical assistance 
and capacity building. The leverage ratio is about 4.8x, as calculated in Section E.6.5.  
After the Project is closed, it is exp ected that PFIs will continue to run EE lending business and mainstream EE 
investment in their corporate and/or project financing. Therefore, the amount of leveraged financing would become 
larger  taking  into account  EE investments  originated  after the Project. In case  that there  is still market  demand  for risk 
sharing  to address  barriers  on PFIs or other  financial  institutions  that have  not joined,  the Risk Sharing  Facility  can be 
extended for a longer period, upon discussion and agreement of GCF to extend the guarantee period or provision of 
risk capital to the Facility by the government or other development partners. With support of risk sharing mechanism 
for a longer  period,  the growth  of EE financing  market  could  be accelerated  more  than the case  when  the Facility  is 
closed as scheduled.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Investments in industrial EE is financially viable, and yield a high level of return. The financial internal rate of return 
(FIRR) of equity investors, i.e. industrial enterprises or ESCOs, ranges from 19 percent to 103 percent, depending on 
the type of transactions and sub -sectors. The FIRR is robust, with small reductions for plausible scenarios of higher 
interest  rates,  lower  fossil  fuel prices,  and low rates  of electricity  tariff increase s. From  the sensitivity  and risk analysis; 
in most  cases,  the risk analysis  shows  that the probability  of not meeting  the financial  hurdle  rate is less than 5 percent 
(and for the largest  project  examined,  wastes  heat recovery/cogeneration  in the cement  industry,  less than 1 percent). 
More details can be found in Section  F.1.


---
*Page 63*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
The GCF Risk Sharing Facility is also financially sustainable. Based on the proposed terms of IBRD/GCF guarantee 
and Facility’s sub -guarantee, as long as the losses are within the expected loss level, which is 5 percent of the loan 
portfolio, all expenses would be covered by revenue from sub -guarantee fees. In this case GCF guarantee would not 
be called. Ev en at the worst case, there is no risk of becoming insolvent. As the IBRD/GCF guarantee is offered on a 
one-to-one basis without leveraging, the Facility would be able to meet its payout obligations when the entire loan 
portfolio goes credit default. Secti on F.1 provides more details on sensitivity and risk analysis of the Facility.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
International  experience  demonstrated  that dedicated  credit  lines are effective  at increasing  the capacity,  interest,  and 
confidence of PFIs in mainstreaming the EE financing business line through a learning -by-doing process and at 
changing their perceptions so that they recognize that EE investments are actually a profitable business. It offers the 
best prospect  for program  sustainability . Evidence  is accumulating  that PFIs continue  to provide  EE financing  after the 
credit line program is  completed.  
Based on experience in other countries, risk sharing facilities can also be effective at increasing the capacity and 
interest of PFIs in ident ifying profitable EE financing opportunities. The proposed approach for a risk sharing facility 
allows for substantial debt mobilization from PFIs and equity financing from IEs, and enables the capital base to be 
revolved during the availability period. Th e project design is based on long -term sustainability with the globally tested 
expectation that PFIs continue to provide EE financing after the Facility is closed.  
The proposed Project is based on a number of lessons obtained from other similar operations in different countries. 
When these financial interventions are well combined with proper technical assistance and capacity building for the 
initial phase, and its implementation arrangement is well prepared and supported, the operation will be able to open  
up a new market of EE financing in a market -driven sustainable manner.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF  
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)14 
 
(a) Total project financing (GCF and  IBRD  projects)  US$ 497.2  million  
(b) Requested  GCF  amount  US$ 86.3  million  
(c) Expected lifetime emission  reductions  overtime  120 million  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a  / c) US$ 4.1 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b  / c) US$ 0.7 / tCO 2eq 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 A larger portion of GCF financing will be provided in a form of guarantee. If the guarantee is not fully called, the 
balance will be returned to GCF, which will further improve the cost efficiency of the Project


---
*Page 65*
---

E GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 52   
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
 
 
  
 
(a) Total  co-financing  mobilized  US$ 410.9  million  
(b) - From private  sector  (PFIs/IEs/ESCOs)  US$ 307.3  million  
(c) - From public  sector  (WB/KOICA)  US$ 103.6  million  
(d) Requested  GCF  amount  US$ 86.3  million  
(e) Expected leverage factor (e = a  / d) 4.8x 
 
 
All figures above are consistent with the financing table presented in Section B.1. Please refer to Section  
B.1 for more detailed breakdown of co -financing.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)


---
*Page 66*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Energy Efficiency Investment: A financial and economic analysis for a sample of representative EE projects 
(cogeneration from waste heat recovery [cement industry]), variable speed motors and regenerative burners (steel 
industry), and energy -efficient pulp washers (pulp and paper industry) shows robust financi al and economic returns 
over a wide range of input assumptions. Annex 7 provides a detailed evaluation.  
For the financial analysis the evaluation is from the perspective of the equity investors (that is, IEs) who are recipients 
of loans  provided  by the PFIs, calculating  both the equity  return  (financial  internal  rate of return  [FIRR])  and debt service 
cover ratios. The benefits are based on estimated nominal financial prices of electricity, fuel oil, and coal (the three 
main  energy  forms  used  in Vietnamese  industry).  In some  cases,  additional  financial  savings  derive  from reductions  in 
operations and maintenance (O&M) costs and other chemical inputs. The results show FIRR ranging from 19 percent 
to 114 percent, with small reductions for plausible scenarios o f higher interest rates, lower fossil fuel prices, and low 
rates  of electricity  tariff increases.  For example,  a 2 percent  increase  in interest  rate from the  assumed  8.83 percent  to 
10.83 percent reduces the FIRR for the paper industry project from 19.1 percent to 18 percent, or if coal prices stayed 
unchanged  at their present  (nominal)  level (that is, falling  real coal prices),  the corresponding  FIRR  falls to 17 percent). 
Annex  7 provides  details  on the sensitivity  and risk analysis;  in most  cases,  the risk analysis  shows  that the probability 
of not meeting the financial hurdle rate is less than 5 percent (and for the largest project examined, wastes heat 
recovery/cogeneration in the cement industry, less than 1 percent). Table 1 summarizes the main resu lts of the 
economic and financial  analysis.  
For the economic analysis, benefits are assessed at international (border) prices. Industry savings in electricity are 
assumed to result in backing down of thermal generation (coal for baseload savings, combined cycle gas for 
intermediate and peak loads), based on the results of detailed simulations prepared by the National Load Dispatch 
Centre  for calculation  of the avoided  cost tariff (ACT)  for small  renewable  energy  (RE) producers.  The economic  returns 
(ERR and  NPV) are calculated with and without consideration of environmental and global externalities: in the case of 
GHG emissions, using the Bank’s recent guidance document for carbon accounting,15 and valuing avoided GHG 
emissions  at the values  recommended  in the recent  guidance  document  on the social  value  of carbon.16 
Summary of Economic and Financial Analysis Results  
Waste  Regenerative  Variable  High pressure  pulp 
heat  burner   Speed   washers  
recovery  Drive  
(VSD)  
Sector  Cement  Steel  Steel  Paper  
Saving:    Electricity  Fuel oil Electricity  Electricity  coal 
Baseline  FIRR  [ ]  25.6%   65.2%   114.2%   19.1%  
Baseline  ERR  [ ] 33.4%  40% 124.6%  17.1%  
Investment  (financial)  VND  billion  297 13.7 85.0 75.4 
 
Distributional analysis  
NPV to IEE  VND  billion  200 21 325 28 
 
NPV to EVN  VND  billion  -31 Not applicable  -112 -1 
 
Avoided Externality benefits  
 
ERR including  GHG  emissions  [ ] 70.6%  49.2%  244%  29.8%  
Lifetime  GHG  savings  1000  tons 722 23 553 164 
 
 
 
15 World Bank. 2015. Guidance Note: Greenhouse Gas Accounting for Energy Investment Operations (Transmission & 
Distribution Projects, Power Generation Projects and Energy Efficiency Projects), Version 2.0, January 2015. World 
Bank Sustainable Energy Department.  
16 World Bank. 2014. The Social Value of Carb on in Project Appraisal. Guidance Note to the World Bank Group Staff, 
September.


---
*Page 68*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
As in the case  of the financial  analysis,  the economic  returns  are robust  with respect  to the general  level of international 
fuel prices, which were at their lowest in early 2015 (and which have already recovered from their lows of US$50/bbl 
(Brent) in mid -January to US$60/bbl at the beginning of March 2015. E ven in the unlikely case that such low prices 
prevail  (unchanged)  for the next 15 years,  economic  returns  are substantially  above  the hurdle  rate. 
When the benefits of reduced carbon emissions are included in the economic analysis, economic returns are 
significantly higher, particularly where coal is displaced. In the paper industry example (which reduces the quantity of 
steam raised in an anthracite -fueled boiler), the baseline economic returns increase from 17 percent to 30 percent. All 
projects examin ed result in significant reductions in lifetime GHG emissions; EE therefore makes a significant 
contribution to reducing the carbon intensity of the economy at no incremental cost (a win -win option) – particularly 
when compared to options such as high -cost RE alternatives (such as wind) that bring carbon reductions only at 
significant incremental costs.  
The distributional analysis shows that EVN’s loss -of-tariff revenue from industrial EE projects does not offset their 
avoided financial costs in fossil fuel  cost savings. This is a common finding, encountered also in the Organization for 
Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD) countries and explains the widely encountered lack of enthusiasm 
for EE by power sector utilities. However, as shown in annex 7 i n case of the cement industry distributional analysis, 
this loss is far outweighed by the other benefits to society. Any significant negative impact on EVN is readily mitigated 
by fully cost -reflective tariffs that are passed to other (industrial) consumer s rather than left to erode EVN’s margins. 
Any increase  in electricity  tariffs  experienced  by consumers  is offset  by much  larger  increases  in welfare  attributable  to 
a more efficiency industrial sector and further incentivize investments in EE by  others.  
Risk Sharing Facility Financial Analysis17 : The financial benefits of the risk sharing facility will be two -fold: 1) to 
mobilize lending to EE investments; and 2) to improve the financial terms available for IE borrowers through credit 
enhancement  of individual  EE investments.  The table  below  shows  the proposed  terms  of GCF  financing  and the sub- 
guarantees issued by the Risk Sharing Facility. The capital base to meet sub -guarantee payouts consists of a GCF 
Grant of US$3 million and an IBRD/GCF Guarantee o f US$75 million. Risk coverage provided will be flexible in a 
preliminary range of 20 -80% of principal and interest  payments18. 
Proposed Risk Sharing Facility terms are as below. There might be some adjustment upon market reactions.  
 
 
 
 
17 The results presented here are preliminary and subject to finalization of the Guarantee Facility structure and terms 
together with Government stakeholders, PFIs and IE borrowers.  
18 For financial modelling purposes, assumed to be 50% on average.  Capital  US$3 million GCF Grant and US$75 million IBRD/GCF Guarantee  
Max. guarantee volume  [US$75 million]  
Guarantee currency  [USD or VND]  
Risk coverage  [Debt service default, scheduled principal and interest payments or 
accelerated loan balance]  
Risk sharing  [Flexible within a range to be agreed and will be based on market needs],  
Sub-guarantee fee  [0.25% up -front fee on guaranteed amount  
0.50% annual guarantee fee on guaranteed amount]  
Sub-guarantee maturity  [5-10 years, to coincide with guaranteed commercial loan]  
Facility life  [15 years with a 5 -year guarantee issuance period]  
Sub-guarantee  amortization  [Bullet or amortizing structure depending on underlying loan  repayment  
profile]


---
*Page 70*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
The facility has a 5 -year av ailability period and a 4 -year ramp -up period resulting in $10 million of guarantees issued 
each year for the first 2 years and $27.5 million each year for the next 2 years. The graph shows the portfolio balance 
of  the Facility over the entire facility te rm. 
 
 
During the availability period, the facility will reissue any guarantee exposure that is released as the guaranteed loans 
are amortized, subject to a maximum guarantee portfolio size of US$75 million. This allows the facility to issue a total 
of $100m in  guarantees  while  maintaining  the maximum  guarantee  portfolio  size of $75m.  The reflows  assumed  in the 
facility only occur during the availability period and following that GCF exposure will be gradually decreased. After the 
availability period, th e PIE will not issue any new guarantees. As loans amortize between years 6 -15, the facility’s 
portfolio exposure reduces and so does GCF’s outstanding exposure to the project. The reflows during the 5 -year 
availability  period  allow  the RSF to issue  more  guarantees  and expand  the capital  mobilizing  impact  of the $75 million.  
The GCF Risk Sharing Facility is structured (a) to limit the likelihood of a call on the IBRD/GCF guarantee so that it is 
never called as long as actual losses do not vastly exceed the  expected losses and (b) to minimize the guarantee fee 
charged to PFIs and ultimately borne by IEs.  
The expected losses are assumed to be 5% of the RSF guaranteed portfolio19 which are more conservative than the 
baseline of 2.8% reported by the State Bank of Vietnam. This is in line with the assumption that on average the loans 
for energy efficiency investments could be riskier than the portfolio of PFIs. PFIs would also in many cases expect to 
require  the sub-borrowers  to provide  collateral  as additional  security  for the loans.  If loans  default,  the PFIs can initiate 
recovery proceedings through the courts or by selling the defaulted loan to other financial institutions. As for the 
underlying asset class, the EE projects are expected to use proven and tested technologies with strong expected 
economic and financial  returns.  
This 5% probability of default is calculated on a guarantee portfolio level assuming individual guarantee coverage of 
50% of the total loan outstanding.  On a portfolio  level,  the facility is therefore  taking  risk for half of the expected  losses  
 
 
 
19 The assumed probability of default on the PFI loans being guaranteed is 5%. The likelihood of a call on the 
guarantees is therefore also 5%. The loss rate is applied on the amortizing balance of the underlying covered loans 
which means that if a straight -line amortization was assumed, the average loss rate over the life of the Facility would be 
half of that, i.e. 2.5%.


---
*Page 72*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
with the other half assumed by PFIs. On an individual loan level, the coverage cannot be only 5% or less given that 
defaults usually happen for the whole loan or a large part of it. It is on the guarantee portfolio level that the losses are 
expected to average out to 5%. To be able to derive adequate pricing benefit and risk mitigation from the guarantee, 
banks expect the guarantee coverage to be meaningful, which is why 50% has been used as a sta rting point for the 
project.  
For example, a USD 10 million loan with a 5 -year tenor would have a guarantee of USD 5 million. If the portfolio level 
loss rate of 5% was applied for an individual loan (for the sake of illustration) which did not amortize but  was rather 
repaid in bullet payment at the end of the loan life, the expected losses on the guaranteed portion would also be 5%,  
i.e. USD 0.25 million of the guaranteed amount of USD 5 million. However, given that the loss rate is applied on an 
amortizing bala nce of the loan, the relevant balance therefore becomes the average balance of the loan over the loan 
life, which is USD 5 million. Applying the 5% to that average balance would result in USD 0.25 million being defaulted 
on the total loan amount, out of wh ich half, or USD 0.125 million, would be the expected guarantee call amount. 
Additional examples are provided in Annex  7. 
If expected losses do materialize, the first losses are absorbed by the Facility itself before GCF capital is put at risk. 
The PIE will be a professional entity with a self -sustaining cash flow, reporting directly to MOIT with the mandate to 
manage the program. It will have cash inflow from risk -based guarantee fees which accumulate in a first loss reserve 
in the Facility, to be used before a call can be made on the IBRD/GCF Guarantee. The reserve consists of two 
components:  
1) The guarantee  fee paid by the PFIs to the PIE to cover  all the expected  costs  of running  the facility  including 
losses  of 5% of the guarantee  portfolio,  administrative  costs  of the PIE and the IBRD/GCF  Guarantee  fee. 
2) 25% of any losses is expected to be recovered through seizing collateral or the Vietnamese judicial system 
with a one -year lag (to account for processing  times).  
BASE CASE  
Key Outputs (15yr totals, unless    
otherwise stated)  VND M  USD M  
Guarantee Facility Fee  0.50%   
Front End Fee  0.25%   
Total Amount of Guarantees Issued  2,238,790  100 
Total Number of Guarantees Issued  # Guarantees  100 
Total Debt Mobilization  4,477,579  201 
Total Investment Mobilization  5,596,974  251 
Losses   5% 
GCF Payout  - - 
RSF Cash Inflows and Outflows  
Revenues  
GCF Seed Grant 
Guarantee Fee Revenues  
Front End Fee 
Recurring Fee  
Interest on Facility Balance  
Expected Loss Recovery (via Legal 
proceedings)   
 
66,885.00   
 
3.00 
76,940.97  3.45 
5,596.97  0.25 
71,344.00  3.20 
54,692.15  2.45 
10,427.56  0.47 
Total Revenues  208,945.68  9.37 
Costs    
Administrative Costs  (82,086.37)  (3.68)  
Losses  (41,988.92)  (1.88)  
GCF Guarantee Fee  (14,268.80)  (0.64)  
 Total Costs  
RSF Net Cash Flow  (138,344.09)  (6.21)  
70,601.60  3.17


---
*Page 74*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 52   
 
Guarantee Fee (bps) 
Guarantee Fee (bps) APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
The financial  analysis  indicates  that these  two sources  of cash  are sufficient  to sustain  the level of losses  without  a call 
on the IBRD/GCF guarantee. Based on sensitivity analysis, the RSF  as currently designed can sustain losses of up to 
15% before the IBRD/GCF Guarantee is called at all. The table below shows the key results of the financial analysis. 
Assuming that PFIs are charged a 0.50% annual guarantee fee and a 0.25% upfront fee, the  Facility can cover its 
administrative expenses and guarantee payouts of up to 12 percent across the portfolio before the IBRD/GCF 
Guarantee is called. If guarantee payouts remain at the expected level of 5% across the portfolio over Facility life, the 
base case cash flows will result in a surplus of US$3.17 million at the end of year 15. The assumptions behind the 
results above are detailed in Annex 7 and are shown in the attached financial  model.  
The financial sustainability of the risk sharing facility d epends mainly on the guarantee fee schedule and guarantee 
payouts  that materialize.  The risk sharing  facility  receives  most  of its revenue  from guarantee  fees (approximately  37%) 
and the GCF seed grant (approximately 32%). In terms of outflows, the administrative costs and the IBRD/GCF 
guarantee  fee represent  approximately  60% and 10% of total costs  respectively.  
The guarantee fee schedule required for financial sustainability is sensitive to changes in the underlying assumptions, 
particularly the GC F grant amount and the level of the IBRD/GCF Guarantee Fee (see graph below). As can be seen 
from the below chart, the level of the GCF Guarantee Fee has a considerable impact on the required cost recovery 
guarantee fee. The higher the GCF Fee, the higher the required guarantee fee charged to PFIs and therefore to the 
IEs. A lower IBRD/GCF Guarantee Fee would allow the guarantee fee to be kept at an attractive level to maximize take -
up of the Risk Sharing Facility by the market. It is suggested for the annu al guarantee fee to be 0.50%, to pay for the  
IBRD/GCF  Guarantee  fee indicated  in the term sheet  (Annex  5), to allow  the Facility  to build  a sufficient  loss reserve 
(together  with part of the US$3  million  GCF  Grant)  to meet  guarantee  payouts  in the base  case,  and lower  the likelihood 
of a call on the IBRD/GCF Guarantee. A higher fee level would be expected to limit the mobilization of commercial 
financing through the Facility. The graph below shows the impact of the IBRD/GCF Guarantee fee and the GCF Gran t 
on the guarantee fee assuming the same cash reserve  levels.  
 
GCF Guarantee  Fee  vs.  Guarantee  Fee GCF  Seed  Capital  (Start  Up Costs)  vs. Guarantee  
140 Fee 
140 
120  115  140 
100  90  120 104 93 
100 
80 65 80  72  
60  50  60  50  
40 40  28  
20 20 
- - 
10 bps  25bps  50bps  75bps  100bps  $0.5M  $1M $2M $3M $4M 
 
It is expected that the partial guarantee will not only incentivize lending to EE projects but also reduce the financing 
costs. The table below shows the potential impact of a 50% guarantee on the interest rate margin due to a lower risk 
premium. The resulting theoretical interest expense saving is close to $30 million to the IEs over the life of the facility, 
representing an 8% reduction in total financing costs (principal and interest payments).  
 Interest  rate margin without Guarantee  4%  
Potential Reduction in Risk Premium with Guarantee  2% 
Guarantee Fee charged to PFIs on guaranteed amount  0.50%  
Guarantee Fee charged to IEs on total loan amount  0.25%  
Interest rate margin with Guarantee  2.25%  
Potential Savings to IEs (over Facility Term)  $28.74 M


---
*Page 76*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
 
GCF is uniquely positioned to offer such a Risk Sharing Facility to PFIs and IEs. The concessional nature of the 
IBRD/GCF guarantee charge and the availability of the seed grant allows for the guarantee fee charged to PFIs and 
ultimately  IEs to be very low, thereby  resulting  in a net benefit  to the IEs. GCF  contribution  is critical  to allow the  IEs to 
access lower cost of financing and improve financial viability for their EE investments.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
EE technologies vary by industrial subsectors but typical energy -saving measures include:  
• Energy systems. Upgrading boilers and switching fuels, using cogeneration facilities and electric -driven 
systems,  including  compressed  air systems,  electric  chillers,  machinery  and lighting.  
• Process technology. Upgrading and replacing equipment, machinery, and  facilities.  
• Waste  heat and waste  use. Use of waste  heat (of hot/warm  gases,  liquids  and solids)  and burning  combustible 
waste (gases, liquids,  solids).  
• Use of RE to decrease fuel and/or electricity consumption may also be  considered.  
Energy  intensive  industrial  sectors  include  cement,  steel,  textile,  pulp and paper,  food processing,  bricks,  and ceramics. 
Potential EE measures for cement industry include using roller mill for grilling raw material, improving furnace fans, 
installation of variable speed drivers, using waste fuel and waste heat recovery. The cement industry is one of the  
energy -intensive sectors, producing a huge volume of heat exhaust at a temperature up to 350oC. Therefore, the key 
measure to improve EE is the utilization of heat exhaust for power generation. This is a well -tested solution achieving 
multiple purposes, i ncluding utilizing heat waste without consuming more fuel for power generation at a sizeable 
capacity scale, reducing emissions of GHG CO2, reducing heat and dust emissions into the environment, and 
increasing  efficiency  of equipment  production  line. More  detailed  project  pipeline  information  is presented  in Annex  2. 
EE technologies  for steel  and iron industries  would  include  waste  heat recovery,  construction  of closed  production  lines, 
replacement of low -performance air compressor, and installation of inverter for motors to operate at low or fluctuating 
load.  Waste  heat recovery  uses  the heat from flue gas (exhaust  heat from electric  arc furnaces,  furnaces,  kilns,  and so 
on) to preliminarily heat up the steel scraps before putting into the electric arc furnace for reducing the time in the 
furnace, saving energy, and improving capacity. It could help heat the steel bars before entering the kiln to save oil for 
furnaces.  Furthermore,  it also helps  heat up the oil instead  of the drying  resistors  to reduce  electricity  consumption.  
Project information provided by the Vietnam Paper Corporation include the investment of new efficient boilers for 
cogeneration (heat and electricity), replacement of motors, switching to biomass fuel technology, and chemical waste 
recovery for heating. Technical details of subprojects submitted by the corporation are presented in Annex 2.  
An OM will detail  eligible  criteria  and industry  specialists  and energy  audit  experts  will be included  in the subproject  due 
diligence teams. They  will ensure that the subprojects are in compliance with Vietnamese industrial and technical 
policies  and regulations,  fully satisfy  the technical  eligibility  criteria,  and are technically  feasible.  TA to build  capacity  for 
project  technical  due diligence  will also be provided  to the PFIs during  project  implementation.  This will ensure  that the 
design of the subprojects will be technically  sound.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Social  Assessment:  The project  is expected  to have  overall  positive  social  benefits  because  it promotes  EE and thus 
reduces  GHG  emissions  and other  pollutants  into the atmosphere.  It will also have  positive  impacts  from the perspective 
of consumers and of workers who are employed by the participating IEs. Through EE investments, the company’s 
energy cost will be reduced per unit of output with positive impacts on final prices of consumer products and services. 
This will also make  IEs more  competitive  and ensure  job security  and potential  expansion  of the workforce.  
The EE subprojects to be financed under the proposed loan will be within the existing premises of industrial facilities. 
However,  to anticipate  the potential  need  of land acquisition  required  for subprojects  identified  in implementation  cycle, 
Operational Policy 4.12 is triggered and Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPF) was prepared. Among others, it  lays


---
*Page 77*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
down the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria of displaced persons, modes of compensation and rehabilitation, 
participation features and grievance procedures, review and clearance process of subproject’s resettlement plan. OP  
4.10 Indigenous  People  is also triggered  to maximize  the project  benefits  in ethnic  minority  community.  Ethnic  Minority 
Planning  Framework  (EMPF)  was prepared,  setting  out guidelines  to: (a) ensure  that the ethnic  minority  peoples  receive 
social  and economic  benefits  that are culturally  appropriate;  (b) avoid  potentially  adverse  effects  on the ethnic  minority 
communities; and (c) when such adverse impacts cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such 
effects. The IEs must be able to demonstrate that it has obtai ned broad community support for the subproject through 
a process of free, prior, and informed consultations with the affected ethnic minority communities. Any non -social 
safeguard impacts (for example, gender and employment) will be addressed in the projec t Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) developed under the framework of OP 4.01. The subloan agreement between the 
PFIs and the IEs will specify  that participating  IEs must  fully comply  with the existing  national  labor  laws,  including  those  
related  to children  and women  and will include  appropriate  mitigation  measures.  
Gender. The World Bank is conducting a gender analysis as part of social impact assessment. The assessment is 
conducted to understand the potential impacts at community, organizational, and individual levels once introducing 
industry EE investments under the proposed project. The specific objectives of the assessment are to (a) identify and 
analyze the potential organizational impacts (positive and negative) and adaptation  strategies of the concerned 
enterprises;  (b) identify  and analyze  the potential  impacts  (positive  and negative  with particular  attention  to gender  and 
ethnic minority groups) and adaptation strategies of the employees working in the concerned enterprises;  (c) identify 
and analyze the perception of men and women living in communities in surrounding areas of concerned enterprises, 
about the potential impacts (positive and negative) caused by the proposed investments; and (d) provide 
recommendation/suggestion  to inform the design of Bank -funded project, ensuring that impacts (if any) on men and 
women, respectively, will be addressed. The social risk for the project is rated  as Low.  
Environmental Assessment: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered due to the potential adverse 
environmental  and social  impacts  associated  with the financed  subprojects  under  component  1 and the IBRD  Loan  and 
certain technical assistance activities under component  2. 
Under Component 1, the Project (and the IBRD Loan) will support financing for various subprojects under energy 
intensive  industries  such  as cement,  iron and steel,  and pulp and paper,  public  and private;  using  these  potential  energy 
saving measures: (a) adoption of energy saving industrial technologies (e.g., e fficient industrial boilers, kilns, and heat 
exchange  systems);  (b) recovery  and utilization  of wastes  and waste  heat;  (c) installation  of highly  efficient  mechanical 
and electrical  equipment  (e.g. motors,  pumps,  heating  and ventilation  equipment);  and (d) industrial  system  optimization 
to reduce energy  use. 
On the positive  side,  the project  will bring  about  important  benefits  to industries  and the environment  by contributing  to 
the reduction  of GHGs  and pollutants,  increase  energy  savings,  and encourage  the promotion  of environmentally  good 
industry  practices.  On the negative  side,  the project  will cause  potential  environmental  impacts  during  the construction 
and operation  of subprojects.  These  impacts  include  noise,  dust,  labor  safety,  and disposal  of old parts  and equipment 
which may hazardous waste and in rare cases, the oil extracted from transformers which may contain PCBs. The 
possible  impacts  during  the operation  of new equipment  and facilities  may include  worker  and health  safety  issues,  air 
pollution, generation of solid waste, wastewater, and disposal of hazardous substances from such polluting industries 
such as cement, steel, textile, pulp and paper, food processing, etc., even though less and lower toxicity than those 
generated from the o ld technologies and equipment. It is anticipated that most of subprojects will be category B, with 
typical impacts which are assessed as localized varying from small to moderate scale, and which can be mitigated via 
good  management  practices  and readily  designed  mitigation  measures.  In addition,  the TA under  component  2 includes 
the development of technical pre -feasibility studies which provide support for the food processing industry under 
Canadian  Externally  Finance  Outputs,  from which  environmental  and social aspects  need  to be considered.  
As the subprojects are not identified prior to appraisal, an ESMF has been prepared by the Client to guide the 
environmental  assessment  process  and ensure  compliance  of the financed  subproject  with the World  Bank’s  safeguard 
policies  and  national  environmental  regulations.  The  ESMF  is  in  accordance  with  the  national  regulations  on 
environmental assessment and Bank’s safeguards policies and requirements on public consultation and information


---
*Page 79*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
disclosure. The ESMF also refer to the Interim Guidelines on the Application of safeguard Policies for TA activities in 
Bank -financed Projects and TA activities should be screened against the Interim Guidelines. The ESMF also include 
the procedures for conducting environment and social audit/due diligence of existing facilities that will be 
supported/retrofitted by the project. The Project Management  Board (PMB) under MOIT, PFIs and IEs are the key 
actors responsible for safeguard implementation of the project. More details on environmental assessment, ESMF 
content, public consultation and information disclosure are described in Annex 6.  
A primary  requirement  of the ESMF  is that the sub-borrowers  provide  the PFI an Information  Package  that includes  the 
sub-borrower EIA approval letter or certificate, the EIA document and documentation that consultation and disclosure 
were performed in accordance with V ietnamese and Bank requirements. All PFIs will contract with Vietnamese 
environmental  consultants  for any technical  reviews  or activities  that are their responsibility,  given  the likely  absence  of 
any local environmental concerns. An audit/due diligence of  existing facilities that will be supported/retrofitted by the 
project will be done by PFIs officer/consultant to determine the eligibility of the subproject. The environmental risk for 
the project is rated as  Moderate.  
Public  Consultation  and Information  Disclosure.  During  the ESMF,  EMPF  and RPF preparation,  consultation  workshop 
was conducted on October 9, 2015 with the aim to collect feedbacks/comments on the frameworks developed under 
the project. The workshop was attended by various participants coming  from NGO, central government, research 
institute. Comments received in the workshop have been incorporated in the final version of the framework. All 
safeguard  frameworks  have  been  disclosed  at the subproject  sites,  MOIT’s  website,  and in the InfoShop,  on November 
23, 2015.  All subprojects’  safeguard  instruments  are also required  to follow  the Bank  policy  on access  to information  in 
public consultation and disclosure of  information.  
• RPF:  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/412041468319734189/pdf/SFG1560 -RP-P151086 -RPF- 
Box393258B -PUBLIC -Disclosed -11-23-2015.pdf  
• EMPF:  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/426401468174909664/pdf/SFG1531 -IPP-P151086 - 
EMPF -Box393258B -PUBLIC -Disclosed -11-23-2015.pdf  
• ESMF:  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/958671468135015942/pdf/SFG1550 -EA-P151086 -ESMF - 
Box393258B -PUBLIC -Disclosed -11-23-2015.pdf  
Physical  Cultura l Resources  OP/BP  4.11 is triggered.  The project  would  not involve  significant  excavations,  demolition, 
moving  of earth,  flooding,  or other  environmental  changes.  It is not expected  that the project  will affect  any known  PCR. 
However, there is a possibility that the some unknown PCR may be revealed during the subproject implementation as 
they include excavation activities. Therefore, the policy is triggered and a chance finds procedure has been prepared 
and included in the ESMF, and will be incorp orated in site -specific subproject safeguards instruments, bidding, and 
contractual documents during  implementation.  
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project 
may submit  complaints  to existing  project -level grievance  redress  mechanisms  or the WB’s  Grievance  Redress  Service 
(GRS).  The GRS  ensures  that complaints  received  are promptly  reviewed  in order  to address  project -related  concerns. 
Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel 
which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB noncompliance with its policies and 
procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's 
attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit 
complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit www.worldbank.org/grs . For 
information  on how to submit  complaints  to the World  Bank  Inspection  Panel,  please  visit www.inspectio npanel.org . 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Financial Management: The financial management (FM) assessment was completed and concluded that the project 
has adequate  FM arrangements  acceptable  to the Bank.  The overall  arrangements  in place  for implementing  the Project 
and the IBRD  Loan  provide  reasonable  assurance  that the proceeds  will be used  for the purposes  intended.  The MoIT  
and most PFIs have adequate FM staff capacity and experience of implementing other similar Bank -funded investment


---
*Page 81*
---

F GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 52   
 APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
 
 
projects, with satisfactory performance. Additional training would be provided to the PFIs’ FM staff on Bank FM 
requirements and disbursement procedures. All PFIs are required to have annual financial statements prepared in 
accordance with relevant acceptable standard and audited by an audit firm acceptable to the Bank as a condition of 
project participation. Two PFIs who are participating in the ongoing REDP, VCB, and BIDV satisfy this requirement. 
Other  PFIs that may be included  in the Project  are being  well informed  during  the project  preparation  process.  The FM 
risk is assessed  as Substantial.  Further  details  of the FM assessment  and proposed  arrangements  are in Annex  7. 
The World Bank will carry out a financial management assessment on the Program Implementation Entity to ensure 
that its financial management arrangements are acceptable to the Bank and that the sub -guarantees issued will be 
used for intended purposes. Capacity building and training will be provided to the PIE’s staff as necessary.  
Procurement20: A Procurement Capacity and Risk Assessment (PCRA) of the major project implementing agencies 
(IAs), including the MoIT and two potential IEs —Hoang Thach Cement Factory and Chinfon Cement Factory —was 
undertaken. It was found that:  
a) the MoIT  and the two IEs have  adequate  institutional  and organizational  capacity  in place;  the MoIT,  however, 
has no specific organizational arrangements and staffing for implementation of their respective procurement 
unde r the project at this  stage;  
b) the MoIT  has some  knowledge  and experience  of Bank  procurement  as a result  of its implementation  of several 
ongoing Bank -financed projects, including CPEE; however, new staff being assigned to implement the project 
may not be familiar with the Bank procurement  procedures;  
c) the two IEs are experienced and proficient in using the procurement procedures under national public 
procurement law and regulations or established private sector/commercial practices; they, however, are 
unfamiliar  with the Bank  procurement  procedures  such  as International  Competitive  Bidding  (ICB)  and Quality - 
and Cost -Based Selection (QCBS) methods which may be applicable to their  subprojects.  
Based on the above findings and considering the specific nature of procurement work required for the project, the 
procurement risk for the proposed project is rated as Substantial. More detailed findings of the PCRA, the proposed 
procurement arrangements, and measures to address the identified risks are presente d in Annex 7. A Procurement 
Plan for the first 18 months of project implementation, acceptable to the Bank, shall be prepared by the PMBs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 The procurement plan applies mainly to the IBRD Loan and Component 2, which include WB-financed procurement. 
The Project involves procurement to the extent of the GCF seed grant of US$3 million.


---
*Page 82*
---

G GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 52   
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The overall project risk assessment is Substantia l, recognizing the institutional constraints and challenges of EE 
investments in Vietnam  as well as the dependence on the macroeconomic and fiscal stability to achieve the PDO.  
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Political and Governance: There is a risk of social instability from  
slower growth, and from reduced access to land of poorer 
Vietnamese in the wake of rapid urbanization.   
Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Enhanced  TA for addressing  social  safeguards  issues,  in particular,  those  related  to land management  and involuntary 
resettlement.  The safeguard  frameworks  have  been  prepared  and will be applied  during  project  implementation.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Macroeconomic : Unfavorable macroeconomic developments 
(interest rate volatility, FOREX risk, low oil prices, and so on) may  
lessen  the   incentives  for  EE   projects  and   slowdown  
investment pipeline.   
Financial   
Low (<5% of 
project value)   
High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will provide TA to IEs and PFIs on FOREX management and interest rate swaps. The sensitivity analysis 
provided in the economic/financial analysis shows that the expected economic/financial returns are robust with respect 
to these risks. The risk sharing facility will build up confidence for PFIs and IEs in EE investments. An associated 
Carbon Finance Program will provide additional revenues to IEs that make EE investments  more attractive.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  Risk Category  Rating  
1. Political and Governance  Moderate  
2. Macroeconomic  Substantial  
3. Sector Strategies and Policies  Moderate  
4. Technical Design of Project or Program  Moderate  
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability  Substantial  
6. Fiduciary  Moderate  
7. Environment and Social  Moderate  
8. Stakeholders  Substantial  
OVERALL  Substantial


---
*Page 84*
---

G GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 52   
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Sector Strategies and Policies: Weak government commitment 
and capacity to promote industrial energy  conservation. Despite 
the government’s EE target, the current policies, financial 
incentives, and the government’s institutional capacity are limited 
to achieve these  targets.   
Technical 
and 
operational   
Low (<5%  of 
project value)   
 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project, together with  the  IBRD  Loan and the ongoing CPEE project, will provide TA and capacity building to 
the MoIT to  strengthen EE policies and institutional  capacity.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Technical Design of Project or Program: Project 
implementation may depend substantially on technical and 
financial capacity of PFIs.  Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
PFIs selected according to eligible criteria i.e. PFIs need to demonstrate strong financial capacity and experiences in 
EE lending.  In addition,  TA will provide  capacity  building  to PFIs and IEs on identification  of EE subprojects,  technical 
appraisal and project  monitoring.  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability: 
Inadequate  support  to PFIs and IEs in identification,  appraisal  and 
monitoring EE investment may lead to low performance of the 
project, pipeline development, quality of investment, and project 
sustainability.   
Technical 
and 
operational   
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Comprehensive capacity building program provided by TA component including technical capacity for identification, 
appraisal and monitoring. A parallel carbon finance program is under development to provide complementary 
resources for TA and establishment of MRV system to ensure the impact and sustainability.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Fiduciary: A Financial Management assessment identified the 
following key risks: (a) low FM capacity of the investment owners 
which may lead to misreporting of transactions or ineligible 
expenditures;  (b) delays  in approving  and processing  payments  at 
all levels, including the PFIs branches and head office, the MoI T 
PMB,  and  the  MoF  due  to  lack  of  experience,  knowledge,  or 
responsibility; and (c)  lack  of  capacity of  the  PFIs  in   financial   
 
 
Financial   
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
Medium


---
*Page 86*
---

G GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 52   
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
reporting in accordance with international standards, which will 
limit their opportunity to participate in the project.  
Procurement risk: During project preparation, an assessment of 
the major project IAs, including the MoIT and two potential IEs 
(Hoang  Thach  Cement  Factory  and Chinfon  Cement  Factory)  was 
undertaken. It was found that (a) the MoIT and the two IEs have 
adequate institutional and organizational capacity in place; the 
MoIT however has no specific organizational arrangements and 
staffing for i mplementation of their respective procurement under 
the project at this point; (b) the MoIT has some knowledge and 
experience of Bank procurement as a result of its implementation 
of several ongoing Bank -financed projects, including CPEE; 
however, new staf f being assigned to implement the project may 
not be familiar with the Bank procurement procedures; and (c) the 
two IEs are experienced and proficient in using the procurement 
procedures  under  national  public  procurement  law and regulations 
or established  private  sector/commercial  practices;  they,  however, 
are unfamiliar  with the Bank  procurement  procedures  such  as ICB 
and QCBS methods which may be applicable to their  subprojects.     
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Mitigation measures for FM: this will be mitigated  by (a) the appointment of a qualified project chief accountant by all 
IAs, to be approved by the Bank; (b) detailed OM with established formal process of approving payments at all levels 
and all IAs; (c) separating the MoIT PMB from the lending cycle to P FIs and investment owners to minimize the 
bureaucratic procedures; and (d) training on the Bank FM requirements to the PMB, PFIs, and investment owners.  
Mitigation  measures  for procurement.  To mitigate  the identified  procurement -related  risks and strengthe n procurement 
implementation capacities, the following key actions have been agreed with the borrower and will be implemented 
throughout project preparation and implementation. Mitigation measures include: (a) Appoint procurement officer or 
hire a procurem ent specialist with adequate qualifications and experience; (b) Prepare and adopt a project OM, 
including a chapter on procurement, which is incorporated by reference in the subloan agreements with private 
developers;  (c) Procurement  training  for project  management  unit staff,  including  initial  procurement  training  at project 
launch and in -depth procurement trainings during project  implementation.  
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Environment  and Social : Sub-projects  involve  small  construction 
for installation  or replacement  of energy  efficient  technologies  and 
equipment. It is anticipated that the Project would mostly include 
category B subprojects. In any case, all subprojects will be 
screened carefully case by case, to determine the appropriate 
category  and environmental  safeguard  instruments  to manage  the 
potential  impacts.   
 
Social and 
environmenta 
l  
 
Low (<5% of 
project value)   
 
 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
During the preparation stage, the MOIT has prepared ESMF/RPF/EMPF frameworks to guide and set out the 
requirements  to ensure  the safeguard  compliance  of the Project  during  implementation  period.  The frameworks  are in 
compliance  with the Bank’s  safeguard  policies  and national  legislations  on environmental  protection.  It will be adopted  
by MOIT  and  integrated  in  the  Project  Operation  Manual.  The  frameworks  lay out  procedures  which includes


---
*Page 88*
---

G GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 52   
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
 
 
(i) screening mechanism to exclude ineligible subprojects, (ii) identification of environmental and social impacts 
associated with the EE project and the mitigation measures; (iii) procedures for preparation and approval/clearance of 
EA documents per GoV regulations and Bank safe guard policies; (iii) monitoring, institutional arrangement and 
financial sources for ESMF implementation and (iv) public consultation and information disclosure requirements in 
accordance to the Bank safeguard policies.  
During subproject implementation, t he IEs will have the overall responsibility to carry out mitigation measures as set 
out in subproject EMPs. The IEs will carry out internal monitoring to ensure the contractors’ implementation of 
mitigation  measures.  The PFIs,  PMB  and WB and local authorities  will carry  out external  monitoring  on IEs safeguard 
implementation on periodical  basis.  
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of  
risk occurring  
Stakeholders : Low interests and weak stakeholders will lead to     
slow   subproject   pipeline   development.   This   is   the  most     
common issue facing credit lines, such as the Renewable 
Development Project. Further stakeholder risk exists with the PFIs   
in   terms   of   their   risk   management   and   EE sector  
exposure.  The  guarantee  payouts   required  from   the   Risk  Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
High 
Sharing Facility will ultimately depend on the PFIs’ ability to     
carry out adequate due diligence of  covered sub -projects.     
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will (a) provide TA and capacity building to the PFIs for business development; (b) link with the 
government’s voluntary agreements with key IEs; and (c) link with the ongoing IFC’s EE financing advisory services 
to the PFIs, and  other donors’ programs.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
 
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 89*
---

H GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 52   
 RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
 
 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level21 
Paradigm shift objectives  
 
 
 
 
 
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  The Project is developed to scale up energy efficiency (EE) in the high -energy intensive 
industrial sector aiming to unlock the huge potential for energy savings. With financial and 
technical support  from the World Bank and the GCF, the Project and the IBRD supporting 
project will mobilize approximately US$ 407.3 million of EE investments, supporting over 
100 industrial companies to reduce energy consumption and generate about 120 MtCO2eq 
of GHG emiss ion reductions over the lifetime of the investments. Furthermore, the Project 
will contribute to a paradigm shift in the nascent EE market. It will open up a new market of 
EE financing in a market -driven sustainable manner. PFIs and other financial institu tions 
are expected to continue to finance EE investments after the Project is over, building on 
lessons from experience during the project implementation and the enabling environment 
created for local financial institutions and industrial enterprises to sc ale up investments in  
energy efficiency  
 
Expected Result   
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)   
Base 
line Target22  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(End 2020)  Final 
(Mid 2023)  
Fund -level impacts  
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) 
reduced over  
lifetime   
 
MoIT M&E  
Reports   
 
0  
 
48 million   
 
120 
million   
 
See Section E.1.2  
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and  
appliances  Volume of 
finance 
leveraged 
(US$ million)   
MoIT M&E  
Reports   
 
0  
 
160  
 
411  
 
See Section E.6.5  
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
 
Expected Result   
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Base 
line Target   
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(End 2020)  Final  
(Mid 2023)  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings,  Energy intensity/ 
improved  
efficiency of  MoIT M&E  
Reports   
0  
1,800   
4,700  Lifetime energy savings 
directly attributable  to 
the project, converted to  
 
 
 
21 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  
22 Note that the targets represent combined targets for the Projects and the supporting IBRD Loan project.


---
*Page 91*
---

H GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 52   
 RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
 
 
cities, industries and 
appliances  buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  
(GWh/year)      GWh. The baseline 
value is 0. Projected 
savings calculated  
against baseline.  
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Bankable EE projects 
developed  Number of 
projects  MoIT M&E  
Reports   
0  
60  
160 Subprojects supported 
by financing facility  
or/and TA component.  
 
2. Industrial entities 
adopting improved EE 
technologies   
 
Number of IEs   
MoIT M&E  
Reports   
 
0  
 
40  
 
100 Number of IEs adopting 
improved EE 
technologies through 
Project and IBRD  
support.  
3. Leveraged  volume of 
financing for EE projects 
by PFIs and IEs  Volume of 
financing 
(US$ million)   
MoIT M&E  
Reports   
0  
120  
307.3  Volume of financing 
leveraged from PFIs and 
IEs by WB lending and  
IBRD/GCF guarantee  
 
4. PFIs capacity to 
underwrite EE loans 
increased   
Number of loan 
officers trained   
MoIT M&E  
Reports   
 
0  
 
40  
 
50 Number of loan officers 
of PFIs who participated 
in training workshops 
offered by the Project or  
IBRD Loan project.  
 
5. IEs/ESCOs capacity 
strengthened  Number of 
IEs/ESCOs 
reached through 
workshops   
MoIT M&E  
Reports   
 
0  
 
160  
 
200 Number of IEs and 
ESCOs which joined 
workshops or training 
offered by the Project or  
IBRD Loan project.  
 
6. Application of EMS in 
industrial sector 
increased   
Number of IEs 
certified for ISO 
50 001/EMS   
 
MoIT M&E  
Reports   
 
45  
 
70  
 
90 Number of IEs certified 
for ISO 50 001/EMS to 
be increased through TA 
activities of the Project 
or the IBRD  Loan  
project.  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Output 1.  Bankable EE projects developed  
1.1 Energy audits 
services provided  MOIT provide technical 
support to IEs on energy  
audits  TA Budget 
component 2   
1.2 Support preparation 
of FS provided  MOIT provide technical  
support to IEs to prepare 
bankable FS  TA Budget 
component 2   
1.3 Technical advisory  
provided  MOIT provide consultant pool  
to advice on EE technologies  TA Budget  
component 2   
Output 2.  Industrial entities adopting improved EE technologies  
2.1 . WB -VEEIE 
subloans extended to  
IEs/ESCOs  PFIs start extending subloans 
to IEs/ESCOs under IBRD on - 
lending  IBRD US$100  
million on -lent to 
PFIs


---
*Page 93*
---

H GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 52   
 RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
 
 
2.2 GCF -RSF sub - 
guarantees provided to 
PFIs The PIE starts providing sub - 
guarantees to PFIs’ underlying 
EE subloans  GCF US$75  
million guarantee 
and US$3 million  
grant   
    
Output 3.  Leveraged volume of financing for EE projects by PFIs and IEs23 
3.1. PFIs selected  Selecting additional PFIs for 
Component 1  WB coordinates 
with MoIT and  
SBV  
3.2. PIE selected  Selecting the PIE to operate 
GCF -RSF WB coordinates  
with MoIT and 
SBV  
3.3. GCF -RSF OM 
finalized  Finalize the Operations 
Manual of GCF -RSF, 
incorporating inputs from the 
selected PIE  WB to review OM 
and provide 
technical inputs   
3.4. WB -VEEIE subloans 
extended to IEs/ESCOs  PFIs start extending  subloans 
to IEs/ESCOs under IBRD on - 
lending  IBRD US$100  
million on -lent to 
PFIs  
3.5. GCF -RSF sub - 
guarantees provided to 
PFIs The PIE starts providing sub - 
guarantees to PFIs’ underlying 
EE subloans  GCF US$75  
million guarantee 
and US$3 million 
grant   
Output 4. PFIs capacity to underwrite EE loans increased  
4.1. Capacity building for 
EE lending business 
startup  Business startup, including 
creation, organization, staffing, 
and initial business plan of the 
EE lending business unit (or 
team);  
Capacity building and training, 
including support for the 
development of necessary 
financial instruments, risk 
management tools, 
procedures and the creation  of 
an adequate knowledge base 
to evaluate and extend EE 
loans;  TA budget under 
Component 2   
4.2. PFI staff training  Marketing and development of 
an EE subproject pipeline;  
support to due diligence of 
eligible EE subloans, including  TA budget under 
Component 2   
 
 
 
 
23 Output 3 will be achieved through activities 1.1 -1.5


---
*Page 95*
---

H GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 52   
 RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
 
 
 financial, technical, social, and 
environmental assessments    
Output 5.  IEs/ESCOs capacity strengthened  
5.1. Capacity building for 
pipeline development  Support to identify  EE projects 
and prepare relevant energy 
audits, technical design, and 
EE project preparation;  
Capacity building on 
safeguards  TA budget under 
Component 2   
5.2. Communication 
campaign  Raise awareness through a 
communication campaign 
organized jointly with  relevant 
industry associations  TA budget under 
Component 2   
Output 6. Application of EMS in industrial sector increased  
6.1. Training and 
capacity building on 
application of EMS and 
ISO 50,001 certification  The adoption of Energy 
Management Systems and 
ISO 50,001 Certification can 
be the most effective practice 
for industrial eco -systems to 
generate energy efficiency 
and GHG reduction projects 
on a sustaining basis.  TA budget under 
Component 2   
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Project implementation involves (a) monitoring of performance indicators in Section H; (b) periodic progress reports; (c) 
midterm review of implementation progress. The PMB will be responsible for overall monitoring and evaluation (M&E), 
including collection of project performance information and reporting on project impacts and results. For activities 
implemented by the PFIs, each PFI will be responsible for collecting information with the assistance of the PMB and 
reporting to the Bank and the PMB . It is noted that the end targets of the project are best estimates as it is not known 
upfront what type of subprojects will be financed and the targets may be revised at mid -term review as necessary. By 
end of the project,  the Bank  will conduct  jointly  with the MoIT  an implementation  completion  assessment  and prepare  an 
implementation completion report (ICR) which will review the performance of the project, assess effectiveness and 
efficiency  of project  implementation,  the achievement  of development  objective,  and provide  relevant  lessons  learned.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
  
 
 
ANNEXES  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 52  
 
 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding  Proposal  
☒ Annex 1. NDA No -objection  Letter  
☒ Annex 2. Feasibility  Study  
☒ Annex 2 -1. Study on energy saving potential and GHG emission  reduction  
☒ Annex  3. Integrated  Financial  Model  that provides  sensitivity  analysis  of critical  elements  (xls format)  
☒ Annex 4. Confirmation letter for co -financing commitment from  KOICA  
☒ Annex 5. Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget  breakdown,  disbursement  
schedule, etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex  I 
☒ Annex 6. Environmental and S ocial Management  Framework  
☒ Annex 6 -1. Resettlement Policy Framework  (RPF)  
☒ Annex 6 -2. Ethnic Minority Planning Framework  (EMPF)  
☒ Annex 7. Appraisal  Report  
☒ Annex 8. Timetable of project  implementation  
☒ Annex 9. Social Impact Assessment Report, including Gender Impact  Assessment  
☒ Annex 9 -1. Gender Analysis and Action  Plan 
☒ Annex 10. TA Component Budget  Estimation  
☒ Annex 11. Key Elements of the Risk Management  Framework  
☒ Annex 12. Budget  Breakdown  
☒ Annex 13. Draft Procurement  Plan 
□ Evaluation Report of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
□ Map indicating the location of the  project/programme
I


---
*Page 99*
---

 
  
 
 
 
 
GCF/B.19 /xx/Add.13  
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority  
 
 
 
Ministry of Planning and Investment Socialist 
Republic of Vietnam  
Mr. Howard Bamsey 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund  
175, Art center -daero, Yeonsu -gu Incheon 406 -
840, Republic of Korea  
 
Hanoi, 05 September 2017  
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the World Bank regarding Scaling Up Energy Efficiency for Industrial 
Enterprises in Vietnam  
 
 
Dear Sir,  
We refer to the project Scaling Up Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises in Vietnam in Vietnam as 
included in the funding proposal submitted by the World Bank and the Vie tnam  Ministry  of Industry  and 
Trade  to us on 25 January  2017  and the revised  version on 25 July  2017.  
The undersigned  is the duly  authorized  representative  of the Vietnam  Ministry  of Planning and Investment, 
the National Designated Authority of  Vietnam.  
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no -objection to the project as included in the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The government of Viet nam has no -objection to the project as included in the funding  proposal;  
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Vietnam’s national priorities, 
strategies and  plans;  
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the 
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.


---
*Page 101*
---

 
  
 
 
 
 
GCF/B.19/xx/Add.13  
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the project as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. Kind regards,  
 
 
 
Pham Hoang Mai GCF 
NDA of Vietnam  
Ministry of Planning and Investment  
 
cc. Pa Ousman Jarju, Director, Country  Programming,  GCF German 
Velasquez, Director, Adaptation and Mitigation, GCF Clifford Polycarp, 
Coun try Operations Dialogue Manage


---
*Page 103*
---

  
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Scaling Up Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises in Vietnam  
Accredited entity  The World Bank  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 1 (I1)  
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure  Not applicable  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure  Not applicable  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure  Not applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
The ESMF is equivalent to the Environmental and Social Management  System (ESMS), 
disclosure of which is required by the Information Disclosure Policy for category I -1 
programmes.  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2015 -11-23 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English, Vietnamese  
Link to disclosure  World Bank:  
http://projects.worldbank.org/P151086/?lang=en&tab=documents&subTab=project
Documents  
Government Project Management Board (PMB): http://cpee.vn/studyreport  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2015 -11-23 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English, Vietnamese  
Link to disclosure  World Bank: 
http://projects.worldbank.org/P151086/?lang=en&tab=documents&subTab=project
Documents  
Government Project Management Board (PMB): http://cpee.vn/studyreport  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Ethnic Minority Planning Framework  (EMPF)  GCF/B.19/xx/Add.13  
Page 1


---
*Page 104*
---

  
 
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2015 -11-23 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English, Vietnamese  
Link to disclosure  World Bank: 
http://projects.worldbank.org/P151086/?lang=en&tab=documents&subTab=project
Documents  
Government Project Management Board (PMB): http://cpee.vn/studyreport