=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/CreationDate: D:20180206110245+09'00'
/ModDate: D:20180206110245+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
Meeting of the Board  
27 February - 1 March 2018  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  15 GCF/B.19/22/Add .11 
6 February 2018  
 
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum XI 
Funding proposal package for FP069  
 
 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Enhancing adaptive capacities of 
coastal communities, especially women, to cope with climate change 
induced  salinity”;  
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or  focal  
point(s); and  
c) Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme Title: Enhancing adaptive capacities of coastal communities, especially  
women, to cope with climate change induced salinity  
 
Country/Region: Bangladesh/ Asia and the Pacific  
 
 
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme  
 
 
Date of Submission: 25 January 2018


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section  A PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section  B FINANCING / COST  INFORMATION  
 
Section  C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section  E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT  CRITERIA  
 
Section  F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section  G RISK ASSESSMENT AND  MANAGEMENT  
 
Section  H RESULTS MONITORING AND  REPORTING  
 
Section  I ANNEXES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”  
• Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal  document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed  50. Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template


---
*Page 4*
---

A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 112  
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information  
 
A.1.1. Project / programme title  Enhancing adaptive capacities of coastal communities, 
especially women, to cope with climate change induced 
salinity  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  Bangladesh/ Asia and the Pacific  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Secretary, Economic Relations Division, Ministry of 
Finance  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☐ Direct  ☒ International  
 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  EE: Ministry of Women and Children Affairs (MoWCA) 
Beneficiary: Total 719,229 direct and indirect beneficiaries  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐ Micro  (≤10)  
☐ Medium  (50<x≤250)  x Small (10<x≤50)  
☐ Large  (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☐ Mitigation  ☒ Adaptation  ☐ Cross -cutting  
 
A.1.9. Date of submission  25 September 2017;  
1st Re-submission 14 November 2017;  
2nd Resubmission 11 December 2017;  
3rd Resubmission 25 January 2018  
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Srilata Kammila; Regional Technical Specialist - Adaptation  
Organization  United Nations Development Programme  
Email address  srilata.kammila@undp.org  
Telephone number  +66 2 304 9100 ext. 5264  
Mailing address  United Nations Service Building,  
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue, Bangkok 10200 Thailand  
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power  generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐ Low emission  transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)  
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and  appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings , energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐ Forestry and land  use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
Most vulnerable people and communities  
☒ (E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses,  etc.) 
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem  services


---
*Page 5*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 112  
 
 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. Climate  change,  manifesting  in the form of intensified  cyclones,  storm  surges,  and sea-level rise (SLR),  is accelerating 
saltwater  intrusion  into the fresh  water  resources  of the coastal  belt of Bangladesh.  Climate  change -induced  soil and 
water salinity is projected to adversely impact freshwater dependent agr icultural livelihoods (leading to loss of 
productivity or livelihoods) as well as the availability and quality of drinking water in the vulnerable coastal 
communities. Furthermore, given the crucial role that women play in water security and household leve l resilience, 
and their socio -economic marginalization, the climate change -induced threat to agricultural livelihoods and drinking 
water security of the affected coastal communities disproportionately affects women and  girls.  
 
2. Therefore, the key objective of the proposed project is to support the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) in 
strengthening the adaptive capacities of coastal communities, especially women, to cope with impacts of 
climate change -induced salinity on their livelihoods and water security . GCF  resources will be combined with 
GoB co-financing  to address  information,  technical,  financial  and institutional  barriers  to implementing  and managing 
resilient livelihoods and drinking water solutions for the vulnerable communities in the Southwestern coa stal districts 
of Khulna and Satkhira. An estimated 719,229 people (about 245,516 direct and 473,713 indirect) will benefit from 
the proposed project  interventions.  
 
3. The proposed project will empower target communities, especially women, as ‘change -agents’  to plan, implement, 
and manage resilient livelihoods and drinking water solutions. The project will enable those communities to address 
climate change risks on livelihood and drinking water security to promote synergistic co -benefits. It will enhance the 
adaptive  capacities  of these  communities  in the face of worsening  impacts  of climate -change  induced  salinity  on their 
freshwater resources which in turn adversely affect livelihood and drinking water requirements. GCF resources will 
be invested in promoting a diversification from currently non -adaptive, freshwater -reliant livelihoods of small -scale 
farmers, fishers, and agro -labourers towards climate -resilient agricultural livelihoods. GoB co -financing is leveraged 
to support adoption and scale of t hese alternative, climate -resilient agricultural livelihoods through strengthened 
value -chains and market linkages for their long -term viability in the face of increasing salinity and extreme weather. 
The project also utilizes GCF and GoB resources to supp ort investments in and management of climate -resilient 
drinking water solutions to secure year -round, safe drinking water supplies for the targeted communities. Access to 
reliable, safe drinking water enables the communities, especially women and girls in targeted households, to invest 
the resulting time and cost savings and health co -benefits in enhanced livelihoods and income generating and/or 
educational opportunities. In turn, the enhanced incomes and livelihoods will enable the communities to sustain t he 
investments in the drinking water supply solutions in the long -term. Finally, through investments in institutional 
capacities, knowledge dissemination and evidence -based learning, the project will enable pathways for replication 
and scale of project imp act to secure livelihoods and drinking water across the vulnerable districts of the southwest 
coast  of Bangladesh.  The project  yields  significant  environmental,  social  (including  gender),  and economic  co-benefits 
including enhanced integrity of coastal eco systems and freshwater resources; improved gender norms and women 
empowerment;  and increased  income  and health  benefits,  estimated  at USD15  million  and USD4  million  respectively 
over the project  lifetime.  
 
4. The project contributes towards GoB’s achievement of priorities outlined in the Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDC) and its climate change strategies. The project objective speaks to the top five key near -term areas of 
intervention identified by the INDC to address adverse impacts of climate change1 including: 1) Food security, 
livelihood and health protection (incl. water security); 2) Comprehensive disaster management, 3) Coastal Zone 
Management,  including  Salinity  Intrusion  control,  4) Flood  Control  and Erosion  protection,  5) Building  Climate  
Resilient Infrastructure. Directly aligned to six of the fourteen2 broad adaptation actions prioritized by INDC, the  
 
1 The remaining are: 6) Increased Rural Electrification, 7) Enhanced Urban Resilience, 8) Ecosystem based adaptation (including  
forestry  co-management), 9) Community based conservation of wetlands and coastal areas, and 10) Policy and Institutional 
Capacity Building.  
2 The remaining are (in priority order): ii) Disaster preparedness and construction of flood and cyclone shelters; iv) Inlan d monsoon 
flood -proofing and protection; vi) Climate resilient housing; vii) Improvement of Urban resilience through improvement of drainage


---
*Page 6*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 112  
 
 
project  is implementing  improved  EWS,  supporting  climate  resilient  infrastructure,  Tropical  cyclones  and storm  surge 
protection, stress -tolerant variety improvement and cultivation, and Capacity Building at Individual and institutional 
level to plan and implement  adaptation programmes and  projects.  
 
5. The proposed project is prioritized for inclusion in the country’s GCF Country Work Programme, currently under 
development and is part of UNDP’s Work Programme as an Accredited Entity of the GCF. The project is designed 
through extensive stakeholder consultations, including with civil society, bi -lateral donors, and communities, which 
informed  the project  design.  The current  design  of the project  was reviewed  as per GoB’s  internal  process  led by the 
NDA,  involvin g relevant  government  ministries,  civil society,  and representatives  of key donors3. The NDA  has issued 
a no-objection  letter.  
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  N/A 
Expected financial close  (if applicable)  TBD (date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GEF)  
 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/07/2018  
End: 30/06/2024  
Project/programme lifespan  6 years  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system to address urban flooding; viii) River training and dredging (including excavation of water bodies, canals and drains); x) 
Research and knowledge management; xi) Adaptation on local -level perspectives, etc.; xii) Adaptation to climate change impacts on 
health; xiii) biodiversity and  ecosystem conservation and xiv) Capacity Building at Individual and institutional level to plan and 
implement adaptation programmes and projects in the country.  
3 Including: Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, UK, and USA.


---
*Page 7*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 112  
 
 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme  
6. For this project,  GoB seeks  maximum concessionality  in the form of  grant  financing  from the  GCF  which  will leverage 
and build upon GoB co -financing (USD8 million). During a project duration of six years, the financing will be used to 
invest in and sustain resilient livelihoods and drinking water solutions for vulnerable communities across Khulna and 
Satkhira d istricts, two of the most extremely vulnerable districts to climate change induced salinity of freshwater 
resources in Bangladesh. In addition to co -financing the investments during the six -year lifetime of the project, GoB 
(DPHE) has also affirmed its com mitment (USD4 million) to post -project O&M of project infrastructure for drinking 
water supply systems. See Annex IVa and IVb for the co -financing and O&M commitment  letters.  
 
7. Co-Financing: GoB has committed to a total of US$ 8 million as co -finance (24 per cent of total project costs) with 
USD7  million  as in-cash  and USD1  million  as in-kind contribution  over the project  duration  of six years.  This new and 
additional co -financing is leveraged to: (i) complement GCF resources for investments in resilient l ivelihood assets 
and inputs  and support  business  skills  development  (Activity  1.1, Output  1); (ii) finance  value -addition,  market  access, 
and access to finance linkages (Activity 1.2, Output 1); (iii) support adaptive management of resilient livelihoods 
(Activity  1.3, Output  3); (iv) contribute  to the infrastructure  investments  for drinking  water  supply  systems  (Activity  2.2, 
Output 2); (v) finance operation and maintenance costs for water supply solutions (Activity 2.3, Output 2); (vi) 
complement GCF res ources to enhance institutional technical capacities for climate -risk informed design and 
implementation  of livelihoods  and drinking  water  solutions  (Activity  3.1 and 3.2, Output  3); and (vii) support  knowledge 
and learning to build long -term adaptive capacities (Activity 3.3, Output 3). The USD1 million in -kind co -financing is 
the form of staff time (institutional staff across Ministry of Women and Children Affairs (MoWCA), Department of 
Women Affairs (DWA), Department of Public Health Engineering (DPH E), and Local Government Institutions (LGIs)) 
for various Training of Trainers (ToT) based capacity building activities across the project and to support effective 
implementation of the project activities across all  outputs.  
 
8. Other financing leveraged: The project crowds in community and private sector (value -chain and market actors) 
engagement and financing during project implementation. The project financing will invest in livelihood inputs and 
assets, skills development, and business and market linkages to support women and adolescent girls to adopt 
diversified,  climate -resilient  livelihoods.  Beneficiaries  will be supported  to graduate  from utilizing  project  funds  to using 
their own investments to replenish inputs (and any minor costs for asset repair) wi thin two years of project 
implementation (while there is contingency built in to the project and budget for extended assistance). The average 
financial contribution per woman beneficiary to uptake full responsibility of livelihood management through input 
purchase  is estimated  at USD160  per year throughout  the project’s  lifetime.  Discussions  with Financial  Intermediaries 
(FIs),  including  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (MFIs),  have  indicated  that for the project  livelihood  groups,  both household 
and group level credit would be feasible given the collateral and income enhancements supported by the project. 
(See Annex XIIIc for details on these Stakeholder Consultations) Therefore, the proposed project is expected to 
leverage continuous financing for the outcomes o f the project through facilitating access to credit for the women 
producer  groups,  especially  for input  provision  and scale  beyond  the project  support.  The FIs and MFIs  (not financed 
by the project) will be linked to the project through networking activities including through the project -established 
Public -Private  Initiative  platforms  (PPIs)  at the sub-district  level.  These  linkages  and technical  assistance  to enhance 
access  to markets  and finance,  is also expected  to leverage  community  and private  sector  financing  during  and post- 
project implementation. Finally, provision of year -round, safe drinking water is also designed to catalyse community 
engagement and investment (estimated at USD635,000), primarily through the nominal fee contributions to O &M of 
the water supply systems. See Annex XIIIb for details on the O&M plan and Annex XIIIc for relevant stakeholder 
(including communities) consultations related to O&M plan and the  financing.


---
*Page 8*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 112 
 
 
Table 1: Financial elements per project outputs4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Using UN official exchange rate as of 1 September 2017, one US dollar = 81.225 Bangladeshi Taka  
 
4 The Accredited Entity (AE) Fee for the proposed project is US$2,248,200. The budget figures presented in this proposal exclude 
the fee.  
 
Output   
Activity  GCF  
funding 
(USD)  Total co- 
financing 
(USD)  Amount 
(for entire  
project) 
(USD)  Amount (for 
entire project) 
(BDT)*  
 
 
 
 
OUTPUT 1. Climate 
resilient livelihoods, 
focusing on women, 
for enhanced adaptive 
capacities of coastal 
agricultural 
communities  Activity 1.1 Enterprise - and 
community -based implementation of 
climate -resilient livelihoods for women   
6,060,530   
947,850   
7,008,381   
569,255,732  
Activity 1.2 Strengthened climate - 
resilient value -chains and market 
linkages for alternative, resilient 
livelihoods   
926,270   
1,925,000   
2,851,270   
231,594,373  
Activity 1.3 Community -based 
monitoring and last -mile dissemination 
of EWs for climate -risk informed, 
adaptive management of resilient 
livelihoods   
 
1,515,150   
 
107,300   
 
1,622,449   
 
131,783,444  
Total OUTPUT 1  8,501,950  2,980,150  11,482,100  932,633,549  
 
 
 
 
OUTPUT 2. Gender - 
responsive access to 
year-round, safe and 
reliable climate - 
resilient drinking water 
solutions  Activity 2.1 Participatory, site -specific 
mapping, beneficiary selection, and 
mobilization of community -based 
management structures for climate - 
resilient drinking water solutions   
 
883,445    
 
883,445   
 
71,757,851  
Activity 2.2 Implementation of climate - 
resilient drinking water solutions (at  
HH, community, and institutional 
scales)   
8,366,055   
3,300,384   
11,666,439   
947,606,475  
Activity 2.3 Community -based, 
climate -risk informed Operation &  
Maintenance (O&M) and management 
of the resilient drinking water solutions   
644,880   
786,751   
1,431,631   
116,284,235  
Total OUTPUT 2  9,894,380  4,087,135  13,981,515  1,135,648,562  
 
 
 
OUTPUT 3.  
Strengthened 
institutional capacities 
knowledge and 
learning for climate - 
risk informed 
management of 
livelihoods and 
drinking water security  Activity 3.1 Strengthen MoWCA’s 
technical and coordination capacities 
for design and implementation of  
gender -responsive, climate -resilient 
coastal livelihoods   
 
1,271,085   
 
43,670   
 
1,314,755   
 
106,790,984  
Activity 3.2 Strengthen DPHE 
capacities for climate -risk informed 
innovation and management of  
drinking water solutions across the 
Southwest coast   
 
1,137,385   
 
146,175   
 
1,283,560   
 
104,257,171  
Activity 3.3. Establish knowledge 
management, evidence -based 
learning, and M&E mechanisms to 
promote long -term, adaptive 
capacities of coastal communities   
 
1,318,380   
 
108,740   
 
1,427,120   
 
115,917,826  
Total OUTPUT 3  3,726,850  298,585  4,025,435  326,965,981  
 
Project Management Cost  2,856,820  634,130  3,490,950  283,552,409  
Grand total  24,980,000  8,000,000  32,980,000  2,678,800,500


---
*Page 9*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 112  
 
 
 
Please see Annex V for the budget breakdown by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, services, etc.) and 
disbursement schedule.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing   
(a) = (b) + (c)   
32.980  million USD  
($)  
  
(i) Senior Loans   
…………………   
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD  
($)   
 (ii) Subordinated  …………………  ( ) years  (   ) %  
Loans  …………………  ( ) years  (   ) %  
 (iii) Equity  …………………   ( ) % IRR  
 (iv) Guarantees  …………………    
(b) GCF 
financing to  (v) Reimbursable 
grants *     
recipient  (vi) Grants *  24.980  
 * Please provide economic and financial justification in  section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price  between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in  section E . 
 Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)   
24.980  million USD  
($)  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
    
 
million USD  Government of 
Bangladesh 
(cash)  
Government of 
Bangladesh 
(in-kind)  
………………  
………………     
 
(c) Co - 
financing to 
recipient  Grant  
Grant  
Options  
Options  7.000  
1.000  
……………  
……………  ($) 
million USD  
($) 
Options   
( ) years 
( ) years  (   ) %  
(   ) %  
( ) % IRR  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
   Options     
    ………………     
 Lead financing institution: ……N/A…………………  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
If there is a fi nancial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the A E.


---
*Page 10*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 112  
 
 
  Financial  
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing   
Choose an item.  ………………….  Options  ( ) years  ( ) %   
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
9. The  project  supports  creation  of assets,  uptake  of tools,  practices,  and skills  for resilient  livelihoods,  and strengthening 
of value -chain/market linkages to enable the livelihood beneficiaries to access finance from FIs including MFIs. The 
support under Output 1 (with leveraged GoB co -financing) on training on business development, O&M, etc. as well 
as the establishment of platforms to facilitate linkages between the livelihood groups and value -chain actors and FIs 
will allow the beneficiaries to obtain credit finance from the financial sector. Consultations during project preparatio n 
with Financial Intermediaries (FIs), including Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs), have indicated that for the project 
livelihood groups, both household and group level credit would be feasible given the collateral and income  
enhancements supported by the  project. (See Annex XIIIc for details on these Stakeholder Consultations)


---
*Page 11*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 112  
 
 
 
 
C.1. Strategic Context  
Country Background:  
 
Geographical context and climate change related vulnerabilities  
10. The hydro -geophysical features of Bangladesh significantly contribute to its high vulnerability to climate change 
induced disasters. While the country’s landmass constitutes only 7 per cent of the combined catchment area of the 
Ganges -Brahmaputra -Meghna  river basin  system,  this region  must  drain  over 92 per cent of rainfall  runoff  generated 
in the combined GBM catchment, within a period of four and a half months (June to mid -October)5. Bangladesh is 
predominantly flat and low -lying6 and apart from hilly r egions in the northeast and southeast, it is mostly less than 
10m above sea level (ASL). It is one of the most disaster -prone countries in the world affected by floods, tropical 
cyclones, storm surges, and droughts. It is highly vulnerable to cyclonic disa sters7, with coastal areas frequently hit 
by cyclones. Floods remain the key natural disaster; approximately 25 per cent of the country is flooded each year 
and a severe flood occurs every 4 -5 years, sometimes inundating up to 60 per cent of the  country.  
 
11. The coastal  zone  is especially  vulnerable  to climate  change,  extreme  events  and their impacts  on the salinity  of soils 
and availability  of freshwater.  It encompasses  a total of 19 districts  along  a 710-kilometre  coastline  and is home  to 
38.52 million people8. The coastal zone ranges between 1 -2 m ASL and 4 -5 m ASL in the southeast and this low - 
lying, flat topography, combined with a dynamic morphology, significantly contributes to its vulnerability to sea level 
change;  small  rises  in sea level combined  with high tides  and/or  storm  surges  lead to more  frequent  seawater  flooding 
and salinization  of soils and freshwater,  as well as increasing  saltwater  intrusion  into groundwater  resources.  Climate 
change is also expected to further increase salinit y levels through increases in temperatures and associated 
evaporation/drying, particularly towards the end of the dry season. It is less clear how rainfall changes will affect 
surface salinities; potential increases during the core of the monsoon season ma y provide a local source of 
freshwater, whereas river flows are largely dependent on rainfall in the Himalayas/India and Nepal, with releases by 
upstream  barrages  controlled  through  international  treaties.  The coastal  zone,  furthermore,  constitutes  32 per cent of 
the country and 28 per cent of the total population9. The southwest region of the coast has an estimated 2.5 million 
poor (including 1.4 million ultra -poor), many of whom suffer an acute shortage of potable water, a scarcity of fresh 
water for agri culture, and experience significant changes in coastal aquatic ecosystems, threatening a range of 
livelihoods. These impacts are compounded by climate change risks, including slow -onset SLR and intensified 
cyclonic  events.  The Intergovernmental  Panel  on Climate  Change  (IPCC)  reports  that by the year 2050  approximately 
27 million people in the coastal areas will be at risk due to SLR. Pender et al. (2008)10 further project that by 2080, 
assuming SLR of 62 cm, up to 17 million, 12 million and 14 million people are expected to be at low, medium and 
high risk, respectively.  That is, the southern  coastal  districts  not only have  a higher  percentage  of the population  living 
in extreme poverty compared to the rest of the country, but those communities are also most likely to suffer a wider 
range of and intensification of impacts from climate change, including SLR, increased storm surges from cyclones 
and tropical storms, changes in rainfall and temperature, which will further exacerbate the risks they  face.  
 
12. Climate  change  impacts  are not gender -neutral  and many  of the consequences  of climate -induced  impacts  are more 
severe for women and adolescent girls, and other socio -economically marginalized groups, given their specific 
livelihood  circumstances,  their socio -political  isolation  perpetuated  by unequal  power  dynamics,  and related  
information asymmetry and constraint in decision making processes11. Women and girls importantly lack access to 
productive resources, as well as decision -making power, and this ha s impacts on their health, food security, and  
 
5 Ahmad, & Rasheed, 1994, ‘Resources, Environment and Development in Bangladesh with Particular Reference to the Ganges, 
Brahmaputra and Meghna Basins’, Academic Publishers, Dhaka;  
6 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/bgdnc2.pdf  
7 Ali, A. 1999. Ghurnijhar (Cyclone), Bangla Academy, Dhaka. 19PP  
8 Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) 2011. Population and housing census report 2011.Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Ministry 
of Planning, Dhaka.  
9 Islam, M. R., and Ahmad, M.,2004, Living in the coast: problems, opportunities and challenges. Program Development Office for  
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan Project. Water  Resources Planning Organization. Dhaka, Bangladesh  
10 Pender, J.S. 2008. What Is Climate Change? And How It Will Affect Bangladesh. Briefing Paper. (Final Draft). Dhaka, Banglades h: 
Church of Bangladesh Social Development Programme  
11 Alam, K., Fatema, N. , & Ahmed, W. B. 2008. Gender, climate change and human security in Bangladesh. Dhaka


---
*Page 12*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 112  
 
 
safety. Constraints in accessing natural resources, and additional socio -cultural barriers limiting participation and 
movement outside the household sphere, are worsened by phenomena such as flooding, drought and erratic rainfall.  
 
13. Relevant  GoB climate  change  strategies:  The GoB is committed  to tackling  climate  change  in the context  of its overall 
development framework. In line with the Vision 2021, the Seventh Five Year Plan (SFYP, 2016 -2020) of GoB boldly 
articulates the country’s commitment to addressing climate change and equitable develop ment and prioritizes 
integration of gender and climate change into the plan. In September 2015, the country submitted its INDC (now 
National  Determined  Contributions  (NDC)),  which,  besides  its mitigation  targets,  also states  the key areas  of work  to 
address  climate  change  adaptation  priorities,  including  promotion  of climate  resilient  livelihoods,  water  security,  early 
warning systems, and cyclone shelters, among others. The Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
(BCCSAP), formulated in 20 08 and revised in 2009, provides an overall framework for climate change action and 
forms the basis for climate investments in Bangladesh. Furthermore, the Climate Change Gender Action Plan 
(ccGAP), articulates the country’s commitment to ensuring gender e quality in climate change related policies and 
interventions.  The project  is prioritized  for inclusion  in the GoB’s  GCF  Country  Work  Program,  under  development.  
(refer to Section E.5.1 for further details on relevant climate change strategies and plans) as  well as UNDP’s Work 
Programme as an Accredited Entity to the GCF.  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
Climate vulnerability baseline  
 
14. Given its location, dependence on monsoon systems, transboundary rivers, and the low coping capacity of  its 
population, Bangladesh is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. In particular, an increase in the intensity of 
cyclones and storm surges, as well as ongoing SLR and temperature increases, are increasingly affecting low -lying 
coastal communities  and ecosystems. Saltwater intrusion into fresh water resources, induced by SLR, storm surge 
and cyclones, is a major risk affecting the lives and livelihoods of coastal communities, disrupting agricultural 
productivity and drinking water  security.  
 
Key cl imate change hazards driving salinity  
15. (i) Storm  surges  and cyclones:  Between  1961  and 2013,  a total of 61 cyclones  hit Bangladesh,  with the south -western 
zone affected by 28 per cent of these cyclones12. Storm surge flooding due to cyclones penetrates deeper inland, 
and causes  extensive  damage,  especially  when  a cyclone  makes  landfall  during  high tide. Historically,  cyclones  have 
had associated storm surges ranging from 1.5 to 10.0m13. Under climate change projected increases in surface sea 
temperatures  are expected to increase the intensity of tropical cyclones resulting in higher wind speeds and storm 
surge.  According  to the IPCC,  tropical  cyclone  frequency  in Bangladesh  is likely  to decrease  or remain  the same,  but 
the number of intense cyclones will likely increase. Dynamic and regional climate models 14 project increased 
intensities of tropical storms by 2100 for the North Indian Ocean and increased frequencies of highest storm surges 
across  the Bay of Bengal.  Combined  with SLR,  the country  is expected  to face increasing  tidal surge  and inundation 
of coastal areas. By 2050, an additional 15 per cent of the coastal area of Bangladesh is projected to be inundated 
with storm surges during cyclones. Storm surge from  a 10-year return period cyclone (such as Sidr) would inundate 
an area 80 per cent greater  than the present  flooded  areas,  with a total of 9.7 million  people  (compared  to 3.5 million 
in the no climate change scenario) are expected to be exposed to severe inundation  (>3m)15. 
 
16. (ii) Sea Level Rise: Observations along the coast of Bangladesh (1980 -2012) demonstrate SLR increases of 6 -21 
mm/ year16. The water level in the Ganges tidal floodplain was found to have risen by 7 -8 mm/yr, in the Meghna 
Estuary by 6-10 mm/ year and in the Chittagong coastal plain areas by 11 -21 mm/ year (Figure 1). These  observed  
SLR trends are much higher than the global mean/average of <4 mm/yr17. Under climate change the country is  
 
12 Quadir and Iqbal Tropical Cyclones: Impact s on Coastal Livelihoods. Investigation of the Coastal Inhabitants of Bangladesh. IUCN. 
December 2008  
13 Brammer, H., 2014, Climate Change, Sea -level Rise and Development in Bangladesh, (Dhaka: University Press Ltd)  
14 Unnikrishnan, A. S., et. al. (2006). Sea Level Changes along the Indian coast: Observations and Projections Current Science India, 
90: 362 -36, Emanuel, K. 2005. Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past 30 years. Nature 436:686 -688 
15 World Bank 2010, Vulnerability of Bangladesh to Cyclones in a Changing Climate: Potential Damages and Adaptation Cost. Policy 
research working paper 5280, The World Bank, Washington, D.C  
16 Climate Change Cell (CCC) (2016). Assessment of Sea Level Rise on Bangladesh Coast through Trend Ana lysis. Department of 
Environment. Ministry of Environment and Forests  
17 Ibid.


---
*Page 13*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 112  
 
 
expected to experience further SLR of 14cm, 32 cm, and 88cm by the year 2030, 2050, and 2100 respectively18, 
assuming  only small  contributions  from melting  ice sheets  (implying  these  estimates  are conservative).  Critically,  both 
the historical increases noted above and the projected increases due to climate change are expected to raise the 
salinity of freshwate r sources19. 
 
Figure 1. Water level trends for the coastal sub zone of Bangladesh based on the data of the last 30 years20 
 
17. iii) Rainfall and temperature: Mean annual temperatures have been increasing in Bangladesh21, and several studies 
have  noted  increases  in surface  temperatures,  with higher  trends  during  drier periods22. Climate  models  simulate  that 
this trend will continue to accelerate23. Furthermore, future simulations of the climate suggest higher than average 
monsoon rainfall in the future24, with winter months becoming warmer and drier while monsoon months become 
warmer and wetter. Increased monsoon rainfall may lead to frequent occurrence of high intensity floods over the 
floodplains25 and prolonged monsoon flood duration will lead to an in creased extent and depth of the inundation26. 
However,  warmer  and drier winter  months  will lead to more  intense  dry seasons,  placing  further  pressure  on surface 
freshwater sources of water and increasing the intrusion of salinity from saltwater (see  below).  
 
18. For further  details  on climate  change  risks  (observed  and projected)  refer to Chapter  1, Section  1.2 of the Feasibility 
Study (Annex  IIa). 
 
Cyclone and SLR induced saltwater intrusion into fresh water resources  
 
 
 
18 NAPA (National Adaptation Programme of Action, Bangladesh) (2005). NAPA Information Pack developed by the NAPA 
Bangladesh project, Dhaka  
19 Bhuiyan,  M. J. A. N., & Dutta,  D. (2012).  Analysis  of flood  vulnerability  and assessment  of the impacts  in coastal  zones  of Bangladesh 
due to potential sea -level rise. Natural Hazards, 61(2), 729 –743. doi:10.1007/s11069 -011-0059 -3 
20 Ibid. 
21 CDMP 2013. Local Level Hazard Maps for FLOOD, STORM SURGE & SALINITY. STUDY REPORT. Comprehensive Disaster 
Management Programme (CDMP II). Ministry of Disa ster Management and Relief  
22Agrawala S, Ota T, Ahmed A, Smith J, Aalst Mv (2003) Development and climate change in Bangladesh: focus on coastal flooding 
and the Sunderbans. Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD; Mondal M. S., 2013, Development of Four 
Decade Long Climate Scenario & Trend: TEMPERATURE, RAINFALL, SUNSHINE & HUMIDITY. Institute of Water and Flood 
Management Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology. Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme (CDMP II). 
Ministry  of Disaster Management and Relief.  
23 Mondal  M. S., Islam  A.K.M.  S., Madhu  M. K. 2013,  Development  of Four Decade  Long  Climate  Scenario  & Trend:  TEMPERATURE, 
RAINFALL,  SUNSHINE  & HUMIDITY.  Institute  of Water  and Flood  Management  Bangladesh  University  of Engineering  & Technology  
24 NAPA (National Adaptation Programme of Action, Bangladesh) (2005). NAPA Information Pack developed by the NAPA 
Bangladesh project, Dhaka  
25 Ministry of Environment and Forest (MOEF), Government of the People’s Republic of Bangla desh (GOB), Dhaka. 2005  
26 A. U. 2006. Bangladesh: Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerability a Synthesis. Climate Change Cell, Department of Environment,  
Component 4b, Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme, Bangladesh.


---
*Page 14*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 112  
 
 
19. A major concern resulting from intensified cyclones, higher storm surge, and rising sea levels is saltwater intrusion 
into the freshwater resources of the coastal belt of Bangladesh, affecting drinking water resources and agricultural 
livelihoods. Salinity intrusion varies by season, with more salinity observed during the dry season owing to reduced 
freshwater  flows.  
 
20. Upstream river flows (non -climate change factor) and salinity : While transboundary flows and land use c hanges 
have  an impact  on fresh  water  availability,  climate  change  risks such  as sea level rise, storm  surges  and tidal flooding 
have increased salinity levels in water and soils, with saltwater intrusions extending further inland. The contribution 
of reduced upstream freshwater flows to salinity increases has stabilised since 1996, due to the Ganges Treaty, 
wherein  agreement  with India  guaranteed  stable  freshwater  flows.  However,  since  then salinity  levels  have  continued 
to increase due to other climat e change related factors mentioned above. The saline area in 10 of the most 
vulnerable coastal districts of the country has increased by 27 per cent between 1973 and 200927. Furthermore, 
extensive modelling of most climate change related factors (SLR, rain fall, temperature, altered river flows from the 
Himalayas, land subsidence and upstream abstraction), though not including storm surge related inundation, has 
shown that by 2050 there will be a probable reduction in slightly saline (<1dS/m, from 22% to 13% ) and slight to 
moderately saline (1 –5dS/m, from 35% to 21%) river areas, whereas there will be an increase in moderate to high 
saline (5 –10dS/m, from 8% to 27%) and highly saline (> 10dS/m, from 35% to 40%) river areas. In particular, 
freshwater  river areas (0–1ppt)  decrease  from 40.8%  to 17.1%  and river areas  suitable  for agricultural  irrigation  (with 
salinity less than 2ppt) decrease by 29.7  percent28. 
 
21. Further studies show that highly saline areas are extending inland and that soil salinity, along with surface and 
coastal  river water  salinity  is gradually  increasing29. The present  dry season  saline  front (2 ppt) is projected  to move 
30 km to 70 km north, affecting most of Khulna, Jessore, Barisal, Patuakhali, and Noakhali (greater) districts by 
205030 (see Figure  2). In particular,  with a 1m SLR,  the saline  front is projected  to move  much  further  north  in districts 
further east. Any increases in storm surge and related inundation will further increase these surface water salinity 
estimates.  Currently,  nearly  6 million  people  are exposed  to high salinity  surface  waters  (>5 ppt) and climate  change 
is expected  to increase  this number  to 13.6 million  in 2050  and 14.8 million  in 2080,  most  directly  affecting  the coastal 
district populations in Khulna, Satkhira, and Bagerhat31. Refer to Section 1.3.1 of the Feasibility Study (Annex IIa) 
for further discussions on observed and projected soil and water salinities in Southwest  Bangladesh.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 Miah,  M. M. U. 2010,  Assessing  long-term impacts  and vulnerabilities  on crop production  due to climate  change  in the coastal  areas 
of Bangladesh (Final Report PR  #10/08).  
28 Dasgupta S., et al. (2014). River Salinity and Climate Change. Evidence from Coastal Bangladesh. World Bank Policy Research 
Working  Paper No. 6817  
29 Dasgupta S., Hossain M. M., Huq M., Wheeler D., 2015. Climate change and soil salinity: The case of coastal Bangladesh. Ambio . 
DOI 10.1007/s13280 -015-0681 -5 
30 Dasgupta S., et al. (2014). Facing the Hungry Tide: Climate Change, Livelihoo d Threats, and Household Responses in Coastal 
Bangladesh. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7148.  
31 Khan, A., et al. (2011). Climate Change, Sea -Level Rise, & Health Impacts in Bangladesh. Retrieved from: 
http://www.environmentmagazine.org/se/u til/display_mod.cfm?MODULE=/se - 
server/mod/modules/semod_printpage/mod_default.cfm&PageURL=/Archives/Back%20Issues/2011/September - 
October%202011/bangladesh -climat -change - 
full.html&VersionObject=92C46D6A76EEAB8328C00BB7F09E23BF&Template=590DB1352F1E17A42A 2BD1D5F197578B&Page  
StyleSheet=30649E3FEA4E0343D76DA1B99596656A


---
*Page 15*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 112  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Projected river salinities in 2050 under two different climate change scenarios (A2 and B1)  
Key Impacts of CC induced salinity – disruption to agricultural livelihoods and drinking water security  
Salinity impacts on agricultural livelihoods:  
22. Local communities are already experiencing direct damages to crops, decreasing fresh water fish stocks, and 
income loss, lea ding to increased vulnerability. Over 1 million hectares of cultivable land are already affected by 
salinity  intrusion  caused  by slow- and rapid -onset  events32 e.g. the net cultivated  area in Satkhira  decreased  by 7per 
cent from 1996  to 200833. Crop  losses  due to SLR-induced  salinity  intrusion  have  been  estimated  as 200,000  metric 
tonnes34, with salinity  (+5 ppt) of irrigation  water  expected  to further  reduce  farm productivity  by up to 50 per cent35. 
Storm  surge  inundation  under  climate  change  is estimated  to cause  an additional  loss of 422,642  tons of Aman  rice, 
156,928 tons of Aus rice, and 116,060 tons of Boro rice, which will have profound impacts on both the country’s 
economy and the food security of its  citizens36. 
 
23. Salinity intrusion and tidal flooding have already prevented the expansion of agriculture in the coastal region, with 
land used  for agriculture  gradually  decreasing  between  1980  and 2010.  The Livelihoods  Assessment  Report  (Annex 
IIb) presents  GIS maps  on land use patterns  in the targeted  project  Unions  for the years  1995,  2005,  and 2015  (see 
Section 6 of the Livelihoods Assessment Report (Annex IIb) for further discussion). These demonstrate that the 
targeted  districts  of Khulna  and Satkhira  have  experienced  a shift from agricultu ral land to aqua -cultural  land (mainly 
shrimp farms), partly related to increasing soil salinity levels due to inundation after cyclones Sidr in 2007 and Aila 
in 2009. Shrimp farming, widely adopted as a way to deal with the increasing salinity of soil and  water, has had 
significant negative impacts on salinity levels of surrounding lands, as well as on the livelihoods of vulnerable 
households. Furthermore, weak governance and land -tenure arrangements, as well as value chain structures, has 
created a situat ion where expanded shrimp farming has primarily benefited middle -class and wealthy landowners 
and large -scale enterprises, affecting the labour and income opportunities of the poor, especially for  women.  
 
32 Soil Resource Development Institute (2010). Saline Soils of Bangladesh. Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh  
33 Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) (2010) Yearbook of Agricultural Statistics of Bangladesh, Statistics Division, Ministry  of 
Planning, Government of Bangladesh  
34 Mainuddi n et al. 2011, ‘Planning and costing agriculture’s adaptation to climate change in the salinity prone cropping system of 
Bangladesh,’ Bangladesh Center for Advanced Studies.  
35 Clarke, D., ‘Projections of on -farm salinity in coastal Bangladesh,’ Royal Soci ety of Chemistry, 2015.  
36 Dasgupta S., Hossain M. M, Huq M., Wheeler D. (2014). Climate Change, Soil Salinity and the Economics of High -Yield Rice 
Production in Coastal Bangladesh. Policy Research Working Paper (forthcoming), Development Research Group, W orld Bank.


---
*Page 16*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 112  
 
 
24. Increasing climate -induced salinities will also adversely impact small -scale fishers. The reproductive cycle and 
capacity,  spawning  area and feeding,  breeding  and longitudinal  migration  of many  fish species  have  been  impacted 
and a combination of anthropogenic and climate factors have led to dramatic declines in fish biodiversity37; fresh 
water species decreased by 59 per cent in the highly saline Paikgacha Sub -District within a 30-year period. This 
dramatic  loss in biodiversity  is a serious  threat  to the local ecosystem  and the national  food supply.  Climate  change 
scenarios used to extrapolate salinity trends in coastal rivers between 2012 and 2050 projected losses across 83 
different fish species which are integral to the current nutrition and livelihoods of local, poor communities in the 
coastal  districts38. 
 
Salinity impacts on drinking water:  
25. Despite Bangladesh’s abundant supply of water resources, drinking water quality is greatly affected by monsoon 
patterns and salinity. While the monsoon is expected to bring fresh subsurface water, groundwater recharge is 
variable, and water supply options are very limited in many coastal areas as freshwater aquifers at reasonable 
depths  are not available39. Climate  change  induced  salinities  (associated  with changes  in precipitation  patterns  and 
inundation) compound dry season water scarcity and deteriorated water quality due to over extraction, salinization, 
arsenic and other contamination, which compels people to avail themselves of multiple drinking water sources to 
meet basic personal  needs40. 
 
26. Tubewells that access groundwater are the main source of drinking water for 73 per cent of the population living in 
the rural areas of Bangladesh41. On the coast, most of the groundwater is pumped from above 150 m below the 
surface, but much of this water is saline42 due to salt water intrusion from the Bay of Bengal, which has accelerated 
due to sea level rise and percolation of salin e surface water resulting from storm surge and unsustainable land use 
practices. These shallow coastal aquifers are highly saline and as such water supply wells must penetrate 250 
metres or more to find water of acceptable quality43. Data from Bangladesh W ater Development Board (BWDB)44 
indicates that the groundwater salinity in several key coastal districts is already beyond the limit for potable and 
irrigation use (>2500 uS/cm) and that surface water is beyond this acceptable limit in Satkhira district an d parts of 
Khulna district45. Due to the high salinity of groundwater a substantial number of coastal people also rely on pond 
water46 and the collection of rainwater is often the primary source of drinking water in many communities47. With an 
additional 1 5 per cent of the coastal area of Bangladesh projected to be inundated by 2050, the quality of water 
resources  in this area is expected  to further  deteriorate.  Cyclones  also damage  water  supply  infrastructure  – 
tubewells and ponds – with many ponds becoming saline subsequent to inundation. Saltwater intrusion due to high 
tidal surges during Cyclone Aila, for instance, affected surface water sources such as ponds further intensifying the  
 
 
37 Ibid. 
38 Dasgupta  S., Huq M., Mustafa  M. G., Sobhan  M. I., Wheeler  D. (2016).  Impact  of Climate  Change  and Aquatic  Salinization  on Fish 
Habitats and Poor Communities in Southwest Coastal Bangladesh and Bangladesh Sundarbans. World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper No. 7593.  March.  
39 Kamruzzaman,  A. K. M., and Ahmed,  F. (2006),  'Study  of performance  of existing  pond  sand  filters  in different  parts  of Bangladesh', 
32nd WEDC International Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka, November, Loughborough, Leicestershire, UK, WEDC Loughborough, 
Pp. 377 -380; Islam, M. M., C hou, F. F., Kabir, M. R., and Liaw, C. H., 2010, Rainwater: A potential alternative source for scarce safe 
drinking  and arsenic  contaminated  water  in Bangladesh.  Water  resources  management,  24(14),  3987 -4008;  Islam,  M.A.,  Hiroyuki,  S., 
Karim, M. R., and Masahiko, S. (2013). Potable water scarcity: options and issues in the coastal areas of Bangladesh. Journal  of 
Water and Health, 11(3), 532 -542 
40 Ansari, M., Islam, H., Roy, K. 2011. Functionality and social acceptance of safe water,  technology pond sand filter (PSF) and 
rainwater harvesting system (RWHS) in the southwest coastal region of Bangladesh. Saarbrucken: VDM Verla  
41 ACDI/VOCA 2015 http://www.acdivoca.org /news/by -country/bangladesh/  
42 Chowdhury, NT., 2010. Water management in Bangladesh: an analytical review. Wat. Policy., 12, 32 -51. 
43 Ahmed MF, Ahuja S, Alauddin M, Hug SJ, Lloyd JR, Pfaff A, Pichler T., Saltikov C, Stute M. 2006. Epidemiology: ensuring safe 
drinking water in Bangladesh. Science. 314:1687 –1688  
44 Unnayan Shamannay (2016) Policy Brief Issue 2016 Policy brief on Water Management in Bangladesh. Retrieved from: 
http://www.cuts -citee.org/SDIP/pdf/Policy_Brief_on_Water -Water_Management_in_Bangladesh.pdf  
45 Ibid. 
46 ACDI/VOCA 2015 http://www.acdivoca.org/news/by -count ry/bangladesh/  
47 Kamruzzaman,  A. K. M., and Ahmed,  F. (2006),  'Study  of performance  of existing  pond  sand  filters  in different  parts  of Bangladesh', 
32nd WEDC International Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka, November, Loughborough, Leicestershire, UK, WEDC Loughborough, 
Pp. 377 -380; Islam, M. M., Chou, F. F., Kabir, M. R., and Liaw, C. H., 2010, Rainwater: A potential alternative source for scarce saf e 
drinking  and arsenic  contaminated  water  in Bangladesh.  Water  resources  management,  24(14),  3987 -4008;  Islam , M.A.,  Hiroyuki,  S., 
Karim, M. R., and Masahiko, S. (2013). Potable water scarcity: options and issues in the coastal areas of Bangladesh. Journal  of 
Water and Health, 11(3), 532 -542


---
*Page 17*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 112  
 
 
freshwater crisis. A district -wise assessment of water infrastructure damage by Cyclone Aila (conducted by DPHE) 
indicated that Khulna and Satkhira were the worst affected, including damage to 278 pond sand filters.  
 
27. The availability  of fresh  water  is also projected  to decrease  due to changing  rainfall  patterns  which  affect  the regular 
recharge of groundwater sources. This will increase drinking water insecurity during the dry season, which is 
expected to be prolonged under projected climate change scenario s. Compounded by water infrastructure damage 
due to cyclones and storm surges, year -round access to safe drinking water will be further diminished, increasing 
the recurrent costs of water supply as well as associated health costs. The situation is all the more pressing, given 
that Bangladesh’s  annual  water  demand  is expected  to increase  by 200 per cent by 2050  from current  levels.  These 
climate change induced impacts on drinking water sources will impact the entire population of the coastal districts, 
but will be particularly  severe  for socio -economically  marginalized  groups,  such  as women,  adolescent  girls,  children, 
the elderly, and ethnic and religious minorities. For further details on salinity impacts on drinking water, refer to 
Section 1.3.4, of the F easibility Study (Annex  IIa). 
 
Disproportionate impacts of salinity induced loss of agricultural livelihoods and reduced water security on women  
 
28. ActionAid in collaboration with the Australian Government and The Economist Intelligence Unit, conducted 
compr ehensive studies on gender -specific vulnerabilities associated with climate -change, and have developed the 
South Asia Women’s Resilience Index to quantify the relative resilience of women. The index demonstrates that 
countries across South Asia fare poorly  in supporting women’s resilience to disasters and in Bangladesh there are 
significant  economic  and social  barriers  to women’s  empowerment  that increase  their vulnerability  during  disasters. 
Gender  inequality  in Bangladesh  arises  from societal  and cultural  norms  that impact  woman’s  daily activities,  as well 
as their overall adaptive capacity to climate change. Participation of women in agriculture has declined between 
2001  and 201148, partly  due to increasing  disruption  to agricultural  production  from cyclones  and salinity  that renders 
agricultural production more difficult, and compels women to take on other domestic burdens, such as walking 
increasing distances to fetch viable water for domestic use. The shift to shrimp farming has also impacted the 
economic opportunities available to women, as it requires less labour than traditional rice paddy  farming.  
 
29. Climate change exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity of women and girls were also examined in a report by 
UN Women and were shown to be certain  of exposure to salinity  in  all  areas  of  their  lives,  and  high  
sensitivity. Women’s livelihoods were deemed vulnerable due to a lack of diversity of livelihoods; reduced options 
for on -farm livelihoods; cultural barriers in employment in the indus try sector; limited SMEs to absorb women 
labourers; poor capacity to enter into skilled service sectors; domestic responsibility; lack of incentives for skilled 
jobs; and sole responsibility of child care. Drinking water related vulnerability was reported to be due to a limited 
number of safe and salinity free water -points in public and private spheres; lack of available water sources; lack of 
economic  ability  for poor women  and women  headed  households  to install  salinity  free water  sources;  long hours  to 
collect  water  from distant  sources;  and threat  of sexual  harassment  during  long walkway  to collect  water  from distant 
sources. Focus group discussions during the proposed project development yielded findings related to gender 
relationships  at the household  and community  level.  These  are presented  in Chapter  1, Feasibility  Study,  Annex  IIa. 
 
30. Land use changes due to salinity significantly impact women’s livelihood options due to fewer on -farm and post - 
harvest employment opportunities. The overall reduction in  livelihood options in coastal regions has also led to the 
increased  migration  of men to find work,  and this also greatly  increases  women’s  burden  of unpaid  and undervalued 
household work. Climate -change induced migration has also meant that income from women’s productive labour 
becomes critical for families’ survival, and also creates a situation where women are often forced to provide labour 
at any cost to supplement household income, sometimes earning only USD0.91 a day49. This is equally true for 
adolescent girls, forced to marry early and discontinue their education in order to supplement household income. 
Women  and married  adolescent  girls who are left behind  face exploitation  and become  even  more  exposed  to unsafe 
and unjust  workplace  conditions  and gender -based  violence50. Furthermore,  increasing  salinity  has also led to a 
decline in the production of assets under their control, such as cattle and paddy. These assets are rapidly being  
 
48 Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) (2010) Yearbook of Ag ricultural Statistics of Bangladesh, Statistics Division, Ministry of 
Planning, Government of Bangladesh  
49 Belton, B. (2016). Shrimp, prawn and the political economy of social wellbeing in rural Bangladesh. Journal of Rural Studies , 45, 
230-242 
50 Pouliotte  J., Smit B., Westerhoff  L. 2009,  Adaptation  and development:  Livelihoods  and climate  change  in Subarnabad,  Bangladesh. 
CLIMATE AND DEVELOPMENT 1, 31 –46. doi:10.3763/cdev.2009.0001


---
*Page 18*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 11 2 
 
 
replaced by economic activities such as shrimp, prawn, and fish aquaculture value chains, and rents from leasing 
out land, all of which tend to be dominated by men.  
 
31. Climate change pressures on drinking water security, both current and projected also h as a disproportionately 
negative impact on women and girls. A recent Gender Water Alliance study for the Bagerhat district, reveals how 
salinity -induced  water  stress  in the region  impacts  the lives of women.  The study  details  how the burden  of collecting 
safe drinking water primarily falls on women and girls, and how declining access to suitable water compels them to 
walk long distances  to secure  water  for the household,  additionally  jeopardizing  their safety.  Moreover,  it is estimated 
that, in the most af fected coastal areas of Bangladesh, women and girls spend an average of 2.5 hours to collect 
water, adding to their unpaid burden of work and monopolizing time that could otherwise be used for income 
generating  activities51. 
 
32. Poor  water  quality  also directly  affects  the health  of women  and adolescent  girls,  in specifics  ways.  In south -western 
coastal Bangladesh, the average intake of sodium far exceeds the World Health Organization (WHO) limit52. 
Although  high levels  of sodium  intake  affect  the health  of the entire  population,  a survey  in 2008  found  that pregnant 
women  living  in this coastal  area had much  higher  rates  of pre-eclampsia  and gestational  hypertension  than pregnant 
women living in non -coastal areas53, likely due to the high sodium intake. Given that women and girls are not 
prioritized in terms of family health expenditures, and that this also has implications for maternal mortality, and the 
survival  rate of infants  at birth,  this salinity  exposure  had multiplier  effects  on the health  of women  and their families. 
These secondary impacts of climate -induced salinity further reduce women’s adaptive capacity. For further details 
on salinity impacts on women and children, refer to Section 1.3.5 of the Feasibility Study (Annex  IIa). 
 
Baseline ef forts and investments  
33. Over  a period  of 15 years  (2001 -2015),  USD3.4  billion  was spent  on development  projects  in the two targeted  districts 
of Khulna and Satkhira. Additionally, USD513 million has been spent to address salinity, waterlogging, and coastal 
inundation in these districts over the last 15 years. The majority of the spending came from the Bangladesh Water 
Development Board (BWDB) (for water and irrigation infrastructure), the Local Government Engineering 
Departments  (LEGD,  on cyclone  centres,  rural roads,  culverts,  irrigations,  and market  development),  the Department 
of Disaster  Management  (DDM)  (for safety  net programmes,  disaster  risk reduction,  and cyclone  centres),  the DPHE 
(for drinking  water  and sanitation  infrastructure),  the Department  of Agriculture  Extension  (DAE)  (for crop extension), 
and the Department of Fisheries (DoF) (for extension work on fisheries). In addition, the GoB is developing a Delta 
Plan 2100  for the coastal  areas  including  support  to ensure  safety  from floods  and climat e change  related  disasters; 
water security and efficiency of water usage; sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries management; 
preservation of wetlands and ecosystems and promotion of their wise use; and integrated use of land and water 
resou rces. The priority activities include the Construction of the Ganges Barrage, the Coastal Embankment 
Improvement Programme, and the Tidal River Management Programme for the southwest region. The estimated 
cost of these three investments is USD4  billion.  
 
34. GoB is undertaking many initiatives, with support from donors, multi -lateral partners and NGOs, related to 
infrastructure, disaster preparedness and response, water and sanitation, agriculture, and social protection. The 
Coastal Embankment Improvement Proje ct (2002 -2013, USD400 million) supported agricultural production by 
reducing saltwater intrusion into polders; the Southwest Area Integrated Water Resources Planning and 
Management (ADB, USD32.5 million) project supports flood control, drainage, and irriga tion schemes; the 
Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project (2013 -present, USD140 million) aims to support 
restoration  and recovery  from the damage  to infrastructure  and livelihoods  caused  by Cyclone  Sidr; the Humanitarian 
Preparedness  and Response,  a USD25  million  DFID -funded  programme,  aims  to save  lives and reduce  risk amongst 
people affected by disasters; the Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme (CDMP) (USD76 million)  has 
introduced adaptation interventions and early warning commu nity management; the Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project (World Bank funded, USD75 million) aims to provide safe drinking water and sanitation for areas  
 
51 Bashawjed 2011hk  
52 Alam, and Khan. Sodium Concentration in Potable Ground Water in Coastal Belt of Bangladesh Due to the Effect of Global 
Warming: A Potential Health Risk. IOSR Journal of Environmental Science, Toxicology and Food Technology (IOSR -JESTFT) e - 
ISSN: 2319 -2402,  p- ISSN: 2319 -2399.Volume 8, Issue 6 Ver. I (Jun. 2014), PP 21 -30 www.iosrjournals.org  
53 Khan A, Mojumder SK, Kovats S, Vineis P. 2008. Saline contamination of drinking water in Bangladesh. Lancet 371:385.;  
doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(08)60197 -X [Online 2 February 2008]


---
*Page 19*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 112  
 
 
near contaminated shallow aquifers; the Blue Gold Programme (EUR 57.5 million) supports participatory water 
management and far mer field schools; the UNICEF supported Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene in 
Difficult and Hard -to- Reach Areas of Bangladesh project focuses on addressing arsenic contamination of water 
supply;  the USAID  funded  Nobo  Jatra,  a Food  for Peace  progra m in Khulna  and Satkhira  districts  and the European 
Union (EU) supported DIPECHO projects focus on resilient agricultural production practices as part of disaster 
preparedness efforts in the south -east region; the Creating Opportunities for the Poor and Excluded in Bangladesh 
(COPE)  (UK-DFID  funded)  programme  supports  the poorest  communities  through  advocacy,  assets,  and economic 
opportunities; and the Empowerment and Livelihood Improvement project, Ultra -Poor (DFID funded) project, the 
Stimulating Househ old Improvements Resulting in Economic Empowerment (DFID funded) project, and the 
SHOUHARDO (CARE implemented) project support livelihoods for the poor. Refer to Section 3.1 Feasibility Study 
(see Annex IIa) for detailed list of investments.  
 
35. Despite  these  considerable  investments,  especially  in the past decade,  there  has been  limited  explicit  consideration 
of climate change related impacts, and the related vulnerabilities on women and girls, in their design and 
implementation. Climate change has also serve d to undermine many of the development investments, and is 
increasing the burden on GoB, as development gains are repeatedly jeopardized by sudden -onset events, such as 
cyclones,  as well as the slow erosion  of environmental  productivity  through  salinity  increases.  In turn, these  impacts 
further exacerbate the vulnerabilities of the poor and extreme poor populations, the very target of the government 
and donor support. The GoB has also invested in building climate change resilience through support from pro jects 
such as the Bangladesh Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR) to support climate -smart technologies, 
climate -proofing of infrastructure, and improving coastal connectivity; the Coastal Climate Resilient Infrastructure 
Project (USD150 million) for investments in roads, bridges, shelters, and markets; the Climate Resilient Agriculture 
and Food Security project (IFC, USD344 million); the Livelihood Adaptation to Climate Change (LACC) (FAO 
supported) for farmers’ resilience; the “Jolobayoo -O-Jibon”  (UK funded, USD15 million) project for climate risk 
reduction  and adaptation;  and the Climate -Resilient  Ecosystems  and Livelihoods  (CREL)  project  (USAID,  USD32.6 
million) to support diversified, resilient  livelihoods.  
 
36. Whilst the majority of projects aime d at addressing climate change, address development challenges to build 
resilience to climate change, only a few focuses on specifically addressing climate change induced risks, both 
observed and projected, to support incremental or full adaptation solutio ns. Furthermore, there has been no 
systematic assessment of cyclone and SLR risks leading to the saltwater intrusion crisis that has disrupted 
freshwater resource dependent lives and livelihoods in the coastal zones. While there have been a number of 
localized interventions,  coordinated  solutions  that address  community  and system  capacities  (particularly  governing 
bodies,  civil society,  and the private  sector)  for gender -targeted,  adaptive  responses  to salinity,  at the required  scale, 
are still limited. For  further details on projects addressing the salinity impacts on drinking water, refer to Chapter 3, 
Feasibility Study (Annex IIa) for further  discussion.  
 
Adaptation Solution  
 
37. The project will empower communities, especially women, as ‘change -agents’ to plan, implement, and manage 
resilient  livelihoods  and drinking  water  solutions  in the face of worsening  climate  change  impacts  on their freshwater 
resources. The paradigm shift is to move away from focus on short -term responses and technology -led 
interventions  towards  community -centric  solutions  that build  ownership  and capacities  across  multiple  stakeholders 
to sustain and scale up adaptive responses to safeguard livelihoods and water security. Community -centric 
awareness, skills building, value -chain and market linkages support can promote a transformational switch from 
current, non -adaptive livelihoods to climate -resilient livelihoods that can, in turn, reduce the vulnerabilities of the 
extreme  poor against  future  climate  change  risks.  Climate -resilient  water  technologies,  such  as rainwater  harvesting 
and pond water systems, provide the communities with a means to shift away from their dependence on ground - 
water to surface water systems that can address seasonal variability and cope with slow - and sudden -onset 
changes. Within the same communities, the benefits of the livelihoods and water security are synergistic and can 
mutually reinforce the resilience of the populations in coping with climate change -induced salinity impacts on their 
freshwater resources. Strengthened capacities across the government, Non -Governmental Organisations (NGOs), 
and private sector to incorporate climate change risks into implementation and management of livelihood and 
drinking  water  solutions  are critical  support  long-term adaptive  capacities  of the coastal  communities.  Strengthening  
MoWCA’s capacity to integrate gender and climate change into policies and programs particularly improves social 
targeting and climate -risk informed development across other sectors. Engaging national, sub -national, and local


---
*Page 20*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 112  
 
 
institutional structures in provision of these solutions creates an enabling environment for communities, particularly, 
women as ‘change -agents’ to adapt to climate change.  
 
Gaps and Key barriers  
 
Limited  awareness,  technical,  and financial  capacity  among  coastal  communities,  especially  women,  to diversify 
to climate -resilient  livelihoods:  
 
38. Lack of awareness and access to tools to practice resilient agriculture -based livelihoods:  A large share of the poor 
and extreme  poor communities  in Bangladesh’s  coastal  areas  have  been  experiencing  disruptive  impacts  of climate 
change  on their economic  activities  and livelihoods,  particularly  through  increasing  salinization  of soil and freshwater 
bodies eroding farming and fishing productivity. However, while communities are aware of the salinity -induced 
disruption to their livelihoods, there is limited understanding of the evolving risks and w orsening impacts due to 
climate change and how to respond to these risks to safeguard their livelihoods. Climate change affects the 
environmental conditions (such as salinity and temperature) under which agricultural livelihoods are practiced. 
Traditional farming practices will only provide a reliable source of income for a limited time, depending on shifting 
climate influenced variables (rainfall, temperature, evaporation, soil salinity, water salinity/availability) and 
management  options  (irrigation)54. Progressive  farming  techniques  involve  using  short  cycle  crops  and shifting  away 
from low salinity tolerant crops such as Boro rice, to those vegetable crops which are less affected by salinity and 
have  a higher  market  price.  However,  there  is a limited  knowledge  of, and access  to those  crop varieties,  particularly 
among  women,  climate -resilient  practices  and livelihoods  that could  reduce  communities’  vulnerability  to the evolving 
risks.  Reliable  information  on climate  resilient  practices  is generally  not available,  preventing  farmers  from switching 
to resilient  agriculture  inputs,  approaches  and techniques  (crop  diversification,  saline/drought/submergence  tolerant 
crop varieties or early maturing varieties etc.) or resilient livelihoods away from fresh -water dependent agriculture, 
given the projected increases in salinity. Many of the recent livelihood changes (within the last 5 -10 years), such as 
shifting  to shrimp  farming  (which  lead to further  salinization)  or cultivating  highly  freshwater  depen dent watermelons, 
have been maladaptive. These have exacerbated vulnerabilities indicating that there is a limited awareness and 
knowledge of how to respond to climate change impacts among local households, particularly women (see 
Livelihoods Assessment Re port, Annex IIb, section  5.1). 
 
39. Gender -specific constraints: This knowledge gap and lack of agricultural extension support services is particularly 
acute among women, with many extension services and training being geared towards men. This is compounded 
by the fact that women’s participation in activities such as trainings can be greatly limited, both due to norms and 
attitudes about the abilities of women, what is considered appropriate work, and due to restrictions on movement 
and time.  Training  and exten sion services  are often  not designed  in a manner  that will allow  women’s  full participation 
(e.g. mixed  groups,  male  trainers,  far from homestead)  and can be compounded  by the fact that many  women  in the 
coastal districts of south -western Bangladesh have limited literacy. When labour opportunities are created, women 
are often involved in work with lower pay, and limited from positions that require more technical skills or leadership 
and their bargaining power is limited in regards to negotiating fair worki ng conditions55. 
 
40. Limited technical and financial capacities to switch to climate -resilient livelihoods:  Closely linked to the lack of 
awareness,  are a range  of constraints,  both technical  and financial,  to diversify  the portfolio  of livelihood  options  and 
adopt climate -resilient livelihoods. Diversification to climate -resilient agricultural practices (e.g. adapting saline 
tolerant crop varieties), technologies (e.g. drip irrigation, hydroponics, aqua -geoponics), and livelihoods (such as 
crab farming) requi res specific knowledge, skills, and technology transfer that is limited, as communities lack the 
technical  assistance  and support  owing  to limited  capacities  among  peers  and local extension  staff.  Extremely  poor 
households are often unable to invest in ris k management strategies, given that they are continuously coping with 
new shocks and stresses and have limited space and ability to think about and act on choices that will make a 
positive difference in their future (relative to households that are relativ ely more resource endowed). Lack of 
collateral constrains the capacity of many agricultural based households to access finance and invest in  the 
necessary switch to resilient livelihoods, but also their marginal asset base and financial resources are conti nually 
undermined  by repeated  saltwater  inundations  and cyclone  impacts,  which  lead to significant  crop and asset  losses.  
 
54 Lazar A. N., et al. 2015, Agricultural livelihoods in coastal Bangladesh under climate and environmental change – a model 
framework. Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 17, 1018  
55 FAO Aquaculture Newsletter (FAN) March 2016. #54 Retrieved from: http://www.fao.org/3/a -bc866e.pdf


---
*Page 21*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPO SAL | PAGE 20 OF 112  
 
 
The livelihoods support and assistance provided by the GoB as part of ‘business -as-usual’ development does not 
incorporate current and projected climate risks to enable transformation to resilient livelihood and market systems. 
Any development gains through existing governmental support programs, particularly for women, are jeopardized 
by these climate change -induced losses. Thus, GoB’s own limited financial resources are also further stressed as 
they cope with sudden onset changes. Furthermore, there is limited capacity within the government to incorporate 
the evolving  climate -risks,  which  undermines  the effectiveness  of support  to enable  the poor to deal with worsening 
climate change impacts, including slow -onset changes in  salinity . 
 
41. Gender  specific  constraint:  Extremely  poor women,  and girls,  in the target  unions  are even  more  vulnerable  to climate 
shocks  and stresses,  and are often  unable  to meet  their basic  requirements  (nutrition,  health,  education,  and shelter) 
due to their socio -economic marginalization. The impact of climate change combined with specific vulnerabilities 
experienced by women, such as restricted technical/financial knowledge, limited or no access to resources and 
assets, markets and services puts women at eve n greater risk. Furthermore, as they have limited decision -making 
power and little control or household assets, they are unable to engage in capital and asset accumulation or other 
forms  of risk mitigation.  Other  factors  may also limit their adoption  of climate  resilient  livelihoods,  including  adoption 
of technologies  that may present  physical  constraints  (type  of aquaculture  with heavy  cages  that are difficult  to move, 
or require  women  entering  deep  water)  and promoting  livelihood  activities  that add to women’s  work  burden  without 
addressing their heavy burden of unpaid household responsibilities (water collection, cooking, child rearing etc.). 
See Section 4.2, in the Feasibility Study for further  detail.  
 
42. Limited  capacities  to invest  in value -chains  asso ciated  with climate -resilient  livelihoods:  Since  a switch  to alternative, 
climate -resilient livelihoods is necessary to cope with climate -change induced salinity, full adaptation solutions 
require  that associated  value -chains  are created  or enhanced  to ensure  long-term viability  of the introduced  resilient 
livelihoods. The existing value chain structures are not usable due to changes in livelihood patterns caused by 
climate change -induced salinity and new value chains are necessitated for the alternative , resilient agriculture and 
aquaculture options. However, given the constrained financial and technical capacities, among both communities 
and the government, the value -chain development required for newer, climate -resilient practices and technologies 
is limited,  which  suppresses  opportunities  for enhanced  incomes  and scale -up of these  resilient  livelihoods.  Several 
climate -resilient agricultural and aquaculture production options such as, crab farming and vegetables grown in 
hydroponics systems, show great  promise in providing opportunities for enhanced incomes, but comprehensive 
value -chain  development  is required  to scale -up access  to the associated  inputs,  create  high value  products,  and to 
spur incentives and market linkages for a vibrant adaptive market place. Increased scale, coupled with rising 
demands can then attract further investments, leading to improved value -chains, creating more competitive prices 
for goods and services related to alternative, resilient  livelihoods.  
 
43. Gender -specific const raint: Compounding the existing lack of market linkages are the currently limited capacities 
and skills of women in Bangladesh to incubate, manage, and grow their businesses and leverage market linkages. 
Given that women are often constrained by religious and social beliefs to household tasks, and may face restricted 
access to markets, the gendered division of labour and constraints in controlling financial assets, they often lack 
knowledge  and skills  related  to marketing,  sales,  income/expenditure,  and accounting,  all of which  further  contributes 
to their vulnerability.  
 
Limited access to freshwater sources and technical capacity and means for communities to plan for, 
implement, and manage resilient drinking water solutions in the light of a changing climat e: 
 
44. Limited access to freshwater sources and limited capacities for planning and implementing drinking water solutions 
in the light of climate -induced salinity:  Given the deterioration of surface and ground water sources due to climate 
change -induced salinity, access to fresh water sources for drinking is becoming increasingly constrained. The 
technological means to capture and store freshwater entail prohibitive  costs for the poor, vulnerable communities 
and requires awareness, skills, capacities, and behavioural change. Coastal households, currently, also have a 
limited planning horizon to adequately consider incremental climate change impacts on fresh -water res ources and 
identify resilient solutions for year -round, safe drinking water supply. This can be related to a limited understanding 
of climate  change  induced  salinization  processes  and an inadequate  exposure  to adaptive  technological  solutions  
to follow best practices. Adaptive technologies, such as rainwater harvesting at different scales, collection of pond


---
*Page 22*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 112  
 
 
water, and Reverse Osmosis (RO) require technical skills, and an understandin g of hydrological characteristics of 
flow regimes,  climate  variability  (including  changes  in monsoon  patterns  and intensity),  and water  treatment  options. 
Options such as RO also have significant environmental impacts and financial costs, constraining adoption by the 
coastal  poor.  Provision  of water  to households  is fairly  decentralized  and where  access  to piped  water  is unavailable, 
communities, local authorities, and NGOs often apply disparate approaches, as there is limited common 
understanding  and technical  skills  to plan and implement  drinking  water  provision  with climate  risks incorporated.  
 
45. Gender -specific constraint: Water scarcity and lack of access to clean water is disproportionately borne by women 
in these communities. Men are generally unwilling to collect water and the issue of drinking water security is not 
given the importance that it warrants. This has become a gender stereotype and as this is not men’s problem 
therefore, the importance is less from the powerful cohorts of the societ y. Access to information, skills, and 
technical capacity is extremely limited among extremely poor women, preventing investment in and adoption of 
climate -resilient  technologies.  The consequence  of exclusion  from water  distribution  and planning  processes  is that 
women are further  marginalized.  
 
46. Limited additional financial means to expand water solutions in increasingly cyclone and salinity -stressed areas:  
Government  and donor  investments  in drinking  water  supply  have  been  repeatedly  eroded  by asset  destruc tion due 
to cyclones and increasing salinity, which has rendered ground water unsafe to drink. Compounded by an 
inadequate  understanding  of and planning  for these  climate  risks,  these  investments  are further  inhibited  in the most 
vulnerable  areas,  as extreme  poor are unable  to pay for costs  of expansion,  new technologies,  or treatment  options. 
The abundance of rainwater is the most dependable source of drinking water in the salinity affected coastal rural 
areas, but affordability for low -income groups is a major concern, given the capital cost of available rainwater tanks 
in the market is often beyond their reach. In addition, there is no specific yearly budget allocation for water supply 
from the government to support people living in water scarce area s. In some unions, a few households from higher 
income brackets have been able to adopt climate resilient water technologies including RO. However, income 
divisions create an enormous barrier for the poor and extreme poor households to follow suit, given t heir economic 
means in the face of the high capital and operating costs of such technologies. The current price of clean water in 
saline -prone areas restricts access to safe, year -round supplies of drinking water for households, particularly those 
living u nder the poverty  line. 
 
47. Gender -specific constraint: Not only do women have less income overall, female -headed households are also 
consistently poorer, and hence less able to invest in clean water. By not having the financial means to access safe 
water, year-round, women are further marginalized. Drinking unsafe water also has adverse health impacts, which 
can further undermine their income generating  capacities.  
 
48. Limited technical, financial and organizational capacities for sustained O&M of the drinking  water technologies:  
Where government or other donor investments have been made to secure water for the poor, the lack of capacities 
among  beneficiaries  to operate  and maintain  these  technologies  in the face of climate -change  impacts,  has rendered 
many suc h investments non -functional. In many instances, technologies are designed without climate change risks 
taken  into consideration.  For instance,  shallow  tube wells  are subject  to saline  intrusion  and Pond  Sand  Filter  (PSF) 
technology alleviates water scarcity by securing surface water in ponds, but without raising the level of the pond 
embankments, cyclone inundation can render ponds unfit for use due to increased salinity. Furthermore, the 
sustainable  operation  and maintenance  of water  technologies  in coastal  districts  in southwest  Bangladesh  have  also 
proved to be difficult. Adaptive technologies required to deal with increased salinization of water sources, such as 
rain water harvesting, PSF, ponds with filtration treatment and RO, require technical skills for both operations and 
maintenance  (including  knowledge  of basic  carpentry  and plumbing),  as well as an understanding  of evolving  climate 
risks,  including  changes  in precipitation,  salinity,  and intensification  of cyclone  events.  However,  often  there  is a lack 
of capacity in these technical skills at the local level, including among community members, local staff, and NGOs 
in regard to sustained operation and maintenance in light of evolving climate risks. An inadequate level of training 
and capa city building,  and a general  lack of awareness  on the long-term benefits  of freshwater  storage  or treatment 
technologies,  results  in limited  technical  knowledge  and neglect  among  local users.  Finally,  community  involvement 
in design and water management has been sporadic and limited. A major constraint is the lack of consultation with 
and involvement of the marginalized and poor, leading to a reduced sense of ownership, which in turn limits the 
willingness and interest of beneficiaries to participate in r equired O&M  activities.


---
*Page 23*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 112  
 
 
 
49. Gender specific constraint: The collection of water for drinking and other household purposes (including cooking, 
cleaning, bathing and household gardening) are  primarily a women's responsibility, are a major contribution to 
women’s unpaid burden of work. Community consultations revealed that women spend on average 2.5 hours 
collecting water for household use, having to walk long distances. Rooftop and local rain water harvesting systems 
would reduce this burden on women by being able to store water at or near their houses. Screening of common 
practices  showed  that water  management  committees,  and women  involvement  within  them,  exists  on a conceptual 
level, but that their functionality, consistency of meetings, and transparent decision -making processes are 
questionable. This stems from unequal power dynamics on the local level and weak organizational structures to 
empower women and other marginalized community me mbers. This constraint leads to a reduced sense of 
ownership, which, consequently, can limit the sustainability of the interventions. Mechanisms to strengthen the 
position of the local communities and women in design processes for drinking -water supply and  livelihood planning 
are needed. That is, it is imperative that women participate in the design and sustainability of solutions, including 
location, access protocols and maintenance, as they are the main -user group of the system. Women should be 
included d uring the project design phase and any system should provide easy access to the water collection point 
for women, and other marginalized groups (people with disabilities, ethnic and religious minorities) who may face 
additional constraints in water access.  See Chapter 4, Feasibility Study (Annex IIa) for further  details.  
 
Limited  institutional  capacities,  coordination,  and knowledge  and learning  mechanisms  for climate -risk informed 
planning and implementation of resilient livelihoods and drinking water  solutions  
 
50. Low technical skills, knowledge, and capacities to innovate, plan for, and implement resilient solutions to cope with 
rising salinity impacts on drinking water and livelihoods:  Despite the prioritization of climate change issues and 
relevant strategies and plans to support climate action at the national level, evidence -based design and the 
implementation of solutions that target climate -induced salinity impacts on coastal freshw ater resources is limited. 
The burden  of maintaining  research  capacity,  knowledge  sharing,  and technical  skills  with regard  to climate  risks,  is 
very high for national,  sub-national  and local government  institutions  that are already  fiscally  constrained,  as well as 
for partners’  institutions  such  as NGOs  and the private  sector.  For example,  the technical  knowledge  and capacities 
to design and implement resilient technologies to support diversification of agricultural livelihoods is not yet 
systematized,  nor positioned  to evolve  as climate  risks evolve.  Similarly,  understanding  of salinity  risks,  consequent 
projected  changes  to the ground  and surface  water  profiles,  changes  in precipitation  patterns,  as well as the technical 
capacities  to innovate  and evolve  drinking  water  solutions  to cope  with these  projected  risks  is limited.  This is partly 
due to limited knowledge and technology transfer, but also due to financial constraints to build these incremental 
costs of climate change responses into developm ent planning, which limits the design of public good solutions 
targeted to support vulnerable coastal communities. Thus, while considerable investments are being made in 
climate -smart agriculture, resilient livelihoods, water supply solutions, and coastal development, the practices, 
efforts,  and approaches  are not institutionalized  to promote  technical  capacities  among  the relevant  ministries.  There 
is limited knowledge exchange and evidence -based learning to support upscale of resilient livelihoods and drinking 
water solutions to cope with climate change induced salinity and extreme weather  events.  
 
51. Gender specific constraint: Given the multiple intersections between building community resilience in the face of 
shifting livelihoods and water scarcity, an d the need for gender responsive solutions to these challenges, it is 
imperative to strengthen the long -term capacity of MoWCA, along with DPHE and LGIs, and relevant technical and 
civil society organizations to incorporate climate change risks into the pl anning and implementation of gender 
empowerment strategies national and  locally.  
 
52. Weak  coordination  across  agencies  and sectors  to support  coastal  communities  in coping  with evolving  climate  risks 
and impacts on drinking water and livelihoods:  The GoB reco gnizes the lack of coordination among sectors and 
ministries  as one of the major  limitations  of the current  institutional  set up to address  climate  change  issues56. Limited 
vertical and horizontal coordination is a barrier for addressing climate change risks such as slow -onset salinization, 
as it requires an integrated, evidence -based approach to planning and supporting resilient interventions to  address  
cross -sectoral impacts of deterioration of freshwater resources. When these impacts are especially de vastating for  
 
56 MOEF -GOB, 2009. Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 2009, Ministry of Environment and Forest (MOEF), 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh (GOB), Dhaka


---
*Page 24*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  23 OF 112  
 
 
women  and girls’ lives and livelihoods  and collectively  affect  a community’s  adaptive  capacity,  coordination  is critical 
to ensure long -term, gender responsive, integrated solutions. Climate -risk reduction of coastal communities is a 
complex  process  demanding  a systemic  approach  and a multitude  of expertise.  The communal  and household  level 
acceptance  of empowering  women  in pursuing  new livelihoods  and managing  climate -smart  water  solutions  requires 
comprehensive  support  from government  institutions  with mandates  and capacity  to coordinate  across  interventions 
and actors. Furthermore, the interventions themselves require coordination across technical domains, gender - 
responsiveness and support that takes women specific climate vulnerabili ties into account. Currently, such 
coordination is weak and can lead to planning failures and short -lived support, without resulting in transformational 
changes to improve the climate -resiliency of water security and livelihoods of coastal people. The desi gnation of 
climate change focal points in each ministry and relevant agencies and training by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests (MOEF) to better integrate climate change into activities is a step in this direction. However, the human 
resource capacit y is still being built and the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) has 
duly highlighted capacity building as a fundamental requirement towards addressing climate change  nationally57. 
 
53. Gender -specific constraint: Many projects implemented by GoB agencies do not have any theoretical construct to 
address gender sensitivity in the project design. The MoWCA, under the Bangladesh Climate Change Trust Fund 
(BCCTF),  has helped  other  ministries  to integrate  gender  considerations,  whilst  NGOs  have  similarly  taken  initiatives 
to train gender focal points to include gender sensitivity in project design and monitoring. Even so, progress has 
been slow and gender is often a neglected aspect in many projects. Weak institutional capacities and c oordination 
can further marginalize women as the opportunities for women to address the impacts of salinity on freshwater 
resource -based livelihoods might be lost in design of primarily technical, sectoral solutions. Institutional mandates 
define  the proce sses and rules  that govern  and regulate  access  and entitlement  to assets  and this can inadvertently 
create winners and losers if the marginalized and the vulnerable, including women and children, are not targeted in 
a coordinated  manner.  
 
 
 
Project objecti ve, outcomes, and impacts  
 
54. The key problem the project proposes to address is the threat to agricultural livelihoods and drinking water security 
of coastal communities, especially women, from impacts of climate change -induced salinity on the communities’ 
freshwater  resources.  
 
55. The objective of the proposed project is to support the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) in strengthening the 
adaptive capacities of coastal communities, especially women, to cope with impacts of climate change - 
induced salinity on their livelihoods and water security. The Fund level impacts of the project are increased 
resilience  and enhanced  livelihoods  of the most  vulnerable  communities  and increased  resilience  of health  and well- 
being,  and food and water  security  of the coastal  communities,  especially  women,  in Bangladesh.  The GCF  Results 
Framework  outcome  that this project  fits under  is strengthened  adaptive  capacity  and reduced  exposure  to climate 
risks of the vulnerable communities, especially women, of the southwest coast of Bangladesh . Recognizing the 
crucial role that women play in water security and household level resilience, and t he layered socio -economic 
marginalization that leads to their increased vulnerability, the proposed solution will empower target communities, 
especially women, as ‘change -agents’ to plan, implement, and manage resilient drinking water solutions and 
livelih oods in the face of worsening impacts on their freshwater resources. The paradigm shift is to move away 
from a focus on short -term responses and technology -led interventions towards community -centric solutions that 
build  ownership  and capacities  across  the system  to design,  implement,  manage,  and evolve  adaptive  responses  to 
safeguard livelihoods and drinking water security.  
 
 
 
 
57 Ibid.


---
*Page 25*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 112  
 
 
56. The project is underpinned by the Theory of Change depicted  below.  
 
 
57. Firstly,  the project  will address  the barriers  related  to low awareness  of and access  to resilient  livelihood  practices, 
lack of technical and financial capacities, and limited adoption and scalability hindering the small -scale farmers, 
fishers, and agro -laborers to diversify to climate -resilient livelihoods and implement adaptive livelihood strategies. 
GCF  resources,  combined  with leveraged  GoB co-financing,  will ensure  that (i) communities,  especially  women,  
adopt and implement  climate -resilient livelihoods; (ii) value -chains/market linkages for these alternative, resilient 
livelihoods are strengthened to ensure their adoption, sustainability, and scale; and (iii) communities have


---
*Page 26*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPO SAL | PAGE 25 OF 112  
 
 
knowledge and capacity to continue to monitor, safeguard and adapt livelihoods and livelihood strategies to 
evolving climate risks. The proposed project facilitates the formation of peer -to-peer support groups (Women 
Livelihood Groups – WLGs) to empower women to identify, plan for, and implement climate -resilient livelihoods 
through awareness raising, skills development, knowledge transfer, and investments into livelihood assets. GoB 
resources will be directed towards enabling va lue-chain and market linkages development to spur adoption, 
sustainability, and scale of these alternative, resilient livelihoods. The proposed project will build the capacities of 
beneficiaries to implement climate risk reduction strategies (including thr ough improved last -mile dissemination of 
EWs) and continually adapt and safeguard their livelihoods and assets as climate risks evolve. The project will, 
thereby, capacitate women to diversify to resilient livelihoods and implement adaptive livelihood stra tegies in face 
of worsening  salinity.  These  investments  are enabled  by the time and cost savings  and health  co-benefits  resulting 
from drinking water security promoted by the  project.  
 
58. Secondly,  the project  will address  the barriers  of limited  understanding  and, technical  know -how and the constraints 
on vulnerable communities to safeguard against the deterioration of their drinking water resources due to climate 
change -induced salinity. Particularly, the project supports women and girls who are burdened with providing water 
for their families and additionally suffer from drinking water insecurity. GCF resources will be used to invest in (i) 
formulating and facilitating establishment of women -based, Water User Groups (WUGs) to support participator y, 
gender responsive planning for distribution of and access to safe, year -round water supply; (ii) implementing 
gender -responsive, reliable and climate -resilient drinking water solutions including rainwater harvesting systems 
(at household,  community,  and institutional  scales)  and pond  water  systems;  and (ii) strengthen  community -centric 
capacities  to plan for, operate,  and manage  the provision  of drinking  water  as climate  risks  evolve.  Community  and 
GoB resources are leveraged to ensure sustained O&M of t he resilient water supply systems, including a 
commitment to co -manage the systems beyond the project lifetime. The Project promotes synergistic benefits 
between the livelihood and water user groups as the same communities will be targeted for the interven tions to 
jointly address climate change -induced salinity risks to the community freshwater resources . Access to reliable, 
year-round, safe drinking water enables the communities, especially women (including those supported through 
livelihood interventions)  and girls in targeted households, to invest the resulting time and cost savings and health 
co-benefits in income generating and/or educational opportunities further reducing their vulnerabilities to climate 
change.  
 
59. Finally, GCF resources will be invested  in building technical and coordination capacities of MoWCA and DPHE; 
facilitating knowledge generation and exchange; and establishing learning frameworks to sustain, replicate, and 
scale resilient livelihood and drinking water solutions for coastal commun ities. The project will: (i) strengthen 
institutional capacities for integrating climate risks in coastal livelihoods support efforts – the MoWCA will benefit 
from technical capacity to support coastal communities in adaptive livelihood planning and implem entation along 
with coordination capacities to integrate climate change and gender into cross -sectoral socio -economic activities. 
This will directly support the continued planning and effective implementation of the livelihood interventions in the 
targeted  communities.  It will also enable  upward  linkages  to ensure  that MoWCA,  in coordination  with key ministries, 
is able to support replication and scale of climate -resilient livelihoods across the climate change affected 
communities  along  the Southwestern  coast;  (ii) enhance  institutional  capacities  for technical  innovation,  design  and 
implementation  of climate -resilient  drinking  water  solutions  – the project  will support  DPHE  in building  their technical 
capacity for innovation, design, and implementation of climate -resilient drinking water solutions for the 
Southwestern coast of Bangladesh. The enhanced technical capacities will ensure that DPHE is able to directly 
support the targeted communities and local government staff with the implementation and sust ained O&M of the 
project  investments  in the light of evolving  climate  risks.  Improved  institutional  capacities  to assess  and incorporate 
climate risks will also enable DPHE to replicate and scale project interventions  across the southwest coast; and  
(iii) improve knowledge management and learning for gender -based, climate -resilient livelihood and water security  
– the project will promote knowledge codification and dissemination and evidence -based learning through 
generation of knowledge related to climate r isks and gender -responsive management of livelihood and drinking 
water  solutions  and impact  evaluation  designed  to enable  systemic  learning,  replication  and scale  of project  impact. 
The project will also foster adaptive capacities of youth (boys and girls)  through targeted behavioural change and 
awareness raising  campaigns.


---
*Page 27*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 112  
 
 
60. Building on best practices and coordination with key initiatives:  The proposed project builds on various best 
practices and lessons learned from past and on -going efforts related to coastal development and resilience in 
Bangladesh, with a particular focus on livelihoods, drinking water, climate resilience, and disaster management. 
These include best practices from  efforts such as: ActionAid and partner NGO supported projects on women -led 
emergency response, livelihoods, and water, CIDA funded RVCC project (CARE implemented), USAID Food For 
Peace  (FFP)  projects,  Oxfam58 project  in southwest  coast,  DFID  funded  Chars  Livelihood  Project  (CLP),  EU-funded 
LoCAL project59, the Government of Netherlands supported Blue Gold program, GIZ supported REEEP project, 
Danish government funded Climate Change Adaptation Pilot Project, and UNICEF -funded rural water supply 
projects.  Project  also builds  on experiences  of many  CSOs/NGOs  such  as ActionAid,  An Organization  for Socio  
Economic Development (AOSED), Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development (APWLD), Bangladesh 
Centre  for Advanced  studies  (BCAS),  BRCS,  CARE,  Centre  for Participatory  Research  and Development  (CPRD), 
Initiative for Right View (IRV), Jagrata Juba Shangha (JJS), RainForum, and Rupantar. These efforts and the best 
practices  and lessons  the project  benefits  from are detailed  in Chapters  3 and 5 of the Feasibil ity Study  (Annex  IIa). 
 
61. In addition to building on these past and on -going efforts, the project has been designed in coordination with and 
to complement the following ongoing and planned  initiatives:  
• The Cyclone Preparedness Programme (CPP) , jointly managed by Ministry of Disaster Management and 
Relief  (MoDMR)  and the Bangladesh  Red Crescent  Society  (BDRCS)  and various  NGOs,  has been  engaged  in 
large -scale public awareness and capacity development activities for pre -disaster preparedness at the 
household  and community  levels.  The CPP disseminates  cyclone  early  warning  messages  through  its extensive 
radio network (130 stations) to districts along the coastal belt. The official mandate of the BDRCS as stated in 
the Standing Orders on Disaster (SOD)  is to complement the government’s efforts in case of emergency 
response,  emphasizing  the development  of disaster  preparedness  related  plans  and programs.  The Bangladesh 
Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) 2009 also emphasize the role of BDRCS  to enhance the 
cyclone  preparedness  programme.  The CPP covers  37 Upazilas  of 13 districts  in the coastal  areas.  The success 
of the CPP is largely  attributed  to the robustness  of the Early  Warning  System  (EWS),  the issuance  of warnings 
through a unified signalling system, and the dissemination of information through approximately 62,000 
volunteer groups. Volunteers have been trained to play a crucial role in the dissemination of cyclone warnings, 
evacuation, rescue, first aid emergency relief and in the u sage of radio communication equipment. The CPP 
relies  on technical  skills  and volunteers’  commitment  to ensure  that potential  victims  of an approaching  cyclone 
are given sufficient warning, enabling them to move to safe sites. CPP receives the meteorologic al data and 
cyclone early warnings from the Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD), which issues regular bulletins 
that are transmitted to the six zonal offices and the 32 upazila (sub -district) offices over high frequency (HF) 
radio. The upazila offic e in turn, passes it to unions (village  level)  through  very  high  frequency (VHF) 
radios. The unit team spreads out in villages and issues cyclone warnings. Volunteers deliver the messages to 
most at risk villages and assist especially the weakest memb ers of communities to seek refuge in cyclone 
shelters. Cyclone Preparedness Volunteers also get involved in Rescue, First Aid activities and the distribution 
of relief items. Outside the 4 months cyclone season they run public awareness activities such as staging 
educational dramas and simulation exercises. The proposed project will coordinate with the CPP to equip and 
train women  and girl volunteers  from targeted  households  to support  gender -responsive  dissemination  and use 
of EWSs for safer lives and  livelihoods.  
• O’Harijan drinking water project (implemented by LEDARS) has initiated two projects to enhance adaptive 
livelihood capacity and income of target beneficiaries. To reduce climate induced migration, the project is 
introducing  integrated  water  resource  management  models  through  excavated  mini ponds  and canals  in paddy 
land, establishing deep tube -wells, and supporting households to preserve the daily use of waste water for dry 
season cropping. The project also increases awareness of the beneficiar ies on how to maximise use of their 
conserved rainwater, what varieties are growing in less water, which varieties can grow in brackish  water,  
introduce tools and techniques for adaptive agriculture. USAIDs Nobo Jatra project works in 40 Unions 
including i n Kaliganj in Satkhira District and Dacope in Khulna District37. The project is designed to reduce food  
 
58 Oxfam (2012) ”bangladesh_NEW.pdf” Retrieved from: http://www .oxfam.org.uk/what -we-do/countries -we-work -in/bangladesh  
59 CCCA+, EU. Retrieved from: http://www.gcca.eu/multi -country%20programmes/local -climate -adaptive -living -facility -local.Access  
date: July 2017


---
*Page 28*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 112  
 
 
insecurity and vulnerability for 856,116 households in 4 Unions and incl udes activities related to Installation of 
water systems and to promote livelihoods of the poor. It will establish Climate Smart Agriculture plots and 
engage with local producer groups. It will activate or reactivate Water, Hygiene, and Sanitation (WASH) 
Committees and community support groups and engage in behavioural change communication activities. The 
project will install 1 -2 water options and 23 -25 sanitation options per village. Water interventions mainly focus 
at the community -level whilst sanitation  more at the household level. The proposed project is coordinating with 
both these initiatives on targeting and coverage to address supply gaps (see Section C.3 on ‘Targeting’). The 
project  also aims  to coordinate  with these  efforts  during  implementation  on institutional  capacity  building  efforts 
to support systematic, climate -risk informed planning and implementation of these  solutions.  
• GoB  started  implementation  of the Local  Government  Initiative  on Climate  Change  (LoGIC)  with support 
from EU -SIDA -UNCDF -UNDP. The project will be implemented in seven districts of which 5 districts (Khulna, 
Bagerhat,  Patuakhali,  Bagruna  and Bhola)  are in the coastal  area and it will support  climate  and disaster  proofing 
rural infrastructure  and household  based  adaptation  and Disaster  Risk Reduction  (DRR)  measures.  The project 
will invest around USD1.5 million in the Khulna District to climate -proof small -scale rural infrastructure and 
households. The project will build on the experience of LoGIC in strengthening vulnerable communities’ 
capacities, local government insti tutions and civil society organizations for planning. Therefore, the actions at 
various levels will bring about climate change adaptation by scaling up through local government institutions 
incorporating high quality accountability and participation of the  most vulnerable  people.  
• GIZ’s planned “Solar Powered Drinking Water Supply in Selected Coastal Areas of Bangladesh” is 
conceptualized as a GCF project to support GoB in addressing the high demand and insufficient supply of 
drinking water. The project woul d include technologies such as PSF, RO, and Managed Aquifer Recharge 
(MAR) and is expected to meet the water demand of approximately 0.16 million households. Discussions with 
GCF  have  led to identifying  potential  complementarities  (in technologies  and target areas)  that will also be taken 
into account as both projects advance.  
• The National Resilience Programme (NRP) is a joint programme implemented by the Ministry of Disaster 
Management and Relief (MoDMR), Ministry of Women and Children Affairs (MoWCA), Local Government 
Engineering Department (LGED) and the Programming Division of the Planning Commission. Considering 
growing  government  annual  development  budgets,  its extensive  portfolio  of social  safety  nets and the likelihood 
of declining international a id, the NRP does not just aim to implement local risk reduction activities at scale but 
will provide strategic support to enhance government capacity to do so through its own structures and 
programmes. Among its key focus areas is enhancing women’s leaders hip in disaster management and 
developing capacity for gender -responsive disaster risk reduction. This will include capacity development of 
Disaster Management Committee Members and women volunteers in particularly vulnerable areas to act as 
local change  agents  for gender  equality  and responsiveness  in disaster  response,  early  warning,  preparedness 
and recovery initiatives. The NRP will also include activities building up the resilience skills and providing 
livelihood  support  of women  in climate  hotspots,  and work  with MoWCA  to use the learning  from these  activities 
to build MoWCA capacity for adaptive social safety programming and skills development programmes. The 
proposed  GCF  project  will coordinate  with NRP  on EWs  and policy  and coordination  capacity  building  activities 
for MoWCA.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
 
Rationale and methodology for targeting of the project areas and populations  
62. The project targets areas most vulnerable to climate change induced salinity impacts and the beneficiaries, 
especially  women  and adolescent  girls that are solely  responsible  for household  income  who are disproportionately 
affected  by the consequent  loss of productivity,  livelihoods  and drinking  water  insecurity.  The targeting  is anchored 
in identifying  Districts  and Union  Parishads  (aka Unions)  most  exposed  to observed  and projected  salinity  impacts.  
 
Identification of target Districts, Union Parishads (Unions), and Wards  
 
63. A total of six districts  (namely  Satkhira,  Khulna,  Bagerhat,  Pirojpur,  Barguna  and Patuakha li) across  the Southwest 
Coast  were  initially  identified  as priority  areas  by the GoB due to their high exposure  to climate  induced  salinity  and 
disasters.  The districts  of Satkhira,  Khulna,  and Bagerhat  face higher  observed  surface  water  salinities,  highlighting 
that districts  to the west are currently  the most  vulnerable  to salinity  risks (Figure  3(a)).  However,  Figure  3(b) shows


---
*Page 29*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 112  
 
 
that future increases in salinity intrusion and cyclone -induced inundation will also occur in districts to the east; 
Patuakhali, Barguna, and Pirojpur, with disruptive impacts on livelihoods and drinking water.  
 
 
Figure  3: (a) Current  poverty,  inundation  risk and surface  salinity;  (b) future  (2050)  modelled  salinity  intrusion  and cyclone 
induced inundation  risk 
 
64. In view of site-specific  assessments  and data required  to target  and plan for climate -resilient  livelihoods  and drinking 
water solutions, GoB aims to adopt a phased approach to supporting ada ptation investments for the coastal 
resilience  of the six high-priority  vulnerable  districts.  Therefore,  for Phase  I (for which  this proposal  seeks  funding), 
Khulna and Satkhira have been prioritized, given their salinity exposures are the highest among the priority 
districts,  with the goal to expand  and scale  the solutions  to the remaining  four districts  (Bagerhat,  Pirojpur,  Barguna, 
and Patuakhali) in a subsequent planned request for GCF  funding.  
 
65. In Khulna  and Satkhira  a total of 39 Unions  (18 in Satkhira  and 21 in Khulna)  were  selected.  These  Unions  were 
chosen based on the level of exposure to salinity, including projected salinization, and the percentage of extreme 
and ultra -poor populations most vulnerable to negative climate change impacts. Fu rther prioritisation of the wards 
within the 39 Unions was undertaken based on the following  criteria:  
• Current  and projected  salinity  levels : Maps  of soil salinity  were  used  to detect  those  wards  most  affected  by and 
vulnerable  to climate -induced  salinization  processes.  Additionally,  land-use change  data (1995,  2005,  and 2015) 
were considered to identify wards where major shifts from agricultural towards aquaculture livelihoods took 
place, as a potential indicator of  salinization.  
• High levels of poverty : Maps were produced that detected particularly poor people based on a poverty index 
constituted by the indicators of: (i) income poverty; (ii) percentage of day labourers; and (iii) a satellite imagery 
analysis of housing structures (see Feasibilit y Study, Annex IIa for more details on poverty  indexing).  
• High exposure of beneficiaries to salinity intrusion due to low elevation : Wards with a low elevation were 
considered as being particularly vulnerable to projected salinity intrusion through SLR and  storm  surges.  
 
66. Through  this process  a total number  of 101 out of the 350 wards  in the targeted  39 Unions  of Khulna  and 
Satkhira districts were identified as potential project  areas.  
Targeted beneficiaries and criteria for final selection of beneficiary HHs during implementation  
 
67. Target beneficiaries were identified based on current livelihood practices, water supply availability, poverty levels, 
location  of housing  and coordination  (based  on coverage  gaps)  with on-going  or future  efforts  by other  government 
or donor projects taken into account i.e. avoiding those already covered by existing projects. The selection of the 
direct beneficiaries of the livelihood interventions was based on a Participatory Rapid Appraisal (PRA) process 
during which hous eholds, women and indigenous people engaged in non - and/or maladaptive livelihoods, that 
require  support  to shift towards  climate -resilient  livelihoods,  were  identified.  Targeted  beneficiaries  for water,  within  
the climate change impacted wards, were identified based on assessing the demand and supply gap (for year - 
round access to safe water, accounting for baseline coverage), water source mapping and availability, and


---
*Page 30*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 112  
 
 
consideratio n of other water supply investments in the targeted areas (especially the USAID funded, World Vision 
supported ‘Nobo Jatra’ and the ‘O’Harizan’ programmes). Detailed methodology for the identification and 
estimation of target beneficiaries is presented in Section E.1.2.  
 
Beneficiary Selection criteria  
 
68. During the start -up phase of implementation, the final selection of beneficiaries will be based on the intersectional 
vulnerability of the households including a prioritisation of female -headed houses, prioritization of those households 
where an adolescent girl is solely responsible for household income, households of indigenous people, and 
households with people with disabilities. In addition, the selection will proportionally reflect the percentage of ethnic 
and religious minority households, to ensure that those with additional barriers in access to resources are not 
further marginalised. Special care will be taken to incorporate the perspective to adolescent girls, but to only target 
those  adolescent  girls that have  been  forced  into early  marriage  and are solely  responsible  for earning.  Attention  will 
also be given  to access  distance  for households,  in order  to reduce  women  and girls time burden  of unpaid  work.  As 
such,  participatory  livelihood  planning;  identification  of households  to benefit  from water  provision,  and siting  of water 
interventions at the institutional and community levels will incorporate the perspectives of beneficiaries and take into 
account  accessibility  (based  on recipient  needs).  For accessibility  to water  supply,  selection  will ensure  that the water 
access points are within a 1km distance of beneficiary  households.  
 
69. The final selection will prioritize the following  beneficiaries:  
• Gender:  Female;  
• Age: Women between 18 -49 ye ars old, responsible for water collection and/or able to adopt a climate resilient 
livelihood strategy; Adolescent girls that are married early and are solely responsible for household income 
generation;  
• Income: Households with incomes less than USD1.25 pe r person per day, having few or no assets, and 
beneficiaries who are compelled to accept employment at low wage  rates;  
• Household Status:  
o Women -headed households (including those widowed, divorced, or  separated/abandoned);  
o Women  and girl beneficiaries  from households,  where  there  are no able male  members  to earn livelihood;  
o Women  from those  households  where  there  are a greater  number  of dependent  members  on the women 
(household members chronically ill, physically, mentally and visually impaired or  disabled);  
o Indigenous (“Adivasi”)  households.  
• Land: The household possess less than 30 decimals (1,214 m2) in previously usable agricultural land, and 
possess less than 50 decimals (2,023 m2) total land;  and 
• Other requirements to assess  eligibility:  
o Hindu minority households will be represented in proportion to their overall population in the  wards  
o The women  beneficiary  cannot  have  been  a recipient  of a GoB’s  or any NGO’s  schemes  of similar  nature 
and/or quantity of support within the last two years.  
 
 
Project Description  
 
70. The project will combine GoB and GCF resources to achieve the project objective through three inter -related 
Outputs:  
• Output 1. Climate -resilient livelihoods, focusing on women, for enhanced adaptive capacities of coastal agricultural 
communiti es (responsible party for execution of the activities is DWA, department of  MoWCA)  
• Output 2. Gender -responsive access to year -round, safe and reliable climate -resilient drinking water solutions 
(responsible party for execution of the actvities is  DPHE)  
• Output 3. Strengthened institutional capacities, knowledge and learning for climate -risk informed management of 
livelihoods and drinking water security (responsible parties for execution of the activities are DWA and  DPHE)  
 
Output 1. Climate -resilient live lihoods, focusing on women, for enhanced adaptive capacities of coastal agricultural 
communities


---
*Page 31*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 112  
 
 
71. This Output  focuses  on enabling  the targeted  vulnerable,  female  smallholder  farmers,  fishers,  and agro-labourers  to 
adopt  diversified,  climate -resilient  livelihoods,  in the light of projected  salinity  risks and climate  change  impacts.  GCF 
resources will be used to provide awareness, technical, and financial support in the form of skills development, 
training, and investments into assets to promote the switch to (or phasing in of) resilient livelihoods. Recognizing 
that resilience  is enabled  through  peer-to-peer engagement,  interventions  will focus  on enterprise -based  approaches 
through gr oup-based and community -scale investments supporting targeted households. In order to enable 
adoption,  sustainability,  and scalability  of the alternative,  climate -resilient  livelihoods,  the project  leverages  GoB co- 
financing to strengthen value chains and  market linkages with focus on building women’s capacities to engage in 
enterprise -based  livelihood  models.  The value -chain  and market  analysis  conducted  for the targeted  livelihoods  (see 
the Livelihood  Assessment  Report,  Annex  IIb) informed  the identifica tion of value -addition  activities  as well as market 
linkages relevant for the scale and sustainability of the resilient livelihoods, while also taking into account gender - 
transformation potential and environmental sustainability. This Output will also pro mote public private platforms, 
called public private initiatives, as part of the exit strategy for the climate -resilient livelihood interventions. Finally, 
this Output  focuses  on strengthening  the capacities  of women  and the communities  for sustained  adaptive  livelihood 
strategies and planning, as well as climate and disaster risk management, to safeguard and adapt their livelihoods 
in the face of a changing climate. Institutional capacities will be strengthened across LGIs/MoWCA and relevant 
technical  institutes to provide climate -risk informed, technical, and operational support for effective implementation, 
monitoring, and management of the resilient livelihood interventions. This Output targets the same communities as 
Output 2 (Drinking Water), with  priority given to provide access to year -round, safe water to livelihood support 
beneficiaries. The women groups formed under the two Outputs will be linked through the formulation and planning 
efforts so the investments yield reinforcing benefits across Output 1 and 2. Adoption of climate -resilient livelihoods 
result in improved incomes and assets enabling sustained management of the drinking water provision and assets 
established  under  Output  2. Overall,  this Output  results  in strengthened  capacities  of women  to diversify  to climate - 
resilient  livelihoods  and implement  climate -risk reduction  strategies  in face of worsening  salinity  and extreme  events.  
 
Activity 1.1 Enterprise - and community -based implementation of climate -resilient livelihoods for women  
 
72. Detailed Union -specific assessments (see Chapter 7, Livelihoods Assessment Report Annex IIb) were undertaken 
to map the potential portfolio of climate -resilient livelihood options to be promoted by the project. The options were 
screened  for their resilienc y to climate  change,  in particular  to observed  and projected  salinity  and cyclone  impacts. 
(See option analysis in Chapter 6 of the Feasibility Study, Annex IIa). Subsequently, an analysis for gender - 
responsiveness,  environmental  impacts,  cultural  acceptability,  and profitability/market  potential  was undertaken  and 
combined with Union -specific data yielded a specific portfolio of livelihood options for each of the 39 unions. The 
project  will promote  climate -resilient  livelihoods  including:  (i) crab farming;  (ii) crab nursery;  (iii) aqua -geoponics;  (iv) 
hydroponics; (v) plant nursery; (vi) sesame cultivation; (vii) crab and fish feed processing; and (viii) homestead 
vegetable gardening. Based on the union profiles’ particular contexts (including chara cteristics such as poverty, 
elevation,  salinity  levels,  existing  skills,  capacity,  and market  potential),  a total formation  of 198 fisheries -based  and 
819 agriculture -based  livelihoods  specific  women  groups  were  proposed.  While  the distribution  of livelihoods,  based 
on Union level profiles, has been undertaken as part of project design, and a budget estimated accordingly, this 
activity  will support  participatory  beneficiary  mapping  and livelihood  planning  during  the first year of the project.  This 
is critical to ensure that beneficiary preferences, socio -economic profiles, and equity considerations are taken into 
account in supporting adoption of climate -resilient livelihoods. A contingency of 10% has been built into the budget 
to allow  for flexibility  and participatory  distribution  of livelihoods  supported  across  the targeted  households.  Chapter 
6 of Livelihoods Assessment Report Annex IIb provides a detailed options analysis and the rationale underpinning 
the proposed shift towards climate -resilient  livelihoods.  
 
73. GCF  resources  will be used  to fund the adaptation  costs  associated  with the switch  from non-adaptive  livelihoods  to 
adaptive livelihoods. This activity will support the implementation of these resilient livelihoods through organized  
groups of women, Women Livelihood Groups (WLGs), facilitating peer -to-peer learning for adoption, knowledge 
transfer, skills development, financial management, and capacity building for long -term viability of the resilient 
livelihoods. This community -base d approach to livelihood support through clustering of HHs into groups, and 
supporting  interventions  at individual  as well as the group  levels,  ensures  cost-effectiveness  and enables  economies  
of scale to build bargaining power to engage across value -chains and markets. Women would be organized into 
about 1,017 WLGs who will receive assets to implement a portfolio of resilient livelihoods. The project will,


---
*Page 32*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 112  
 
 
furthermore, secure  land lease for ponds and lots for entire project lifetime to enable the WLGs to start their 
operations and cover the lease for the duration of the project. This support will ensure the poorer households (with 
limited land) will benefit from the project th rough community - and group -based management of the inputs and 
production. During the first year of implementation, village and community -specific mapping and participatory 
livelihood planning will be undertaken, building on the Union -wise profiles identifi ed during project design. This 
Activity will be closely coordinated with Activity 2.1 under Output 2 to promote capacities across the WLGs and 
Water User Groups (WUGs) for synergistic planning and implementation to jointly address the climate change 
impact s to the community’s freshwater resources.  
 
74. GCF  resources  will support  initial  investments  into inputs  and assets  (with  GoB co-financing  leveraged  for inputs  for 
additional production cycle(s)); however, a phased approach will be supported to build the financial capacity of the 
WLGs to procure their own inputs through the subsequent production cycles. GCF and GoB resources will be 
blended to support technical training and community sensitization campaigns for skills transfer; promotion of best 
practices and norms; and awareness raising including on fair working conditions, land tenure arrangements and 
negotiation for the women. Sustainable management of inputs and production will be promoted including 
management of wild stocks in carb farming and crab fry , use of hatchery stock and alternatives to mangrove fuel 
wood,  and effluent  management.  The technical  training  will be undertaken  in coordination  with the government  entity 
called  Brackish  Water  Centre  of Bangladesh  Fisheries  Research  Institute  (BFRI)  for support  on resilient,  aquaculture 
based  livelihoods.  BFRI  would  be providing  in-kind support  through  their staff time to support  effective  backstopping 
and implementation support for the aquaculture  livelihoods.  
 
75. GoB co -financing is leveraged to support training and sensitization of WLGs in O&M, financial planning, and 
marketing with links facilitated across value -chain actors to engender sustained uptake and viability of the resilient 
livelihoods, reducing dependence on project support. In each of the Un ions, these WLGs would be supported by 
‘Women Standing Committees’ (WSCs), which are established structures that operate at the Union level and 
comprise of local extension support (LGI) staff. The WSCs will support them in addressing institutional barriers  and 
enhancing vertical coordination linkages with Upazilas and  Districts.  
 
The key inputs for this activity include:  
1.1.1  Participatory mapping for the portfolio of climate -resilient livelihood  options;  
1.1.2  Development  of livelihood  profiles  based  on the community  livelihood  risk and adaptation  assessment  and 
selection of beneficiaries (Utilize ActionAid resilience  index);  
1.1.3.  Formation and reactivation of 1,017 Women Livelihood Groups (WLGs) based on the livelihood profiles 
(coordinating with Water User Groups – WUGs – under Output  2); 
1.1.4.  Procurement of inputs, assets, and tools for community -based management (through WLGs) of climate - 
resilient livelihoods;  
1.1.5  Training of Trainers (ToT) based approach and community sensitization/awareness for WLGs (involving 
WSCs/LGIs/MoWCA  staff in 39 Unions) on skills development on climate resilient technologies, best practices 
and norms, sustainable management practices, and O&M of resilient livelihoods (in coordination with BFRI for 
aquaculture  interventions);  
1.1.6  ToT approach for WLGs to s upport business skills development resulting in marketing and financing plans 
for the resilient  livelihoods.  
 
 
Activity 1.2 Strengthened climate -resilient value -chains and market linkages for alternative, resilient livelihoods  
 
76. This Activity focuses on lev eraging economies of scale and ensuring that the switch to the alternative, resilient 
livelihoods (supported by Activity 1.1) is viable in the long -term and has a sustained impact beyond the project 
lifetime.  Given  that the diversification  to resilient  livelihoods  is necessitated  in the light of climate  risks,  investments 
in value -chains and market linkages for these livelihoods are critical for transformative impact that goes beyond 
asset creation for the resilient  livelihoods.  
 
77. GoB co -financing (with incremental support from GCF resources on incorporating climate risks) will invest in 
climate -resilient  value -chain  and market  development  activities  for those  climate -resilient  livelihoods  that can 
leverage economies of scale, promote linkages across value -chains from production through market access, and 
enhance private sector engagement through establishment of public -private platforms. These linkages will enable


---
*Page 33*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 112  
 
 
knowledge  sharing  for improved  technologies,  practices,  and management  for resilient  production  and scale  of the 
resilient livelihoods. Combined with the capacity building across value -chain actors (Activity 1.3) on climate risk 
reduction  strategies,  these  linkages  engender  adaptive  capacities  across  communities  and support  the exit strategy 
for the  project.  
 
78. In particular, GoB resources are leveraged to fully finance the upgrading of an existing crab hatchery to ensure a 
sustainable up -scaling of the crab -farming and carb -nursery related resilient livelihoods introduced by the project. 
The crab hatchery to be supported is currently operated by the Bangladesh Fisheries Research Institute (BFRI) – 
a government entity with experience in operating hatcheries for the aq ua-cultural sector. Based on consultations 
with BFRI, the crab hatchery will be upgraded to ensure biosecurity and environmental risk management of the 
facilities,  as well as expanded  to ensure  the sustainability  of this climate -resilient  livelihood  pathway  over time.  This 
expansion is in line with the production model of the hatchery. MoWCA will enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with BFRI to affirm their commitments to a secured, prioritized (on a ‘first -customer’ basis) 
supply of crable ts to the project’s women beneficiaries throughout the entire project’s lifetime. (See Stakeholder 
Consultations and Engagement Plan, Annex XIIIc and XIIId as well as the co -financing letter, Annex IVa). In 
addition to the upgrades, codes of practice to re duce adverse environmental stresses of the aquaculture value - 
chains will be developed under this project in coordination with key government organisations such as BFRI, 
Department of Fisheries, and Department of Agriculture Extension  (DAE).  
 
79. This activity  will also support strengthening of market linkages through the formulation of public private platforms, 
termed ‘Public Private Initiative’ (PPI), which is based on a best practice emerging in Bangladesh. GoB funds are 
leveraged to establish PPIs at the Up azila level to support adoption and scale of the resilient livelihoods. PPIs 
enable the women beneficiaries to interact with relevant value chain actors and contribute to market development 
and strengthening of market linkages for the livelihoods promoted by the project. There will be 20 to 25 
representatives  per PPI (8 WLG  representatives,  6 value  chain  actors,  6 stakeholders  comprised  of DAE,  fisheries 
department, MoWCA, Bank and financial institutions, and relevant local Union level staff and facilitatin g NGOs). 
The platform will be hosted by MoWCA to facilitate public sector support to the PPIs whereas the decision making 
and governance of the platforms is retained by the private sector actors and WLGs. PPIs also serve to provide 
vertical  coordination  across wards,  unions,  and Upazilas,  and can act as a conduit  for promotion  of climate -resilient 
and sustainable technologies, standards and best practices. They will also serve to empower women through 
decision -making and bargaining power to safeguard their livelihoods in the light of evolving climate  risks.  
 
80. Finally, this activity will also enable access to finance linkages between the WLGs and value -chain actors and the 
financial intermediaries. For the diversification to resilient livelihoods to be sustain ed, GoB co -financing is targeted 
to build  on the collateral  and financial  capacities  supported  through  investments  in resilient  livelihoods  and connect 
the beneficiaries with financial intermediaries such as Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs). Specifically,  this Activity 
will support business and financial planning for beneficiaries, awareness, and training for financial intermediaries 
on climate risks and resilient livelihoods, and networking through workshops and forums to connect lenders and 
borrowers. Co nsultations (see Stakeholder Consultations, Annex XIIIc) during project design have identified 
potential Financial Intermediaries (FIs) and their need and priorities and have yielded expressed interest in 
participation  during  project  implementation  and in post-project  engagement  to invest  in replication  and scale  of the 
resilient livelihoods and value -chains. For instance, PKSF and local FIs60 have been consulted on their potential 
role in financing  the diverse,  climate -resilient  livelihoods  supported  under  this project.  Two key risks were  identified 
related to providing credit financing to the targeted, extreme poor women, for climate -resilient livelihoods: the 
uncertainty of the diversified livelihoods (production and income generation capacity) and the la ck of collateral to 
cover repayment risks. Therefore, given the project support for upfront investments, skills transfer, technical 
training,  creation  of collateral,  and capacity  building  on financing,  marketing  and business  plans,  the MFIs  indicated 
that there is strong potential for the WLGs to be initially enrolled with the MFIs under a savings scheme; and 
thereafter, graduating to the ‘micro -enterprise financing’  schemes.  
 
Key inputs under this Activity include:  
1.2.1. Participatory, climate -risk inform ed, value -chain development planning among WLGs, linking with value - 
chain actors;  
 
60 Shamaj Unnayan Shangstha (SUS), Nawabeki Ganomukhi Foundation, (NGF), UNNAYAN, Rural Reconstruction Foundation 
(RRF), NABOLOK, PRODIPAN, Jagrata Juba Shangha (JJS), etc.


---
*Page 34*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 112  
 
 
1.2.2.  Climate -risk informed, value addition investments for resilient livelihoods (upgrading of 2 existing crab 
hatcheries);  
1.2.3.  ToT based technical training, incorporating climate risks, for  operation and management of value -addition 
technologies and facilities  (hatcheries);  
1.2.4 Development of a Codes of Practice for sustainable production and management of small aquaculture as 
climate change risks evolve;  
1.2.5.  Establishment and facilitation (through workshops and networking events at union level to form PPIs) of 
the PPIs at Upazila level to enable replication and scale of resilient  livelihoods;  
1.2.6.  Training of Upazila and District level staff (MoWCA, Department of Agriculture, Department of Fisheries, 
LGIs) on supporting PPIs to upscale resilient  livelihoods;  
1.2.7.  Capacity building workshops and networking events for WLGs, value -chain actors, and FIs to promote 
access to finance linkages for sustained climate -resilient l ivelihood and value -chain  investments.  
 
Activity  1.3 Community -based  monitoring  and last-mile dissemination  of EWs  for climate -risk informed,  adaptive 
management of resilient  livelihoods  
 
 
81. This Activity focuses on building capacities for women, value -chain  actors, and institutional support staff 
(WSCs/LGIs/MoWCA) in adaptive planning and management of the new livelihoods in the light of evolving climate 
risks including slow - and sudden -onset climate change events. Envisioned to support the resilient livelih ood and 
value -chain  investments  under  Activity  1.1 and 1.2, this Activity  invests  in awareness  raising  and training,  especially 
among  women,  to plan for, implement,  and manage  livelihoods  in the long-term in the face of climate  change.  This 
Activity  will also be implemented  in close  coordination  with activities  under  Output  2 to ensure  that the communities 
supported  are able to implement  climate  risk reduction  strategies  for improved  resilience  in light of evolving  climate 
risks.  
 
82. To reduce vulnerabilities  of the targeted beneficiaries to increasing climate change impacts, this Activity will 
strengthen  the awareness  and understanding  among  WLGs  and value -chain  actors  as well as local WSC/LGI  staff 
in use of climate risk reduction strategies to safeguard the ir livelihoods and assets. GCF resources will also be 
invested  in capacitating  and equipping  women  and girls to support  last-mile dissemination  of Early  Warnings  (EWs) 
and preparedness information to facilitate timely and effective response to extreme even ts. The proposed project 
will establish women early warning volunteers in the selected wards. In coordination with the ‘Cyclone 
Preparedness Program’ (CPP), GCF resources will be used to train women and girl volunteers, targeting those 
under the WLGs and a ssociated HHs, to invest in proven community -based and gender targeted messages and 
dissemination  mechanisms  that ensure  timely  delivery  and use of the information  to safeguard  lives and livelihoods.  
 
83. The project will also train the Union -level Disaster Management Committees (DMCs) to incorporate the gender - 
responsive messages and mechanisms co -developed with the women and girl volunteer groups. The training will 
facilitate the dissemination of the gender -responsive EWs and last -mile dissemination approa ches developed in 
each  of targeted  wards  to other  non-targeted  wards  in the 39 Unions.  Learning  exchange  will be promoted  between 
the project  women  and girl volunteer  groups  and the CPP volunteer  groups  established  at the Union  level to enable 
replication to other wards. MoWCA will also support advocacy with CPP, Bangladesh Red Crescent Society 
(BRCS),  and Ministry  of Disaster  Management  and Relief  (MoDMR)  and coordinate  with the NRP  to scale  up these 
women and girls volunteer groups and mechanisms for last  mile dissemination of EWs to the remaining Unions 
across the two  districts.  
 
84. This Activity will also support the development of climate -risk informed, social audit protocols and training of the 
targeted beneficiaries as well as institutional staff (LGIs/M oWCA) in social auditing approaches to ensure that 
women are empowered to monitor their livelihoods, assess the effectiveness of the results, and adapt the 
implementation  of the livelihoods  to manage  evolving  climate  change  risks.  This Activity  closely  links with Output  3 
in which  the institutional  capacities  and knowledge  are promoted  to create  an enabling  environment  for climate -risk 
informed livelihood planning. Therefore, the capacity building under this Activity will foster upward linkages among 
communities, NGOs, and Government institutions to support evidence -based, community -driven adaptation 
planning for resilient livelihoods.  
 
Key inputs under this Activity include:


---
*Page 35*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 112  
 
 
1.3.1.  Awareness  and training  through  101 workshops  for women  groups,  value -chain  actors,  and WSC/LGI  staff 
on implementation of climate risk reduction strategies;  
1.3.2.  Formation  of women  and girl volunteer  groups  and (one per ward)  and ToT based  training  on dissemination 
and delivery of actionable early warnings (in coordination with  CPP);  
1.3.3  ToT based training, learning exchange, and advocacy for DMC staff, Union level CPP volunteer groups, 
BRCS, and Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief (MoDMOR) staff to enable replication  of the volunteer 
mechanisms across other wards and  Unions  
1.3.4  Development of climate -risk informed social audit protocol and toolkits for participatory monitoring and 
evaluation of resilient livelihoods;  
1.3.5  ToT based training for WLGs and institutional staff (LGIs/DWA) on results monitoring of livelihoods in the 
light of evolving climate  risks.  
 
Output 2. Gender -responsive access to year -round, safe and reliable climate -resilient drinking water solutions  
85. This Output will invest in ensuring that capacities of v ulnerable coastal households, especially women, are 
enhanced in planning for, implementing, and managing climate -resilient drinking water solutions. GCF resources 
will be invested in building climate resilient water supply solutions, community -based approa ches for planning and 
management of these systems (backstopped by GoB), and capacities for households and communities on climate 
risk management  and adaptive  planning  to ensure  drinking  water  security.  Leveraged  GoB co-financing  will be used 
to support O&M  of the systems during the project under a three -tier O&M model described below (Activity 2.3). 
DPHE has committed to provide continued technical backstopping and post -project O&M financing (see O&M 
commitment letter, Annex IVb). By ensuring drinking water  security and water supply solutions in proximity to the 
houses  of beneficiary  women  and girls,  GCF  resources  will be gender -transformative  in reducing  the unpaid  burden 
of work which so importantly inhibits the resilience of women and girls. This Output will also create linkages to the 
activities under Output 1 particularly building the beneficiary assessment and livelihood profiles which will be used 
for putting up the appropriate community management structures and ensuring that the most climate vulnera ble 
beneficiaries are targeted to gain access to drinking water. Planning under both outputs is to be mutually 
reinforcing,  since  drinking  water  provision  will lead to reduced  unpaid  time burdens,  improved  health  and thus also 
the time required  to pursue  climate -resilient  livelihoods.  As a priority,  this Output  will target  the women  and the HHs 
supported  under  Output  1, to ensure  they have  access  to safe,  year-round  drinking  water  supply.  These  combined 
investments  will save  women  and girls’ time and resources  as well as safeguard  their health  and safety,  improving 
their opportunities  to invest  in livelihoods  (and/or  education)  thereby  increasing  their adaptive  capacities  in the face 
of a changing climate. Furthermore, the promotion of last -mile access  to EWs under Output 1 will also enhance 
preparedness  of the communities  and mitigate  damage  to drinking  water  systems  caused  by intense  cyclones  and 
storm  surges.  
Activity 2.1 Participatory, site -specific mapping, beneficiary selection, and mobilization of community -based 
management structures for climate -resilient drinking water solutions  
86. Based  on the PRA process  involving  participatory  community  consultations  at the ward  and union  levels,  combined 
with and assessment  of existing  and planned  coverage  information,  (triangulated  with LGIs  and DPHE),  a portfolio 
of climate -resilient technologies and solutions has been proposed under this project. Selection of appropriate 
technologies for the communities in the targeted districts was based on current avail ability and usage of options, 
current  and projected  availability  and quality  of water  (taking  into account  projected  climate  change  risks),  climate - 
resiliency of the sources and technologies, accessibility, ease of operation and maintenance and technical 
complexity, affordability, health and environmental impacts, gender -responsiveness, and social acceptability. The 
recommended options include Household based rainwater harvesting systems (RWH), Community -scale (small 
and medium) RWH systems, Institutional -scale (large and very large) RWH, and community freshwater pond 
systems with supporting embankments for storm surge protection and filtration treatment. Details of the options 
analysis is presented in Chapter 7, Drinking Water Assessment Report (Annex  IIc). 
 
87. The proposed drinking water supply solutions were designed and prioritised for the target households based on 
accessibility  and cost-effectiveness,  focusing  on community  level freshwater  pond  systems  with filtration  treatment 
technology  (and including  raising  embankments);  institution -scale  RWH  defined  as large  (covering  75 households)  
and very large (covering 100 households) RWH systems at existing public institutional buildings (primarily in


---
*Page 36*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 5 OF 112  
 
 
institutions such as schools, colleges, Union Councils and other government institutions); community -scale RWH 
systems defined as small (covering 25 households) and medium (covering 50 households) RWH systems at 
existing community buildings (pri marily at community buildings such as mosques, temples, cyclone centres, 
community clinics and other private owned buildings used for community purposes) and existing institutional 
buildings;  and Household  level RWH  systems  for people  with no access  to community  or institution  based  RWH  or 
pond  treatment  systems,  especially  people  living  far away  from these  systems,  women  and adolescent  girl headed 
households,  people  with disabilities  and minority  groups.  At least  20 per cent of the target  households  in each  ward 
will be covered by household based systems. The Union -wise portfolios are referenced in Chapter 6, Feasibility 
Study (Annex  IIa). 
 
88. The institutional -scale large and very large tanks have been identified and sited and detailed technical designs  
have been developed for each of the sites. In addition, the small and medium community -scale tanks have been 
mapped and potential sites have been identified accompanied by prototypical designs (see Chapter 7 in the 
Drinking Water Assessment Report , Annex IIc). Building on this mapping, final siting (for community -scale RWH 
tanks  and pond  treatment  systems),  finalization  of targeted  beneficiaries,  and grouping  (for access  and distribution) 
will be undertaken during the first year of implementation. The formulation of Water User Groups (WUGs) and 
Water  Management  Committees  (WMCs)  will enable  sustained  planning  and management  of the proposed  water 
solutions. The WUGs group will be comprised of women members from each of the targeted household and will 
be clustered based on their access to the identified drinking water solution sites. The WUGs will also include 
members of school management comm ittees where the WUG covers institution based RWH systems. The 
formulation will be done in coordination with the formation of the WLGs under Output 1 for leveraging synergies 
and mutually reinforcing planning and use of freshwater resources in a changing c limate. In each of the targeted 
wards in 39 Unions, one WMC will be formed whose main responsibility will be to look after the water supply 
technologies provided to ensure proper management of the systems. The WMCs will be formed at the ward level 
and will comprise  Local  government  representatives  (Ward  Councilor  and representative  from the Watsan  standing 
committee -WatSC), Representative from Union level DPHE staff, representatives from associated WUGs, 
owners/representatives (at least 2) from the institu tional/community buildings/facilities and technician/caretaker 
representatives for the cluster of water  solutions.  
Key inputs under this Activity include:  
2.1.1  Consultations,  in light of the selection  criteria,  to finalize  beneficiaries  HHs,  raise  awareness,  and plan 
for distribution  of access  to proposed  drinking  water  solution  systems  in light of climate  change  risks;  
2.1.2  Participatory  mapping,  vetting,  and siting  of drinking  water  supply  systems  (based  on site-specific 
assessments conducted during  design);  
2.1.3  Formulation/reactivation/facilitation of WUGs and WMCs (synergizing with WLGs in Output  1); 
2.1.4  Detailed  assessment  including  water  quality  testing  at applicable  sites to support  customized  design  of 
the water supply  systems.  
Activity 2.2 Implementation of climate -resilient drinking water solutions (at HH, community, and institutional 
scales)  
89. GCF resources, supported by GoB co -financing, will be invested in the implementation of the portfolio of climate - 
resilient  drinking  water  technologies  in each  of the 39 Unions  of the targeted  districts  of Khulna  and Satkhira.  Each 
of these supply options and their designs take into account projected climate change risks including irregular 
rainfall  patterns  and intensified  storm  surges.  The RWH  systems,  comprising  the catchment,  conveyance,  storage, 
and the delivery, have been designed to support year -round access to safe drinking water (with the tanks sized 
for the estimated worst -case scenario of a 180 -day dry period with no rainfall). Apart from construction of s torage 
tanks (for the varied scales), combined GCF resources will be invested in rehabilitating/constructing catchments, 
conveyance  systems  including  gutters,  downpipes,  and pre-storage  filtration  devices  and ‘first-flush’  mechanisms, 
and delivery system t o control flow to end use and managing distribution. The household level RWH systems will 
include a  new roof  catchment (10' X  6' size corrugated iron sheet), and a 2,000 -litre capacity  plastic  rainwater  
storage tank with a cement platform as well as th e conveyance systems etc. The institution -scale RWH and


---
*Page 37*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 112  
 
 
community -scale RWH rainwater storage tanks will be made of reinforced concrete. Detailed technical 
specifications  for the proposed  technologies  are provided  in Drinking  Water  Assessment  Report  (Annex  IIc). Based 
on the expressed  concerns  of the communities  and experiences  of local NGOs,  simple  filtration  and/or  disinfection 
methods would be used to mitigate contamination of stored rainwater, along with improved maintenance of the 
roof catchment. Awareness would also be raised for beneficiaries on end -use storage and safety measures to 
mitigate  any residual  health  risks.  The household  rainwater  tanks  will be constructed  on a raised  cement  platform 
that provides protection for the RWH system during cyclonic events. The household rainwater tanks are also 
expected to be at least partially full of water during cyclone events which will increase their cyclone resistance. 
The impleme ntation success of the household level RWH systems will be ensured through community 
mobilization, WUG formation for clusters of households with household level RWH, and ongoing institutional 
support from  DPHE.  
 
90. The water  supply  gap in the target  wards  (for year-round,  safe drinking  water)  is too large  to address  solely  through 
installing RWH systems at existing community and institution buildings. The existing surface water ponds are an 
alternative  and popular  option  of potable  water  supply  in the coas tal belt and arsenic  prone  areas.  Ponds  typically 
do not dry up during the dry season and can provide a viable additional safe water source after treatment. The 
existing Pond Sand Filters (PSFs) are a simple low -cost technology using slow sand filtration, but most existing 
PSFs  have  been  unable  to fully remove  microbiological  contamination.  In addition,  inadequate  O&M  arrangements 
and inundation of the ponds during high storm surges and damage to filters have left many PSFs in the area 
unusable. To improve climate -resiliency and prevent saltwater intrusion during intense cyclonic events, selected 
fresh water ponds (not in the vicinity of/exposed to shrimp farming or other aquaculture), will be supported by 
raised embankments. The pond selection will also foc us on existing ponds that are not saline and can provide 
year-round water availability. Furthermore, filtration treatment systems will be installed at these sites to provide 
water that meets GoB drinking water standards and World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines for drinking 
water (treatment technology options will be selected for each freshwater pond site based on water quality testing 
results, options include an improved PSF design and membrane filtration options). Filtration modules are also 
installe d in a well -protected superstructure, which are resilient to disaster  shocks.  
The key inputs under this Activity include:  
2.2.1.  Customization and detailed design for each of the sites and water supply  systems;  
2.2.2.  Site preparation and construction of 13,308 househol d RWH systems including storage tanks, roof 
catchments, and conveyance  elements;  
2.2.3  Site preparation and construction of 228 community -scale RWH systems including storage tanks, roof 
catchments, and conveyance  elements;  
2.2.4  Site preparation and construction of 19  institutional -scale RWH systems including storage tanks, roof 
catchments, and conveyance  elements;  
2.2.5  Site preparation and construction of pond embankments and installation of filtration systems at 41  ponds;  
2.2.6. Water quality testing/verification of fresh  water sources after installation and prior to commissioning.  
 
Activity 2.3 Community -based, climate -risk informed Operation & Maintenance (O&M) and management of the 
resilient drinking water solutions  
91. The drinking  water  systems  will be managed  through  a community  and tier-based  approach  comprising  of the WUGs, 
WMCs, and LGI/DPHE staff. This Activity will support capacity building for all the stakeholders in participatory, 
community -based water access, distribution, and delivery planning and implementation  to ensure gender -targeted, 
inclusive, and equitable access to year -round, safe drinking water. WUGs will be facilitated to meet, discuss, and 
plan for water supply for their households in light of climate change, including continuous monitoring of water 
availability and quality as well as peer -to-peer learning on efficient and sanitary practices for water collection and 
use. 
 
92. The provision  of and access  to water  will be anchored  in a fee-based  model  (based  on existing  practices  and DPHE’s 
mandate)  that will engender  ownership  and commitment  to securing  drinking  water  for the targeted  households.  The


---
*Page 38*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 112  
 
 
fee would be based on affordability considerations and financing available. The averag e annual operations and 
maintenance cost contribution (excluding major repairs and infrastructure replacement) per household across all 
water supply technologies is estimated at USD5 (the nominal fee, per annum). In addition to this nominal fee, 
households  with household level RWH will also be encouraged to pay an amount of US$19 per year as a set -aside 
to cover the household contribution to the major repairs/replacements for the short life assets of household roof 
catchment and conveyance elements. The sca le of this fee has been endorsed through discussions in the field 
conducted in with households, Union Parishads and institutional stakeholders. GoB resources will be leveraged to 
support  O&M  costs  beyond  the household  fee contributions  as well as post-project  as outlined  in the O&M  plan and 
supported by DPHE’s O&M commitment letter (see Annex XIIIb and Annex IVb  resp.)  
 
93. The fee will be standardized according to the water supply technology with one fee per HH for HH RWH, one fee 
per HH for Community/Institution -scale RWH and one fee per HH for treated pond water (the fee could be different 
from one ward to another but not from one RWH site to another RWH site within the same ward). The fee supports 
basic operation needs including simple clea ning and minor repairs and will be used as an O&M fund to collectively 
contribute to the staffing of a technician/caretaker maintained as part of each WMC. RWH systems entail low 
operation  and maintenance  costs;  however,  the pond -based  solutions  entail  higher technical  complexity  and a need 
for robust O&M support. The pond -based solutions will be maintained by a local caretaker and managed by a third - 
party service contract provider with a contract jointly signed by the Union Parishad and  DPHE.  
 
94. The project , therefore, will promote a three -tiered O&M system (based on community consultations as well as 
discussions with LGIs and DPHE) endorsed by DPHE (see O&M plan and O&M Commitment Letter, Annex XIIIb 
and Annex IVb respectively). The three -tiered O&M managem ent system has been endorsed through discussions 
in the field conducted  in 2017  through  the PRA process  as well as targetd  consultations  undertaken  with households, 
Union Parishads and institutional stakeholders. Please refer to Annex XIIIc for the outcomes of stakeholder 
consultations with community representatives and Unions on the proposed O&M system and willingness to pay. 
There is proven experience of two -tier community involvement for water supply points from water interventions 
implemented by NGOs (e.g. WaterAid) in Satkhira and Khulna. The WaterAid approach has been to have regular 
maintenance  supervised  by a Management  Committee  (Tier 1 equivalent  to the proposed  WUG)  with oversight  and 
strategic decisions regarding the water point provided b y the Ward Development Management Committee (Tier 2 
equivalent to the proposed WMC). Furthermore, the proposed mechanism below is aligned with DPHE’s mandate 
requiring household and community contributions towards  O&M.  
 
95. Tier 1: WUGs will need to be respons ible for daily and/or monthly monitoring of the water supply systems, in 
particular, the HH RWH, community -scale RWH systems and the daily operations of the pond treatment systems. 
The beneficiary  households  of the HH RWH  will need  to undertake  the minor  maintenance  themselves  (for example 
cleaning the household roof catchment) with support from the caretakers for the more technical tasks such as 
replacing the tap. The project will initiate and facilitate the monitoring, through capacity building and peer -to-peer 
learning  activities,  continued  monitoring  of the availability  and quality  of the systems,  simple  O&M  needs,  household - 
level sanitation and hygiene practices, and collecting the nominal fee as a set -aside for minor repairs that can be 
undertaken by  the caretaker. In case of institutional based rain water harvesting systems, the system will be co - 
managed  by school  management  committee  and community  users  group.  Therefore,  the two committees  determine 
the O&M strategy and cost sharing of each committee for operation and maintenance of the water supply  system.  
 
96. Tier 2: WMCs  (at the ward  level)  will staff a technician/caretaker  for each  ward.  The WMC  have  backstopping  support 
from the Watsan Standing Committee (WSC) at the Union Level. The caretaker will need to be responsible for an 
associated  cluster  of WUGs  including  WUGs  for nearby  household  RWH  systems.  Co-financed  by the WUG  (through 
the nominal fees collected from every beneficiary household), and the Union Parishad contributions, thi s resource 
would be available to support daily operations and minor repairs including maintenance of pond treatment systems 
(excluding any annual third party module maintenance, which is included under Tier 3) and of RWH systems 
including roof catchment cl eaning, tank cleaning and minor repairs of taps, joints, gutters, and  pipes.


---
*Page 39*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 112  
 
 
97. Tier 3: DPHE (from GoB co -financing) will phase in to backstop and cover the O&M costs related to replacement of 
community and institution system infrastructure (e.g. conveyance systems including gutters and downpipes which 
have an expected life of 5 years), and potentially full system rehabilitation in case of unanticipated cyclonic shocks. 
For the po nd-based treatment systems requiring package filtration plants, installation with warranty would be 
procured to ensure robust technical support for long -term viability of these solutions. DPHE will also be responsible 
for any third-party  contract  for the treatment  systems  (e.g. an annual  module  maintenance  cost to change  membrane 
and filter materials  for filtration  plants  with membranes).  Third -party  contracts  for membrane  filtration  package  plants 
will need to include a fixed rate for the supply of replac ement parts over the full lifecycle of the membranes. Post - 
project O&M would continue to be supported through community and DPHE financing and the commitment letter 
indicates the O&M costs to be covered by DPHE beyond the project  lifetime.  
 
98. This Activity will build the capacity of all stakeholders (including LGI and DPHE) to develop and implement O&M 
plans and sustain, continuous adaptive planning in the light of evolving climate risks. This will enable LGIs and 
DPHE to incorporate climate -risk informed, c ommunity -centric O&M approaches into their service provision in 
other non -targeted unions and districts across the southwest coast. In particular, the Activity will facilitate, through 
the WMCs,  adaptive  water  distribution  planning  and management  of drinking  water  solutions  including:  planning  of 
adaptive operation and maintenance of water options, including water quality monitoring, development of fee - 
based model and financial management system, resolution of the problems/issues raised by WUGs, staf fing and 
monitoring of caretakers' performance to maintain the community/institution based water options, identify the 
suppliers and take necessary steps for system troubleshooting, any repair or maintenance works, and periodic 
renewal of the committee its elf. DPHE capacities will also be strengthened to provide backstopping and major 
O&M support as outlined in the O&M plan (see O&M Plan, Annex XIIIb). DPHE has Upazila level engineering staff 
who oversee diploma engineers assigned to each of the Union Paris hads as support under  LGIs.  
The key inputs under this Activity include:  
2.3.1  Facilitation  of WUG  and WMC  meetings  for yearly,  adaptive  water  distribution  and management  planning 
in the face of a changing  climate;  
2.3.2  Awareness  raising  and capacity  building  (through  workshops)  for HHs,  water  user groups,  WMCs  on 
climate change and disaster risk management for water  solutions;  
2.3.3  Development of fee -based, three -tier O&M plan including identification of O&M needs, financing sources, 
and technical  support;  
2.3.4  ToT based  technical  training,  incorporating  climate  risks,  on operations,  maintenance  and use (including 
water quality monitoring, system condition assessment, end -point quality control) for HHs, water user groups, 
WMCs, technicians/caretakers, LGIs/DPHE  staff;  
2.3.5  Implementation of community -based and three -tier system for water availability and quality monitoring 
and operations  & maintenance  (including  provision  of water  quality  test reagents,  caretaker  costs,  and O&M 
support).  
 
Output 3. Strengthened institutional capacities, knowledge and learning for climate -risk informed management 
of livelihoods and drinking water security  
99. This Output will build the technical capacities of MoWCA, DPHE, and LGIs to integrate climate risks and impacts 
into design  and implement ation  support  in a manner  that is responsive  to community  needs  and priorities,  especially 
those  who are marginalized  (including  women,  girls,  people  with disabilities,  elderly,  and minority  communities).  GCF 
resources  will be used  to invest  in increasing  knowledge  and technical  skills  for the technical  support  staff,  research 
and development staff, implementation support staff (including LGI staff), gender focal points to provide enabling 
support to the interventions implemented under Outputs 1 and 2. As t he government agency with the mandate to 
support integration of gender and climate change across sectoral activities, MoWCA’s capacity for coordination 
would be improved to support other relevant ministries in incorporating gender -based approaches to adapt ation 
responses. Using a ToT approach, and coordinated by the Department of Environment (DoE), MoWCA will be 
equipped  with the skills  and knowledge  to carry  out climate  adaptive  programmes,  compile  lessons,  and raise  issues 
for policy planning. A knowledge  portal will also be hosted at MoWCA on gender responsive climate change 
adaptation, in coordination with existing initiatives including those of DOE’s climate change  cell.


---
*Page 40*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 112  
 
 
100. A key focus of this Output is also on facilitating knowledge generation and management, evidence -based learning, 
and improved coordination for gender -responsive solutions to secure water and livelihoods for the vulnerable, 
coastal populations. The strengthened technic al capacities combined with knowledge and learning will boost the 
replicability and scalability potential of output 1 and output 2. Knowledge generated through project activities 
including climate risk analyses and modelling, decision -making tools, best pr actices and lessons learned will be 
codified and institutionalized for dissemination as training modules through institutional platforms, technical training 
institutes,  and academia.  A targeted  "Learning"  plan will be developed  and implemented  that extend  learning  beyond 
the standard project monitoring elements. This activity will focus on young girls and boys, as the agents of future 
change to achieve enhanced climate change resilience through transformative adaptation. The targeted capacity 
building  will be interlinked  with evidence -based  learning  through  impact  evaluation  to assess  the adaptive  capacities 
built as the result of the project and facilitate further scale and replication of the project impact based on lessons 
derived. This Output will also support the development of a replication roadmap, in coordination with relevant 
ministries, donor community, private sector, and other GCF Accredited Entities, to support replication and scale of 
the project activities and impacts.  
 
Activity 3.1 Strengthen  MoWCA’s technical and coordination capacities for design and implementation of 
gender -responsive, climate -resilient coastal livelihoods  
 
101. GCF resources and GoB co -financing will be invested in building institutional and technical capacities of MoWCA 
and DW A staff to assess climate change risks and scenarios and undertake design and implementation of climate - 
resilient livelihoods and adaptive livelihood strategies. GCF resources would be invested in development of climate 
change risks and livelihood scenari os to inform design of resilient livelihood interventions for the coastal 
communities. In addition, a tool kit will be developed to support targeted, on -the-ground livelihood interventions in 
communities across the Southwest coast. The toolkit will include  modules on climate risks and impact scenarios 
related  to various  livelihoods,  climate -risk informed  livelihood  planning,  cost-benefit  models,  programme  design  and 
management, and M&E approaches to assess adaptive capacities and impacts of livelihood progr ams. A Training 
of Trainers  (ToT)  approach  would  build  MoWCA  and DWA’s  capacities  to develop  and implement  solutions  utilizing 
the scenarios and the tool -kit. Furthermore, MoWCA’s cross -sectoral coordination capacity will be improved to 
support  integration  of gender  and climate  change  concerns  into other  socio -economic  activities  through  development 
and dissemination of a ‘Gender Sensitive Climate Change Adaptation’ training module and training of staff in 
mainstreaming  gender  and CC across  sectoral  policie s and programs.  The climate  risks and scenarios,  toolkits,  and 
institutional  knowledge  related  to livelihood  security  will be developed  in coordination  with Activity  2 so as to promote 
synergistic  planning  and benefits  of resilient  livelihoods  and drinking  water  solutions  in the same  communities  facing 
deterioration of freshwater resources due to climate  change.  
 
Key inputs under this Activity include:  
 
3.1.1. Development of and training (ToT approach) on climate risks and livelihood scenarios for coastal 
livelihoods;  
3.1.2  Development of and training (ToT approach) on tool kit for gender -responsive, climate -resilient livelihoods 
design and implementation for the Southwest  coast;  
3.1.3  Development of ‘Gender Sensitive Climate Change Adaptation’ Training Module and ToT for gender focal 
persons across key  ministries;  
3.1.4  Training of MoWCA and DWA staff to integrate gender and climate change across policies (policy forums 
such as PEC, ECNEC, NDA Advisory Committee) and programs across  sectors.  
 
Activity 3.2 Strengthen DPHE cap acities for climate -risk informed innovation and management of drinking water 
solutions across the Southwest coast  
 
102. This Activity will invest in technical capacities for DPHE and LGIs to integrate climate change risks and projected 
impacts on the fres hwater resources and water supply infrastructure of the coastal communities into planning 
and implementation support. DPHE will be capacitated to assess climate risks and model drinking water needs 
in light of climate change. A regional database would be e stablished, co -financed, by GoB to map water supply 
sources and infrastructure to support effective coordination across various implementation efforts and  
investments. Technical capacity of the Research & Development (R&D) wing of DPHE will be strengthened  
through training and field based work (in coordination with engineering institutes and ongoing efforts such as


---
*Page 41*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 112  
 
 
UNICEF’s  support  to research  on MAR  and other  climate -resilient  technologies)  to support  technical  excellence, 
innovation, and implementation of solutions for climate -resilient water supply. This would include supporting a 
shift to climate -resilient solutions (PSF, Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR), river based solutions,  RO, etc.) for 
year-round, safe drinking water for coastal populations in light of projected slow - and sudden -onset climatic 
events.  
 
Key inputs under this Activity include:  
 
3.2.1.  Development  of and training  (ToT)  on climate  risks and scenario  modelling  for drinking  water  needs  across 
the southwest  coast;  
3.2.2.  Establishment of a regional database for mapping of water supply sources and existing/planned water 
supply  infrastructure;  
3.2.3  Technical  capacities  for Research  and Development  (R&D)  wing of DPHE  (training  and field-based  studies) 
for innovation and design of climate -resilient water solutions across the coast, in coordination with technical 
institutes.  
 
 
 
Activity 3.3 Establish knowledge management, evidence -based learning and M&E mechanisms to promote long - 
term, adaptive capacities of coastal communities  
 
103. GCF resources will be used to address the barriers related to awareness and knowledge and learning that 
constrain continuous adaptation and long -term capacities to cope with climate change, and in particular, with 
deteriorating impacts of salinity on coastal freshwater resources threatening livelihoods and drinking water 
security. This Activity will contribute to the long -term sustainability of the project impact and create pathways for 
continued le arning and evidence -based replication and scale of project impact. GCF resources will be used to 
codify  and integrate  knowledge  products,  such  as climate  risk and scenario  analyses,  design  and implementation 
tools and products for climate -resilient livelih ood and drinking water solutions, and best practices and lessons 
learned into institutional platforms, training modules for academic institutes, and a web -portal for wider 
dissemination.  
 
104. A targeted ‘Adaptive Learning’ activity will be undertaken to focus on young girls and boys in targeted coastal 
areas to build their long -term adaptive capacities. This will be achieved by integration of project intervention 
support  (under  Outputs  1 and 2) with targeted  awareness  raising,  behavioural  change,  and peer-to-peer learning 
support  related  to various  aspects  of climate  change  such  as causes  of climate  change,  potential  future  changes, 
and adaptation technologies. Learning will be augmented by providing insights from ongoing project activities, 
with a focus  on collecting  and using  data in a rigorous  manner.  This learning  will be evaluated  as part of broader 
project impact evaluation (see below). The learning will also focus on their rights and resources and provide 
access  to information  and knowledge  on social,  economic,  and health  risks  and benefits  in a changing  climate.  
 
105. GCF resources will also be used to establish longitudinal impact monitoring mechanisms for gathering valuable 
data and lessons to enable evidence -based policy, planning, and implementation of climate -resilient programs 
for secure water and livelihoods. In addition, an impact evaluation (quasi -experimental) will be designed and 
executed to quantify project impacts (subject to constraints imposed by the extent to which beneficiary selection 
can b e feasibly modified). Output 1 and 2, as well as activities under Output 3 for learning induced adaptive 
capacity of youth, will be evaluated using rigorous impact evaluation  techniques.  
 
106. This Activity will also support the development of a replication roa dmap, building on the analytical groundwork, 
knowledge, and learning established under this project, to support the GoB to replicate and scale project impact 
to other  districts  of the Southwest  Coast.  The roadmap,  developed  in coordination  with relevant  ministries,  donor 
community,  private  sector,  and multi -lateral  partners,  will identify  priority  districts  and financing  mechanisms  (such 
as enhance  micro -credit  for livelihoods,  private  sector  engagement  for water  provision)  to support  replication  and 
scale of the project activities and impacts.  
 
Key inputs under this Activity include:


---
*Page 42*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 112  
 
 
 
3.3.1. Codification of knowledge, good practices, tools, and approaches such as climate risk and scenario 
analyses, tools for climate -resilient livelihood and drinking water solutions, and best practices and lessons  
3.3.2  Integration of knowledge and tools into training and informational modules of government and technical 
institutes;  
3.3.3  Establishment of a web -portal, co -hosted by MoWCA, for dissemination of climate and gender related 
knowledge, tools, and adaptation  practices  
3.3.4  Design  and implementation  of ‘Adaptive  Learning’  for young  boys  and girls through  school - and community - 
based behavioural change  communications;  
3.3.5  Implementation  of monitoring  and evaluation  framework  including:  (i) baseline  climate  risk and vulnerability 
assessments (Incorporate ActionAid resilience index); and (iii) impact evaluation to quantify project  impacts;  
3.3.6  Development  of a Replication  Roadmap  for replication  and scale  or climate -resilient  livelihood  and drinking 
water solutions, coordinating with donors, ministries, and  multi -laterals.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
107. The Ministry of Women and Children Affairs (MoWCA) is the sponsor of the project. MoWCA is a GoB Ministry 
mandated to develop and implement policies and programmes to establish and preserve legal and social rights 
of women  and children . Given  the disproportion ate impacts  of salinity  of women’s  lives and livelihoods,  GoB has 
underscored the need to prioritize women -led, community -centric solutions that build ownership and capacities 
of women over technology -centric interventions. Therefore, given the explicit focus of the project to empower 
women as ‘change -agents’ to plan, implement, and manage resilient drinking water solutions and livelihoods in 
the face of worsening impacts on their freshwater resources, and MoWCA’s mandate to integrate gender and 
climate  change  in across  socio -economic  activities,  GoB has selected  MoWCA  as the key sponsor  of the project. 
In addition,  MoWCA’s  experience  in providing  livelihoods  support  through  DWA  and track  record  of coordinating 
with DPHE on provision of drinking water solutions will be replicated in the proposed  project.  
 
108. With an annual  budget  of roughly  USD321  million,  it implements  various  programmes  aiming  to support  the most 
marginalized and poor women and children in all districts of the country. These include the country’s oldest and 
largest social protection programme - Vulnerable Group Development (VGD) programme - with an annual 
expenditure  of about  USD190  million,  aiming  to enhance  the livelihoods  of the most  disadvantaged  women.  The 
MoWCA  delivers  six major  functions:  (i) Formulation  and implementation  of the National  Women’s  Advancement 
Policy and National Child Policy; (ii) Initiation of programmes for the welfare and development of women and 
children; (iii) Establishment and preservation of legal and socia l rights of women and children; (iv) Initiation of 
programmes for the empowerment of women including the creation of employment opportunities for women; (v) 
Formulation of law for eradication of violence against women and children; and (vi) Coordination an d monitoring 
of the activities of different ministries relating to women’s advancement through the Focal Points of Women in 
Development  (WID).  
 
109. The Department for Women’s Affairs (DWA), the operational wing of the MoWCA, is responsible for programme 
implem entation  as per GOB’s  rules  of business.  The DWA  has nation -wide operational  set-up in 469 sub-districts 
and working arrangements with local government institutions. It implements a range of vital social safety net 
support programs at scale, including the VGD programme, Working Lactating Mother Assistance fund and 
Maternity Allowances for ultra -poor pregnant mothers. The VGD programme is designed to address the 
marginalization  of vulnerable  women  and lactating  mothers;  food security  of unprivileged  women;  maternal  health 
and nutrition; and capacity development. The DWA is also implementing an innovative livelihood programme 
targeting  extreme  poor women  through  the initiative  – Investment  Component  of VGD  – supporting  7,000  extreme 
poor women  in two of the most  vulnerable  districts.  As of 2017,  the programme  covers  5.6 million  vulnerable  and 
ultra-poor women in all 64 districts of Bangladesh (Ahmed et al., 2004; GoB,  2017).  
 
110. The DWA is also implementing activities  to: 
• Provide technical, vocational and income  generating training, equipment/materials and microcredit for the 
self-employment of 7.9 million women;  
• Provide training for the empowerment and enhancing the efficiency of women entrepreneurs and create 
accommodation facilities for 1.5 million  women;


---
*Page 43*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 112  
 
 
• Create opportunities for 2,650 women and children to access modern information  technology;  
• Provide hostel facilities for 2.65m working women and day care facilities for 4.5 million children of working 
women;  
• Provide medical treatment, legal assistance and counseling to 1.89m abused women and children;  and 
• Provide life skills training to 10.9m adolescent  girls.  
 
111. In addition, MoWCA (through DWA) has implemented two climate change projects funded by Bangladesh Climate 
Change Trust Fund (BCCTF) in 2009 -10 Financial Year (FY) and 2013 -14 FY related to drinking water. These 
projects supported drinking water provision for vulnerable women and their communities in the areas most 
affected  by climate  change.  To implement  the project,  as done  for any project  with a multi -ministerial  engagement, 
according to GoB rules, the DWA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with DPHE, which is the 
main  technical  agency  for the drinking  water  investment  in Bangladesh.  The first project  – entitled  “Ensure  potable 
water and social protection of women and girls living in extreme climate vulnerabilities and environmental 
adversities” - was implemented in the coastal Bhola district, with a cost of USD400,000, successfully benefiting 
1000 households. The project innovated and scaled up rainwater harvesting technologies at the community and 
household levels. The second project - entitled “Social protection of women and girls living in climate change 
impacted  disaster -prone  areas  in Bangladesh”  - was implemented  in different  parts  of the coastal  Barisal  Division 
in the year 2013 -14 with a budget of USD625,000, benefiting 1300 households with climate resilient drinking 
water  systems.  
C.5. Market Overvie w (if applicable)  
112. In Bangladesh, the market for rainwater harvesting tanks comprises of two kinds: plastic tanks and reinforced 
concrete tanks. Ferro -cement tanks and earthen tanks are also found in few areas, but not very popular due to 
their relatively lower life span. There are other types of rainwater tanks available in different parts of the world 
(e.g. timber, HDPE and steel), but considering absence of those types of tanks in local market, they were not 
considered as sustainable or cost effective op tions. The cost of construction of ferro -cement tanks is lower 
USD120 -150 for 2,000 L capacity tank) than the cost of a plastic tank of the same capacity (about USD200 for 
2,000  L capacity  tank),  however  ferro-cement  tanks  have  a lower  life span  than plastic  tanks.  In addition,  in ferro- 
cement tanks, cement absorbs water and iron expands when it rusts and cracks the cement, which would be a 
major threat in saline -prone coastal areas where salinity would affect the iron. The weak point with the rendere d 
embedded steel and mesh is that the mesh and steel, when embedded in the cement, eventually corrodes and 
expands, causing cracks and  leaks.  
 
113. Reinforced  concrete  is concrete  in which  reinforcement  bars ("rebars"),  reinforcement  grids,  plates  or fibers  have 
been  incorporated  to strengthen  the concrete  in tension.  Reinforced  concrete  is concrete  that contains  embedded 
steel bars, plates, or fibers that strengthen the material. Concrete is strong in compression, but weak in tension, 
thus adding reinforcement increases the strength in tension. The capability to carry loads by these materials is 
magnified, and because of this, RCC is used extensively in all construction. In fact, it has become the most 
commonly utilized construction material. Reinforced material s are embedded in the concrete in such a way that 
the two materials  resist  the applied  forces  together.  The compressive  strength  of concrete  and the tensile  strength 
of steel form a strong bond to resist these stresses over a long span. Plain concrete is n ot suitable for most 
construction  projects  because  it cannot  easily  withstand  the stresses  created  by vibrations,  wind,  or other  forces.  
 
114. The project has proposed plastic tanks for household -scale tanks and reinforced concrete (RCC) tanks for the 
community -scale and institution -scale tanks. For households, plastic tanks were preferred over RCC tanks. 
Plastic tanks are very rigid, do not get affected by salinity, sunlight or high temperature, and leakage can only 
happen due to severe damage. Plastic  tanks are portable, hence can be relocated which is useful as the rural 
households in cyclone affected areas often need to be rebuilt after large cyclones or storm surges. RCC tanks, 
once constructed, cannot be relocated. The ease of installation and main tenance were the main reasons why 
plastic  tanks  were  chosen  over RCC  tanks  for the household -scale  tanks.  Plastic  tanks  are not available  in market 
if the volume requirement exceeds 10, 000 L and for large size tanks, RCC tanks are more cost effective than  
plastic tanks. Also, plastic tanks are circular, therefore, several large plastic tanks would take up more land area 
than a rectangular  RCC  tank for the same  volume.  Therefore,  for large  size community  and institution  scale  tanks,  
reinforced concrete tanks were selected. The RCC tanks are durable because of using reinforcement which is 
protected by concrete layers, hence less chance of getting affected by salinity or moisture. The structure is good


---
*Page 44*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 112  
 
 
enough to resist cyclones or heavy impacts. Protection of water quality is good inside RCC tanks. RCC tanks 
may develop small leaks as they age but these can be sealed and repaired. RCC tanks will take longer to 
construct and implement tha n plastic tanks.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
115. There are no applicable licenses or permits for the implementation of the project. In addition, there are no tax 
implications or regulations applicable for resilient livelihood  interventions and drinking water supply through rain 
water harvesting systems. As DWA and DPHE are the ‘Responsible Parties’ supporting implementation, the 
planned interventions will comply with GoB’s rules and regulations. Following Public Procurement Re gulation of 
the Government  of Bangladesh  Value  Added  Tax and Income  Tax will be applicable  for the government  procured 
activities of the project. UNDP enjoys VAT and Tax exemptions which will be applicable for the part of the 
procurement plan implemented by UNDP.  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements


---
*Page 45*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 112  
 
 
 
116. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Bangladesh, the Country 
Programme Document (CPD), and as policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) (see  here). The national executing entity - also referred to as the 
national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance with 
UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures (including the NIM Guidelines). In legal terms, this is 
ensured thro ugh the national Government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement 
(SBAA), together with a UNDP project document, which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern 
the use of the funds (once the funds are secured). The Standar d Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA) was 
signed with the GoB in  1986.  
 
117. The Implementing Partner for this project is Ministry of Women and Children Affairs (MoWCA). MoWCA is 
accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and evaluatio n of project interventions, 
achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources. UNDP, in agreement with the 
Government of Bangladesh, will provide implementation support (support to NIM) as agreed in the letter of 
agreement (LOA)65 signed between MoWCA (on behalf of the GoB) and the UNDP. UNDP will also provide 
oversight through UNDP Country Office in Bangladesh, and BPPS/UNDP Global Environmental Finance Unit in 
Bangkok Regional Hub and Headquarters in New  York.  
 
118. UNDP provides a three -tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at 
regional  and headquarters  levels.  The quality  assurance  role supports  the Project  Board  by carrying  out objective 
and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management 
milestones are managed and completed. Project assurance must be independent of the Project Management 
function; the Project Board cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to t he Project Manager. 
The project  assurance  role is covered  by the Accredited  Entity  fee provided  by the GCF.  As an Accredited  Entity 
to the GCF,  UNDP  is required  to deliver  GCF -specific  oversight  and quality  assurance  services  including;  (i) Day- 
to-day oversight supervision, (ii) Oversight of the project completion, (iii) Oversight of project  reporting.  
 
119. The following  parties  will enter  into agreements  with MoWCA  to assist  in successfully  delivering  project  outcomes 
and are directly accountable to MoWCA as outlined in the terms of their agreement : Department of Women 
Affairs (DWA) (under MoWCA) and the Department of Public Health and Engineering (DPHE) (under Ministry of 
Local Government, Rural Development and Co -operatives) will serve as the ‘Responsible  Parties’ for the 
execution of the livelihood and drinking water related activities of the project  respectively.  
 
120. DWA would be responsible for the implementation of the activities under Output 1 including the promotion of 
diversified, resilient livelihoods, associated value -chains and market linkages, and awareness and training on 
climate -risk reduction strategies and continued monitoring for sustained livelihoods and assets. Jointly with 
MoWCA,  DWA  is also responsible  to implement  the institutio nal capacity  building activities  under  Activity  3.1. 
 
121. DPHE will be responsible for the implementation of all activities under Output 2, including the installation and 
O&M of the drinking water solutions. It will also be responsible for Activity 3.2 aimed at enhancing its technical 
and innovation capacities to sustain and scale resilient drinking water solutions across the coast. Jointly, DWA, 
DPHE,  and MoWCA  would  support  implementation  of Activity  3.3 aimed  at establishing  knowledge  management 
and learning mechanism for sustained impact of the  project.  
 
122. The implementation and the management arrangements (as per UNDP NIM modality) for this project are 
summarized  in the chart  below:  (where  Executive  is MoWCA  as the Executing  Entity  in GCF  terminology,  Senior 
Beneficiaries are DWA and DPHE as the ‘Responsible Parties’, and Senior Supplier is UNDP as the Accredited 
Entity)


---
*Page 46*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 112  
 
 
 
 
 
123. Governance  Arrangements:  The project  will be governed  by a Project  Steering  Committee . The Committee  will 
consist  of a group  of representatives  responsible  for making  consensus -based  strategic,  policy  and management 
decisions  for the project.  Further,  it will oversee  the project  implementation;  review  compliance  with GoB,  UNDP 
and GCF requirements; and ensure implementation of the management plan for the risks identified. The 
Committee will be responsible for the approval of the Annual Work Plan (AWP), budget allocation and revisions 
when  required.  It will meet  once every  six months  and/or  upon  a call by the National  Project  Director  (see below) 
if urgent strategic decision is to be  made.  
 
124. The PSC will be comprised  of: 
• An Executive  (role represented  by National  Implementing  Partner)  that holds  the project  ownership  and chairs  the 
Board. The Executive will be Secretary who is the Chief Accounts Officer of  MoWCA;  
• A Senior Supplier representative providing guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project, compliance 
with donor  requirements,  and rules  pertain ing to use of project  resources.  This role will be fulfilled  by UNDP  in its 
capacity as GCF  AE; 
• Senior  Beneficiary  representatives  from DWA  and DPHE  who ensures  the realization  of project  benefits  from the 
perspective of project beneficiaries;  
• The National  Project  Director  (NPD),  nominated  by MoWCA,  is responsible  for overall  direction,  strategic  guidance, 
and timely delivery of project  outputs.  
• Other representatives will include Local Government Division, Rural Development and Cooperatives Division, 
Minist ry of Agricultural, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, Ministry of Environmental and Forest, Ministry of 
Planning,  Ministry  of Finance,  Implementation  Monitoring  and Evaluation  Division,  Ministry  of Disaster  Management 
and Relief, BFRI, Bangladesh Bank, National Designated Authority, BRDB, Sanchy Bank, Palli Karma -Sahayak 
Foundation (PKSF) and Social Development Foundation  (SDF).  
 
Implementation and Management Arrangements


---
*Page 47*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 112  
 
 
125. The PSC will be supported by the Project Management Unit (PMU) . The PMU will be responsible for preparing 
the quarterly  work  plan,  quarterly  progress  report,  annual  work  plan and annual  progress  report.  It will supervise 
the overall project implementation and day-to-day management of the project. The PMU will be led by the NPD 
and his/her  responsibilities  will follow  NIM/National  Execution  manual  as mentioned  below.  The AWPs  will be the 
main management instrument for the implementation of the project. The RPs w ill prepare their AWPs with well - 
defined  result  indicators,  using  the standard  format  UNDP  programmes,  which  will be approved  by the PSC.  The 
human resource and procurement needs are integral part of the AWP. Through the AWP, the NPD and DNPDs 
of the RPs may request UNDP to provide various technical and operational support, which may include 
procurement and recruitment done by UNDP. These will be directly spent by UNDP and be included into the 
quarterly and annual financial and narrative reports sign off b y NPD.  
 
126. National  Project  Director:  Using  established  practice  under  NIM (aka National  Execution  – NEX),  GoB will designate 
a National Project Director (NPD) who will be a Senior Official from MoWCA and not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary.  The NPD  will be responsible  for setting  out overall  direction,  strategic  guidance,  and timely  delivery  of 
project outputs. The major roles of the NPD will be the  following:  
• Coordinate the DNPDs DWA and DPHE to ensure that the objectives of the programme are  met; 
• Coordinate  project’s  components  using  coherent  approach  for synergy  in implementation,  calling  the meetings 
of the PSC and implement decision made by the  committee;  
• Carry out advocacy based on evidence generated by the project - for government  decision -making; 
• Submission of AWPs, narrative reports, mid -term evaluation and final evaluation to the  PSC;  
• Ensure  that the project  is implemented  in coordination  other  development  partners  whose  support  is critical  to 
achieving the outcomes of the  programme  
• Supervise the work of the Project Manager and other staff at  PMU.  
 
127. The Project Manager (PM ), recruited by UNDP , will manage the implementation of the project under the 
supervision of NPD. UNDP will recruit all staff of the PMU responsible for day -to-day op erations and the 
management. This arrangement has been in place with a high degree of effectiveness in approximately 30 of 
UNDP’s ongoing projects in Bangladesh.  
 
128. The PMU, comprised of technical and operational support teams, will be responsible for develo pment and 
implementation of all programme component of the project. The PM will implement the project with the support of 
the two teams. The Technical team will work on (i) development of programme standards, (ii) provide technical 
guidance to implementati on team at the field level and contractors and NGOs, (iii) implement policy research, 
dialogue and advocacy component of the project, (iv) guide implementation of and monitor social, gender, and 
environmental safeguards plans, (v) implement knowledge manag ement and communications activities; and (vi) 
monitor project progress and support project M&E. The Operations team will manage finance, general 
administration,  internal  auditing  and risk management  functions  of the project.  UNDP  will play the Project  Assurance 
Role in line with the requirements outlined in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed with GCF. This 
includes management of funds, programme quality assurance, fiduciary risk management, timely delivery of 
financial and programme reports  to GCF and other requirements as per the  AMA.  
 
129. The MoWCA will enter into specific “Letter of Agreement” (LoA) with relevant agencies for the implementation of 
the project. UNDP will manage the funds from GCF, and will disburse quarterly in advance against  agreed work 
plans,  to a project  account  managed  by the MoWCA,  DWA,  and DPHE.  The MoWCA  will deliver  reporting,  auditing 
and M&E requirements of the government to UNDP, in line with UNDP  requirements.  
 
130. Deputy NPDs at DWA and DPHE:  The DWA and DPHE will nominate Deputy NPDs from its Senior Officials to 
assist the NPD in the implementation. These directors will be accountable to the Secretary of their respective 
ministries and the NPD. These positions are not remunerated by GCF resou rces but are Government financed 
positions. The role of each Deputy Project Director is  to: 
• Assume  financial  and results  accountability  of the respective  component  and resources,  including  FAPAD  audit;  
• Ensure that the project is well coordinated with the programme as a whole, by formally meeting with the NPD; 
ensure the PSC endorsed the annual work plan and meet with PMU and PSC to jointly review progress once 
per quarter/by  annual;  
• Exercise overall technical, financial and administrative oversight of the project they are responsible  for; 
• Ensure timely submission of work plans, financial reports and narrative reports to the NPD;  and


---
*Page 48*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 112  
 
 
• Supervise work of sub -project staff and  consultants.  
 
131. The DPHE and DWA will be technically and operationally supported by dedicated staff of PMU based in 
respective project offices set up by each RP. Work of these staff will be supervised by DNPDs on a day -to-day 
basis and will report to the PM. They will be responsible for the implementation of the project activities, monitor 
and supervise quality of the work by contractors, suppliers and NGOs, prepare annual work plan and prepare 
reports for  PMU.  
 
Field -level execution  
132. At the district  and sub-district  level,  the officials  of the DWA  and DPHE  will support  day-to-day implementation  of 
the project  activities  undertaken  by PMU.  DWA  and DPHE  will work  closely  with the Local  Government  Division 
(LGD)  which  has its offices  at the district  level to monitor  the functioning  of Local  Government  Institutions  (LGIs). 
The Local  Government  Engineering  Department  (LGED)  is the engineering  arm of LGD to support  all LGIs  in 
Bangladesh in all engineering -related rural and urban infrastructures development e.g. roads, culverts, markets, 
and small  irrigation  infrastructure.  DPHE  is the main  technical  agency  of LGD to support  all LGIs  in fulfilling  their 
responsibilities  in relation  to drinking  water  supply  and sanitation  infrastructure.  The Union  Parishad  (UP) Act of 
2009  is the main  legal  basis  of the LGIs  to operate.  UPs consist  of a chairman,  nine members,  and three  women 
members,  elected  through  direct  local votes.  They  govern  their functions  through  14 standing  committees  to deal 
with, agriculture and other development works, cottage industries and co -operatives, women and children 
welfare, culture and sports, fisheries, livestock and rural water supply and  sanitation.  
 
133. The RPs will enter  into contractual  agreements  with competent  engineering  companies  and NGOs  specialized  in 
implementing livelihood projects and drinking water solutions. The selection will be based on a competitive 
process  approved  by the Board.  The LGIs  will be closely  engaged  in co-management  and oversight  of the project 
interventions. The  livelihood interventions for the women livelihood groups are supported through the 
engagement of the UP staff and the Women Standing Committee. The drinking water related interventions are 
co-managed with the support of the ward level, Water Management Co mmittees and the UP level Watsan 
Standing Committees. The implementing contractors and NGOs will work under the supervision of the 
committees and with technical monitoring by the staff of DPHE, DWA, and  PMU.  
 
134. Construction and operational arrangements:  Cont ractual services will be procured by the RPs to construct and 
commission all the water supply systems proposed under the project. DPHE will enter into agreements with all 
Unions to transfer assets to Unions post -construction. The proposed drinking water in frastructure will be 
established in public land, and does not entail any use of private land. The infrastructure in institutions will be 
primarily owned by school/ college and they will register that as their asset; however, as the community will also 
use (consent has been established during preparation of the project) the infrastructure, the infrastructure will be 
registered as an asset by the Union Parishad for co -management including for operation and maintenance. The 
community -scale RWH systems and the pond -based systems will be owned by the Union Parishads. As such, 
the communities have right of access to the water and land. This is established and working practice in 
Bangladesh.  
 
135. For the value -chain facilities, the crab hatcheries, MoWCA will sign an M oU with the Bangladesh Fisheries 
Research Institute (BFRI) for the upgrading of the existing facilities and will outline the roles and responsibilities 
of each  parties  under  the MoU.  BFRI  is the official  fisheries,  aquatic  resources  and aquaculture  researc h agency, 
with experience in operating hatcheries for the aqua -cultural sector. Its primary aim is to assist fisheries 
development  by conducting  and coordinating  nationwide  research  efforts,  standardizing  techniques  to maximize 
production and improve resource management, identifying and cultivating new production opportunities and 
providing trainings and disseminating important skills and technologies to relevant actors within the fisheries 
sector.  
 
136. The following diagram depicts the flow of funds from GCF to UNDP onwards to IP/RPs/and other service 
providers.


---
*Page 49*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 112  
 
 
 
GCF  
 
UNDP  (AE)  
 
Implementing 
Partner (IP) 
MoWCA  
 
 
 
Direct  procurement  Responsible  parties - Procured  Service 
of Goods  and  RPs – DWA  and  Providers  (incl.  
Services  DPHE  CSOs/NGOs)  
 
 
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
The project will be implemented over a period of six years to ensure capacities are built up for effective 
operation and management of the livelihood and water investments, knowledge and learning mechanisms 
are developed and applied, and an enabling environment is advanced to ensure sustained impact of the 
project beyond its lifetime. The implementation schedul e is presented in Annex.


---
*Page 50*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 112  
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
137. Without  GCF  involvement  to complement  ongoing  efforts  and address  gaps,  GoB cannot  take adequate  steps  to 
help vulnerable coastal livelihoods facing increasing threats from climate change induced salinity to their 
freshwater resources, affecting agricultural livelihoods and drinking water security. The planned interventions 
target the most climate vulnerable segment of the po pulation. As described in Section C.2, low awareness of 
climate risks and responses to climate -change induced salinity impacts on coastal freshwater resources, weak 
technical and financial capacities to assess and adopt adaptation measures, inadequate inst itutional capacities 
to enable climate -risk informed, planning and implementation of resilient solutions are some of the key barriers 
that hinder  community  as well as government  investments  for drinking  water  and livelihood  security.  Specifically, 
GCF’s value -add is in:  
 
138. Funding, at scale, of primarily public good investments for resilience of extreme poor coastal 
communities:  Alternative  financing  options  to address  transformative  change  for the most  vulnerable  populations 
are limited,  as the planned  interventions  do not yield aggregate,  large -scale  financial  reflows.  Where  private  sector 
engagement and markets are present for alternative livelihoods, barriers related to lack of awareness, technical 
capacities,  and financial  limitations  in investing  in alternative,  climate -resilient  livelihoods  inhibit  the extreme  poor 
from investing in and accessing these opportunities. Therefore, while the project delivers a positive economic 
return, the interventions targeted at the most vulnerable would not be finan cially viable without public sector 
financing. Private sector investment is limited in provision of drinking water supply for the extreme poor whose 
affordability and willingness to pay is extremely low owing to their socio -economic vulnerabilities that ar e further 
compounded by repeated climatic impacts. While GoB has and continues to benefit from donor aid, these 
development  investments  do not typically  consider  evolving  climate  change  threats,  and could  be undermined  by 
climate change impacts. While ther e have been government and donor initiatives aiming to provide solutions in 
relation  to provision  of drinking  water  and some  elements  of livelihoods,  the impact  of climate  induced  salinity  and 
how it manifests  to disrupt  livelihoods  and water  security  have  not been  considered  in its full scope  previously.  
 
139. Investing  in the additional  costs  of switching  to adaptive  livelihoods  and resilient  water  solutions  to cope 
with climate -induced salinity: Coastal communities have devised coping mechanisms and alternative 
productive options to deal with the adverse consequences of salinity risks including shifting to non -farm, meagre 
day labour and maladaptive practices. The intensity of cyclones as the result of climate change has left coastal 
communities  with very little means  to recover  and secure  safe water  or livelihoods.  The marginalized  populations 
who are worst affected and eke out a subsistence -level livelihood clearly have insufficient resources to invest in 
addressing  the incremental  costs  of adaptation  to salinity  risks.  Inspite  of significant  development  investments  by 
GoB and partners into drinking water security, coastal development, and livelihoods support, the slow - and 
sudden onset climate change impacts continued to jeopardize and wash away development gains. Therefore, 
investments are needed at scale to ensure climate -risks are taken into account in the planning and 
implementation of interventions to secure lives and livelihoods of the coastal communities. GCF resources will 
leverage Go B co-financing to jointly fund the costs of switching from currently, non -adaptive (or mal -adaptive) 
livelihoods to resilient livelihoods and climate -resilient drinking water solutions. Funding of these adaptation 
measures and long -term adaptive capacities  for climate - risk informed planning and implementation will also 
ensure that underlying developmental investments are themselves safeguarded and not further undermined due 
to climate  change.  
 
140. Crowding in public and private sector financing and mobilizing community -level investments: GCF 
resources are critical in catalyzing household, community, government, and private sector engagement and 
investments to safeguard drinking water and livelihoods for the vulnerable coastal communities. By building 
awareness,  technical and financial capacities and empowering communities, especially women as the ‘change - 
agents’, GCF resources remove the barriers for household and communities to switch to adaptive solutions. In 
view of the (i) non -climate drivers that exacerbat e water and livelihood insecurity and (ii) the co -ownership and 
management of solutions the project entails, including for sustained impacts post -project, GCF resources will be 
complemented by new and additional co -financing leveraged from the Government o f Bangladesh (see  Section  
B.1 for the details on GoB contributions). Proposed project will also leverage co -investments from targeted HHs 
and communities towards drinking water and livelihoods.  Based on the surveys and the studies conducted,  
beneficiaries  are likely to phase in their own capital investments for livelihood assets and inputs as project 
implementation progresses (estimated at USD160 per year) and support in the O&M of established water supply


---
*Page 51*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 112  
 
 
infrastructure through collective financial support (estimated at USD635,000 over the project duration), all as     
a result of the skills, assets, knowledge, and capacities developed through the implementation of the proposed 
project. GCF resources enable beneficiaries to leverage credit finance for expansion of activities owing to the 
technical support and access to finance linkages promoted through the project. Furthermore, establish ment of 
PPIs and the capacity building across value -chains on climate risks and impacts enable private sector 
engagement for resilient livelihood  support.  
 
141. Reaching the most vulnerable: Coastal communities in the targeted districts are extremely vulnerable to climate 
change risks, especially rising salinity levels and intensified cyclones that severely impact their freshwater 
dependent  lives and livelihoods  through  heightening  drinking  water  insecurity  and loss of agricultural  productivity 
and liv elihoods. Underlying socio -economic vulnerabilities are further compounded by the climate stresses and 
shocks  leaving  pushing  these  communities  into deeper  poverty  and socio -economic  and political  marginalization. 
The climate -change  induced  salinity,  combined  with non-climatic  drivers,  is worsening  the availability  and quality 
of ground water resources thereby increasing the time and resource pressures on women and girls who are 
primarily responsible for securing drinking water for their households. Cy clonic impacts also destroy the water 
infrastructure and assets stressing the already limited resources of the poor households and communities. GCF 
resources  will add value  by targeting  the small -scale  farmers,  fishers,  and agri-labourers  and supporting  a switch 
to resilient  livelihoods  in light of projected  climate -change  induced  salinity  risks.  They  will also secure  year-round,  
safe and reliable  supply  of drinking  water  in light of evolving  climate  change  impacts  on water  supply  and increase 
the health and safety of the households, especially women and  girls.  
D.2. Exit Strategy  
142. The proposed project was designed through consultation with government agencies, NGOs, Community Based 
Organisation (CBOs), donor and partner agencies, and local communities, particularly targeting women and 
marginalized populations. Findings from household surveys, focus group discussions, key informant interviews, 
transect  walks  and participatory  rapid  appraisals  (PRA)  were  combined  with secondary  research  and analysis  of 
past and ongoing efforts, best practices and lessons learned to inform project design. Based on this analytical 
groundwork  and the pathways  to replication  and scale  established  by this project,  GoB aims  to sustain  and scale 
the project  impacts  under  Phase  II, targeting  the remaining  prioritized  vulnerable  coastal  districts.  (See  discussion 
on Targeting, Section C.3).  
 
143. In particular,  the following  elements  of the project  design  encompass  the Exit Strategy  for the proposed  project:  
 
144. Enterprise - and community -based  climate -resilient  livelihoods  and value -chains:  Through  the investments 
in assets, tools, knowledge and skills development, awareness of climate -risks and capacities to continuously 
monitor and adapt livelihoods, the project enables ownersh ip, co -investment, enhanced income generation, and 
social empowerment of the vulnerable women and marginalized households. Moreover, the group -based 
livelihood and value -chain development support (through WLGs) promotes a peer -to-peer support system and 
cost-effective investments resulting from the economies of scale. Capacity building in understanding and 
assessing  climate  risks and undertaking  social  auditing  of the livelihood  interventions  empower  women  to assess 
the results of the interventions and adap t their livelihoods. Supported by the institutional capacities (of WSCs, 
staff of LGIs, DWA, MoWCA) strengthened under each of the Outputs; and, particularly, the institutional 
framework  for planning  and coordination  promoted  under  Output  3, these  measures  ensure  long-term capacities 
among the beneficiaries for adaptive livelihood planning beyond the project  lifetime.  
 
145. Participatory  approaches  and co-management  of drinking  water  supply  investments:  The project  proposes 
the formulation  of WUGs  and WMCs  to support  participatory,  adaptive  planning  for water  access  and distribution 
and O&M support that can be managed at the community level, backstopped by O&M support by DPHE. 
Participatory mapping, vetting, and siting of drinking water supply systems in consul tation with the communities 
will promote  buy-in, building  on site-specific  consultations  undertaken  during  project  design.  Households  will also 
contribute a nominal fee to ensure access to water and minor upkeep and maintenance of the water systems. 
WUGs,  with support  from WMCs,  will be able to identify  O&M  and financing  needs  and plan for them  for sustained  
operation  of the systems.  WUGs  will be trained  in water  quality  monitoring,  simple  O&M  skills,  and measures  for 
end-point  storage  and quality  control  along  with awareness  of climate  risks and climate  and disaster  risk reduction


---
*Page 52*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 112  
 
 
strategies so that the benefits from safe and reliable water supply are evident and incentivize long -term 
community commitments in the face of climate change.  
 
146. GoB co -financing leveraged for ownership and sustained impact: The project has leveraged USD8 million 
in cash co -financing from GoB to support investments in technologies and capacities for communities and 
institutions to safeguard livelihoods and water security of the targeted coastal communities. GoB resources will 
support  skills  transfer  including  business  skills  development,  value -chain  development  and market  linkages,  and 
access  to finance  for the resilient  livelihoods  promote  by the project.  They  will also support  continued  monitoring 
and implementation  of adaptive  livelihood  strategies  through  participatory  social  auditing  for the livelihoods.  GoB 
co-financing will support implementation of resili ent drinking water solutions, especially shouldering the cost of 
project and post -project O&M (USD4million commitment for post -project O&M), with contributions from the 
communities (see paragraph below). GoB co -financing, including USD1 million in kind, is  also leveraged to 
support  technical  and coordination  capacities  of local,  sub-national,  and national  level government  institutions  to 
ensure that project impact is sustained during and beyond the project lifetime (see Section B.1 for details on the 
activities co -financed by GoB  resources).  
 
147. Project and post -project operations and maintenance . O&M of the project established infrastructure will be 
undertaken through a community -centric tiered support system, with backstopping by GoB. In case of O&M of 
livelihood assets, beneficiaries will be fully responsible for maintaining tools and equipment provided by the 
project,  with technical  assistance  from local support  staff and BFRI  (for aquaculture).  Beneficiary  investments  are 
facilitated by enhanced income generation supported by the interventions as well as the support for access to 
finance.  For the water  supply  infrastructure,  the project  establishes  a three -tiered  O&M  system (see  Activity  2.3) 
that involves a fee -contribution and training for WUGs on upkeep and maintenance and GoB co -financing for 
both the minor repairs through staffed technicians in each WMC and for major repairs/part or full system 
replacements  during  the project.  Community  and GoB financing  will be fully responsible  for post-project O&M,  as 
also indicated in the O&M Commitment Letter issued by DPHE (see Annex IVb). This model of O&M and co - 
ownership  and management  will maximize  the likelihood  of continued  operational  and financial  viability  of project 
investments  beyond  the project  implementation  period.  In addition,  as GoB’s  main  technical  agency  dealing  with 
rural water supply and sanitation, DPHE has the mandate to provide DPHE has demonstrated a strong track 
record in working with several development partners to install r ural water technologies having implemented 
around  1300  development  projects  since  its inception  and currently  implementing  several  relevant  drinking  water 
and sanitation projects in rural Bangladesh. DPHE’s presence (offices and technical staff) in each Upazila (sub - 
districts) and districts in Bangladesh including outreach staff at Union Level and the project support to further 
strengthen its capacities in addressing climate change -induced salinity impacts on drinking water supply for the 
coastal communi ties will enable sustained impact  post-project.  
 
148. Sub-national and national Institutional capacity building for climate -risk informed implementation and 
management of livelihoods and water security: Technical knowledge and capacities for implementation 
supp ort among the local support staff (WSCs/WMCs/LGIs) are strengthened through training, along with 
communities, in Outputs 1 and 3 to ensure long -term viability of planned interventions. In addition, Output 3 of 
the project creates an enabling environment to  sustain the community -centric, gender -responsive investments 
during  the project  and enable  replication  and scale  of the impact  beyond  the project  period.  By building  technical 
capacities of MoWCA on climate risks and livelihood scenarios and climate -risk informed implementation of 
livelihoods, the project ensures adaptive management of the project interventions for livelihoods. DPHE’s 
capacity  to innovate  and implement  resilient  drinking  water  solutions  and livelihoods,  helps  safeguard  the project 
investments as climate risks evolve. This ensures that the project interventions do not remain short -term 
responses rather can be sustained and scaled beyond the project lifetime. ToT approaches to technical training 
further institutionalize these skills s o as to build long -term, continued capacities across the agencies. Moreover, 
broadening the capacity building to include sub -national and national level government staff as well as partner 
NGOs creates synergistic approaches to support for coastal communit ies that can also ensure that impacts last 
beyond the project.


---
*Page 53*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 112  
 
 
149. Incentivizing private sector engagement: The proposed project catalyses private sector engagement in the 
adoption and  up-scaling of climate -resilient livelihoods and value -chains. Output 1 support to enterprise - and 
community -based livelihoods through initial upfront investments into assets and tools to switch to resilient 
livelihoods and skills development for financing  and marketing facilitates economies of scale to attract private 
sector investment. Value -addition and value -chain linkages will crowd -in upstream and downstream value -chain 
and market actors (including for further investments in crab hatcheries, productio n and processing). Project 
facilitates public -private platforms (PPIs) at the Upazila level to broaden the market access and create linkages 
across value -chain actors to support the financial viability and sustained scale of alternative climate -resilient 
livelihoods.  The collateral  expansion  of the WLGs,  business  skills,  and value -chain  development  will also enable 
access to finance. The proposed project will also build awareness of the FIs in understanding climate risks and 
financing resilient livelihoods for long -term financial viability of project interventions. Private sector engagement 
is nascent  in the provision  of drinking  water  for the extreme  poor communities.  With the institution  of a fee-based 
model  and co-management  of water  supply  systems,  there  is a potential  to create  community -based  enterprises 
that would co -invest in capital costs and distribute water at a  cost.


---
*Page 54*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 112  
 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
150. The project will contribute to following GCF Fund -Level Impacts for adaptation: (i) “increased resilience and 
enhanced  livelihoods  of the most  vulnerable  people,  communities  and regions”  through  the promotion  of climate - 
resilient,  sustainable  and diversified  livelihoods  for 25,425  women  in targeted  coastal  districts  (Fund -Level  Impact 
A1.0) and (ii) “Increased resilience of health and well- being, and food and water security” for vulnerable coastal 
communities  through  provision  of year-round,  safe and reliable  drinking  water  supply  benefiting  136,110  people. 
(Fund -Level Impact  A4.0).  
 
151. Overall, the project will benefit 719,229 direct and  indirect beneficiaries in vulnerable coastal districts of Khulna 
and Satkhira (about 16.25 per cent of the total population of the two districts) with 245,516 people directly 
benefiting from the project interventions in building resilience across water an d livelihoods through household, 
community,  government,  and partner  capacities.  The interventions  will provide  indirect  benefits  to 473,713  people 
to the nearby  communities  in the targeted  Wards  and other  unions  in the 5 Upazilas  through  integration  of climate 
change concerns into planning and implementation of the mandated agencies as well as the pathways 
established for replication to other communities through knowledge and learning mechanisms.  Specifically:  
- 25,425 women will directly benefit from the interventions to switch to (or phase in) climate -resilient livelihoods 
with associated 500 people benefiting from capacity building and support to value -chain and market  actors.  
- 245,516 people benefit from timely, gender -responsive early warning information and climate risk reduction 
strategies, facilitated through the women and girl volunteer groups established by the project at each of the 
targeted wards.  
- The project benefits 68,327 females and 67,783 males through year -round access to safe and reliable drinking 
water  improving  their health  and safety,  and significantly  decreasing  the unpaid  time burden  of women  in regards 
of water collection and thereby creating opportunities for education and/or enhanced income  generation.  
- 525 number of Governm ent staff benefit from improved capacities for climate -risk informed planning and 
implementation of resilient solutions for water and livelihood  security.  
- The project  support  to women  groups  for climate  resilient  livelihoods  options  in aquaculture  and agriculture  yields 
increased income benefits and enables participation in the formal economy, for a total expected increase in 
income  of USD15  million  (over  the full life of the project).  By providing  an alternate  higher  quality  source  of water, 
salt intak e by the population in the target communities will substantially decrease deaths and averting quality 
adjusted life years (the rainwater harvesting technologies have sufficient capacity to provide for basic drinking 
water needs even in times of low precipi tation), for net benefits measuring USD4  million.  
 
152. The project outcome will strengthen the adaptive capacity and reduce exposure of vulnerable coastal households, 
especially women, to climate change induced salinity risks and impacts on their freshwat er-dependent lives and 
livelihoods through a switch to climate -resilient livelihoods for enhanced capacities of communities, focusing on 
women and those adolescent girls who are solely responsible for household income generation; gender - 
responsive access to year -round, safe and reliable climate -resilient drinking water solutions; and strengthened 
institutional capacities, knowledge, and learning for climate -resilient drinking water and livelihoods security. The 
project directly benefits 245,516 women and men through use of gender -responsive livelihoods and water 
security strategies and activities to respond to climate change and variability.


---
*Page 55*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 112  
 
 
 
153. The project has significant impact positively by reducing the vulnerability of the targeted population whose 
agricultural  livelihoods  have  been  affected  by declines  in productivity  and, and in some  cases,  loss of livelihoods 
entirely (of agriculture, fisheries, and aquaculture) due to increasing climate -change induced salinity. By 
catalysing a switch to resilient livelihoods, resilient in the face of evolving climate risks, the project supports 
households, especially women, in adopting and  scaling variety of livelihood strategies. Investments in assets, 
skills development, and capacities for awareness and continuous monitoring of the livelihoods create robust 
adaptation  benefits  yielding  enhanced  incomes  and resulting  in reduced  vulnerabilities  to climate  change.  Group - 
and community -based  interventions  across  the resilient  livelihood  value -chains  promote  economies  of scale  and 
sustainability  of the impact  beyond  the project.  The project  also invests  in risk reduction  strategies  for the targeted 
communities by empowering women and girls to access and use EWs to safeguards their lives and livelihood 
assets. Women and girl volunteer groups, established per ward, will be capacitated to disseminate actionable, 
gender -responsive EWs, s upported by participatory preparedness activities for the communities. Specifically, 
245,516 people benefit from timely, gender -responsive early warning information . About 25,425 women directly 
benefit from adoption of diversified, climate - resilient livel ihood options (including in fisheries, aquaculture, and 
agriculture).  
 
154. The project  has significant  impact  on increasing  the drinking  water  security  of the extremely  poor populations  and 
enhancing their health and safety, especially for women and girls who are disproportionately affected by limited 
access  to safe and reliable  drinking  water.  The project  invests  in 13,308  household  level RWHs,  228 community - 
scale  RWHs,  and 19 institutional -scale  RWS,  and 41 pond  based  solutions  to support  year-round  supply  of water 
(estimated 180 days). Gender -responsiveness, accessibility and social acceptance, projected demand and 
climate  change  risks have  been  taken  into account  to ensure  that the solutions  are inclusive,  targeted,  and viable 
in the long -term to safeguard  drinking water security as climate risks evolve. The project builds the capacities of 
over 600 WUGs and LGI and DPHE staff to enhance community ownership and adaptive management of the 
drinking water solutions, with enabling support from local, sub -nation al, and national institutions, including on 
O&M,  to ensure  sustained  impacts  beyond  the project  lifetime.  These  climate -resilient  solutions  will benefit  HHs, 
including  those  supported  through  adaptive  livelihood  investments  and lacking  existing  drinking  water coverage, 
with improved  health,  safety,  and time and cost savings  that can be invested  in income  generating  or educational 
opportunities  (particularly  for women  and girls).  The project  benefits  68,327  females  and 67,783  males  with year- 
round access to  reliable and safe drinking  water.  
 
155. The project builds the technical capacities of MoWCA in assessing climate risks and adaptation scenarios for 
climate -risk informed coastal livelihood planning and integrating gender and climate change concerns across 
policies and programs for coastal development. An estimated 405 government staff will be trained to support 
climate  risk and livelihood  scenarios  and tool-kit for design  and implementation  of livelihood  interventions  among 
the vulnerable districts of the Southwest coast. The project also invests in innovation and implementation 
capacities of DPHE through training on climate risks and drinking water needs and building technical capacities 
of the DPHE staff (R&D wing) for innovation and design of climate -resilient water solutions across the coast, in 
coordination  with technical  institutes.  An estimated  120 DPHE  staff would  be trained  to effectively  support  climate - 
risk informed management of sustained drinking water supply and security for coastal communitie s. Impact 
potential beyond the project is catalysed through investments in knowledge codification and dissemination; 
targeted  learning  to build  adaptive  capacities  of young  girls and boys;  and monitoring  and evaluation  to promote 
evidence -based planning and implementation of solutions for coastal communities in the face of a changing 
climate. A ‘Replication Roadmap’ is developed to assist GoB in identifying needs and financing mechanisms to 
replicate  and scale  the project  impact.  The project  benefits  525 government  staff (local,  regional,  and national)  
with capacities to implement gender -responsive, climate -resilient solutions for water security and livelihoods for 
coastal communities.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
  Annual


---
*Page 56*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 112  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) 
to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Lifetime   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender  (reduced 
vulnerability or increased  resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender  (adaptation 
only)   
 
 
 
Total  719,229 direct and 
indirect beneficiaries  
245,516 direct 
beneficiaries of which 
50.2% are women  
473,713 indirect 
beneficiaries of which 
50.2% are women  
 
 
 
 
Percentage 
(%) About 16.25% of the 
total of the two District 
populations of which 
50.2% women  
About .44% of the 
national population 
(162,951,560, in 2016)  
of which 50.2% are 
women  
Other 
relevant  
indicators   
N/A 
 
156. Direct Beneficiaries: The calculation of beneficiary numbers are based on ward -level population statistics and 
needs -based identification of the beneficiaries for livelihoods and water. The total population of the two targeted 
districts (Khulna and Sathkira) is 4,427,662 people, of which 50.2% are female, a ratio that was used for all 
beneficiary calculations as outlined below . The total number of direct beneficiaries of the project include those 
households that were identified as being in need of support to shift towards alternative, resilient livelihoods, 
those  receiving  access  to the climate -resilient  drinking  water  supply,  as well as people  reached  through  the EWS 
in the targeted wards. The following table provides an overview of the beneficiary figures for all relevant outputs 
and activities with  key calculations  and assumptions.  A snapshot  of the calculations  by ward  is shown  in Table  3 
below. The full table for the 101 wards is provided in Annex  XIII(h).  
 
Table 2: Methodology for beneficiary calculations  
  Methodology/Calculations  Target  Male  Female  Assumptions/References   
 Output 1: 
Livelihood 
interventions 
(Activity 1.1) • The target is based on 
identifying the number 
of agricultural/aqua - 
cultural HHs for each  of 
the 101  wards.  
• The distribution of 
women and  households 
currently engaged in 
non-adaptive 
livelihoods,  e.g. 
fisheries, agriculture, 
agriculture day  25,425  0 25,425  • Female ratio of 50.2% applied, 
based on census data and  PRA 
process.  
• An average of 4.4 people per  HH 
used.


---
*Page 57*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 112  
 
 
  labourers ranged 
between 15 -70 per cent 
of the entire ward 
population.  
• The highest  distribution 
was used as the 
percentage to be 
targeted for that 
particular ward.  
• Using this  percentage 
figure on each of the 
ward populations, 
combined with the 
portfolio of livelihoods 
to be supported, the 
populations were 
grouped as Women 
Livelihood  Groups  
• With this method, 
around 1017 groups 
were identified, with  25 
women per  group  
yielding 1017*25 – 
15,425 women.       
 Output 1: 
Early Warning 
Systems 
(Activity 1.3)  • The CPP program has 
established a Union 
level EWs volunteer 
group, comprised of 3 
males from each  ward, 
which functions as the 
early warning 
dissemination arm of 
the Disaster 
Management 
Committee  (DMC).  
• The volunteer groups of 
the three members lead 
sub-groups such as the 
Shelter Group, Search 
and Rescue Group, and  
Warning  Dissemination.  
• The proposed project 
strengthens both the 
content and gender 
responsiveness of the 
EWs by establishing 
women and girl 
volunteer groups (one 
per ward, 15 members 
per group).  
• Therefore, the total 
beneficiary numbers of 
the last -mile Early 
Warnings  (EWs)  245,516  122,267  123,249  • The population of the entire  101 
wards is 245,516, based on 
census  data.  
• Female ratio of 50.2% applied, 
based on census data and PRA 
process.  
• Through training, equipment,  and 
participatory  preparedness 
exercises,  the project ensures 
that 100 per cent of the targeted 
wards are reached by timely, 
actionable, and gender - 
responsive EWs.


---
*Page 58*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 112  
 
 
  through women and girl 
volunteer groups is 
estimated to reach the 
entire ward population 
of the 101 selected  
wards of 245,516 
people.       
 Output 2: 
Water 
Interventions  • The first step for 
calculating the number 
of target direct 
beneficiaries for water 
supply interventions 
was to subtract the 
baseline coverage  of 
year-round, non -saline 
drinking water supply 
from the number of 
households in the ward 
to determine the water 
supply gap. A total of 
57,737 people were 
identified to already 
have a secure year - 
round, non -saline  water 
supply in the 101 
targeted wards.  
• The second step was  to 
identify the gap in 
coverage based on two 
key initiatives: 
USAID/WV supported 
Nobo Jatra program 
and the O’Harizan 
initiative.  
• Based on coverage by 
other efforts; the wards 
were divided into: i) 
Zone 1(Paikghacha  and 
Assassuni upazil as), 
where there is no 
overlap with other 
efforts (ii) Zone 2 
(Dacope, Shyamnagar, 
and Koyra upazilas), 
where 50 per cent of 
the water supply gap in 
these upazila will be 
covered by Nobo Jatra 
and O’Harizan  projects.  
• Based on this, in Zone 
1 Upazailas, 100 % of 
each of the wards  and 
in Zone 2, 50% of each 
of the ward populations  136,110  67,783  68,327  • An estimated 61% people have 
access to some quality water 
sources (but not year round), 
and only 23% of the people  have 
access to year round quality 
drinking wa ter. (Source, BBS 
2011, DPHE 2016 and PRA 
survey 2017). This leads to the 
baseline coverage.  
• An average of 4.4 people per  HH 
used.  
• Female ratio of 50.2% applied, 
based on census data and  PRA 
process.


---
*Page 59*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 112  
 
 
  (minus the baseline 
populations) was 
targeted.  
• The target  populations 
for each of the 101 
wards in shown in 
Table in Annex  XIII(h)       
 Output 3: 
Capacity 
Development  • 405 number of 
MoWCA/DWA and  120 
number of DPHE staff 
would have undergone 
both initial and 
refresher trainings and 
engaged in the 
planning, monitoring, 
and implementation of 
the livelihoods and 
water  solutions.  525 368 157 • Female ratio of 30% applied, 
based existing staffing  ratios.   
 TOTAL Direct 
Beneficiaries  • The total direct 
beneficiaries is  the 
aggregate of the 3 
Outputs, avoiding 
duplication.  
• Since the EWs 
interventions (Output 1, 
Activity 1.3) cover the 
entire population, this 
number is used as the 
total, with each output 
functioning as a  sub-set 
of this  figure . 245,516  122,267  123,249  • An average of 4.4 people per  HH 
used.  
• Female ratio of 50.2% applied, 
based on census data and  PRA 
process.   
 
 
Table 3: Snapshot of table showing calculations for water, livelihoods, aggregate, and overlap. (Full table with 
targeted % for all 101 wards in Annex XIII(h))


---
*Page 60*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 112  
 
 
 
Note: To assess the intensity of interventions that benefit populations with both livelihood and drinking water 
interventions,  a conservative  approach  was chosen  to identify  the overlap  between  Output  1 and 2. In the wards  from 
Zone  2 for water  provision,  where  50 per cent of the ward  (minus  the baseline)  is targeted  for water  supply,  the lower 
of the livelihoods and water % is selected to estimate HHs benefiting from both. In the wards under Zone 1, where 
drinking  water  is provided  for 100%  of the ward  (minus  the baseline),  the distribution  percentage  for livelihood  support 
was selected  to reflect  the overlap, with  the assumption  that those  targeted  with livelihoods  would  also be benefiting 
from water provision. With this methodology, we arrive at about 107,570 benefiting from both livelihood and water 
interventions.  
 
157. Indirect beneficiaries: The indirect beneficiary number is comprised  of: 
• water users - including the existing baseline population with functioning water supply as the quality and 
quantity of their water supply could be improved (depending on water source, for example saline intrusion 
into groundwater could decrease when the extraction rate decreases). The baseline for the existing safe 
drinking water supply is based on the people supplied by non -saline drinking water sources (e.g. deep tube 
wells rather than shallow tube wells) that provide year -round access of at least 2 LCPD drinking water to 
recipients.  The baseline  does  not include  water  sources  that are being  used  but are saline.  Current  baseline 
is 13,122 households (13,122 * 4.4 = 57,737) in the target wards out of a total of 56,298 households as  
measured  through  the PRA process.  This is equivalent  to 23 per cent of the households  in the target wards.  
• EWs beneficiaries – which include 80 per cent of the remaining population of the non -targeted wards of the 
targeted  39 unions  as the project  builds  capacities  of the Union  level DMCs  to support  last-mile dissemination 
of EWs  to the remaining  wards.  Through  learning  exchange  and advocacy,  the CPP volunteer  groups  will be 
capacitated to build on the gender -responsive, actionable EWs promoted under the t argeted wards of the 
targeted unions. The effectiveness of the EWs is expected to improve for the 80 per cent estimated to be 
receiving EWs. Therefore, the beneficiaries of EWs are estimated at 719,229 people (including direct 
beneficiaries).  
 
158. In aggregate , the indirect number of beneficiaries is, 473,713, which is the total number of EWs beneficiaries 
minus the direct number of beneficiaries.  (719,229 -245,516=473,713).  
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact  beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
159. The paradigm shift for the project is to move away from focus on short -term responses and technology -led 
interventions  towards  community -centric  solutions  that build  ownership  and capacities  for sustainable,  long-term 
adaptive responses to safeguard water security and livelihoods. Awareness, enhanced livelihood asset base, 
skills  building,  value-chain  and market  linkages  will promote  a transformational  switch  from current,  non-adaptive 
livelihoods to climate -resilient livelihoods that can, in turn, reduce the vulnerabilities of the extreme poor against 
future climate change risks. Climate -resilient water technologies provide the communities with a means to shift 
away  from their dependence  on ground -water  to surface  water  systems  that can address  seasonal  variability  and 
cope with slow - and sudden -onset changes. Institutional capacit ies, knowledge, and learning builds capacities 
across  a variety  of stakeholders  for evidence -based  implementation  of adaptive  solutions  and creates  an enabling 
environment to support communities, particularly, women as ‘change -agents’ for climate action. T he Theory of 
Change for the project is presented in Section  C.1. 
 
160. The proposed project integrates sustainability strategies and pathways for replication and scale to catalyse 
impacts beyond the project lifetime. GoB aims to build on this project to replicate and scale resilient livelihoods 
and drinking water solutions to the other vulnerable coastal districts prioritized for Phase II. (See discussion on 
Targeting, Section C.3). In particular, the following activities advance the potential for transfo rmative impact 
beyond the project:


---
*Page 61*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 112  
 
 
• Supporting diversification to climate -resilient livelihoods through formation of Women Livelihood Groups (WLGs) 
and linkages across value -chain actors  promotes community -based enterprises, economies of scale, and an 
adaptation market place for resilient technologies, products, and services (Activities 1.1 and 1.2). Investments in 
capacities for income generation and collateral building can support scale -up of the livelihoods through micro - 
credit  and other  inclusive  finance  mechanisms.  The project  spurs  access  to finance  linkages  to promote  graduation 
of the supported livelihoods away from grant financing to enable further  scale.  
• The ToT and peer -to-peer learning approaches for promotion of resilient technologies, business development, 
and livelihood management skills as well as establishment of PPIs at the Union level can support replication of 
adaptive  livelihood  approaches  to rest of the wards  across  the targeted  Unions.  Development  of MoWCA  and LGI 
capacities  (including  Women  Standing  Committees)  for climate -risk informed  implementation  and management  of 
resilient coastal livelihoods can enable replication of the livelihood interventions, through impr oved service 
provision and crowding in external financing, to other districts, building on the codified climate risk and livelihood 
scenarios and the implementation took -kit (Activity 3.1). (Multiple is 25 – project reaches about 100,000 people 
with liveli hood benefits - about 250,000 additional people can be reached as the agricultural populations across 
the non -targeted wards in the targeted Unions; times an additional 10 unions across the targeted  districts).  
• The establishment of women and girl volunteer  groups at the ward level enables last -mile dissemination of EWs 
for enhanced resilience of supported livelihoods and water interventions to climate -change induced disasters. By 
training and promoting learning exchange for the Union level DMCs and CPP volu nteer groups as well as 
advocacy with relevant NGOs and MoDMR (Activity 1.3), the project enables replication of the women and girls 
volunteer mechanisms to other wards of the targeted Unions as well as non -targeted unions of the two districts. 
(Multiple i s about 4 – project reaches about 250,000 people directly with EWs; another 650,000 can be reached 
across targeted Unions; and there are 10 additional non -targeted Unions of the targeted districts with 240,000 
population).  
• Community -centred  investments  in resilient  drinking  water  technologies,  co-managed  by WUGs  and WMCs  at the 
Ward levels, have the potential to be replicated to other communities across the non -targeted wards of the 39 
Unions as Output 2 strengthens the capacities of HHs, communities, and local support staff in adaptive water 
supply  management,  operation  and maintenance,  and climate  and disaster  risk management  to safeguard  drinking 
water.  Moreover,  the project  invests  in DPHE’s  national  and sub-national  technical  capacities  on climate  risks and 
drinking water impacts, design of resilient technical solutions (connecting with engineering institutes), and 
community -centric  management  of drinking  water  solutions  (Activities  2.3 and 3.2). Through  climate -risk informed 
service provision and enhanced technical support, DPHE would be able to replicate the project interventions to 
other communities, building on the community -centric planning and O&M approaches promoted by the project. It 
will also be able to better coordinate investments and ens ure climate -risks are incorporated in the planned water 
supply  investments  the coast.  (Multiple  is 30 – project  reaches  about  130000  people  with water;  assuming  50 per 
cent coverage  for non-targeted  wards,  impact  can be replicated  to about  300,000  people;  another  100,000  people 
in the 10 non-targeted  unions;  times  10 for coverage  across  the additional  10 districts  across  the coast  vulnerable 
to climate  change).  
• The pathways to knowledge and learning promoted in Activity 3.3, including through codification o f knowledge 
generated  and its dissemination  through  integration  into a web-portal  (hosted  by MoWCA),  institutional  platforms, 
and research and academic institutes; learning for long -term adaptive capacities of youth; and impact evaluation 
enable transformative impact beyond the project.  
 
161. Building on the analytical groundwork and knowledge established by the project, the project supports the 
development of a ‘Replication Roadmap’ to assist GoB in identifying key needs and sustainable financing  
mechanisms. In coordination with other ministries, donors, private sector, and multi -lateral partners, the project 
will support further replication and scale of climate -resilient livelihoods and drinking water solutions across the 
coastal communities faci ng climate -change induced salinity impacts on their freshwater resources. Overall, the 
project contributions can be replicated and scaled to 250 wards and 10 unions, and across 10 additional 
vulnerable districts of the southwest coast (with an aggregate mu ltiple of 30 – based on wards and unions 
population data and number of districts) to promote climate -resilient development of Bangladesh.


---
*Page 62*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 112  
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
 
162. The project  enhances  institutional  capacities,  knowledge,  and learning  to support  GoB in increasing  the resilience 
of its coastal communities to evolving climate risks through gender -responsive, community -centric approaches. 
Output 3 of the project codifies knowledge related to climate -risks and scenarios for livelihoods and water, 
technological solutions and implementation tools, and training modules for livelihood and water security 
(generated under Activities 3.1 and 3.2). It also codifies best pr actices, lessons learned, and an evidence -base 
generated  by the community -centric  interventions,  focused  on women,  under  Outputs  1 and 2. A web-portal,  co- 
hosted  by MoWCA  and potential  partners,  would  support  wide reach  of the knowledge  and learning  facilitated  by 
the project. Integration of customized modules for government, academic and research institutes into their 
respective platforms will advance multi -stakeholder capacities for continued adaptation responses in the face of 
a changing climate. M oWCA’s capacity for institutional coordination would also be enhanced to support 
integration of gender and climate change, in coordination with Minister of Environment and Forest (MoEF), into 
cross -sectoral policies, plans, and investments. ToT approaches will be implemented to institutionalize 
knowledge and technical skills across MoWCA, DWA, DPHE and LGIs, with support from Department of 
Environment (the technical agency deals with scientific part of the Climate Change in  Bangladesh).  
 
163. The project promotes peer -to-peer learning among communities to invest in adaptation solutions and risk 
reduction strategies by enhancing knowledge, awareness, and capacities of WLGs, value -chain actors, WUGs, 
LGIs  and volunteer  teams  for dissemination  of EWs.  PPIs  serve as a knowledge  exchange  and learning  platforms 
to support  scale  up climate -resilient  livelihoods  and catalyse  private  sector  engagement.  The interventions  under 
Outputs 1 and 2 will be supplemented with a targeted ‘Adaptive Learning Plan’ (under Output  3) for young boys 
and girls that is envisioned  to create  transformative  change  for future  communities.  This would  include  awareness 
on climate risks and impacts, learning on adaptation scenarios and best -practices, and behavioural change 
focused on secure  lives and livelihoods in a changing climate. Learning will be augmented by providing insights 
from ongoing project activities, with a focus on collecting and using data in a rigorous manner. The project will 
also promote evidence -based learning through th e establishment of longitudinal impact monitoring mechanisms 
for gathering valuable data and lessons to inform implementation of climate -resilient interventions for secure 
water and livelihoods. An impact evaluation (quasi -experimental) will be designed an d executed to quantify 
project impacts under Outputs 1 and 2, as well as the ‘Adaptive Learning’ activities under Output  3. 
 
164. Finally,  the gender -responsive  approaches  to adaptation  solutions  and knowledge  generated  will be a significant 
asset for Bangladesh as well as to other south Asian countries. The knowledge and learning mechanisms can 
promote the project as replicable model for gender and climate change adaptation action in least  developed  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling e nvironment  
 
165. Enabling effective and sustained participation of private and public -sector actors: The project invests in 
communities,  especially  women,  as ‘change -agents’  to ensure  ownership  and sustained  engagement.  WUGs  are 
capacitated  to invest  in livelihoods,  after an initial  period  of capital  cost support,  and their scale -up through  group - 
based  skills  support  and development.  Engagement  and technical  support  for value -chain  actors  and networking 
linkages  for market  and financial  access  also incentivize  community -based  enterprise  development  and markets 
for alterative, climate -resilient livelihoods. The project will crowd -in private sector investment into value -addition 
facilities such as crab hatcheries with project financing easing the barriers for investment and enhancing the 
productive capacity of women groups. Supported by PPIs (comprised of WUGs, Value -chain actors, LGIs, 
MoWCA) at the Upazila level, this will leverage sustained private sector participation across market actors and 
FIs. The project also enables community buy -in and ownership of the drinking water supply investments under 
Output 2. By participatory mapping and formulation of WUGs and WMCs, the project creates community -centric 
structures that institutionalize drinking water solutions beyond a HH -level intervention. Improving the technical 
capacity and  knowledge  of  the  communities,  especially the  women  groups,  in  adaptive  water  distribution  
planning, O&M of water solutions, and climate risk reduction strategies  will ensure their sustained engagement.


---
*Page 63*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 112  
 
 
A fee-based  model  for access  to and O&M  of the drinking  water  solutions  will be sustained  underpinned  by these 
capacities and secured impact of drinking water security for these communities, potentially creating the 
environment for nascent enterprise -based models for drinking water provision. Furthermore, the strengthened 
institutional capacities among government, including local extension staff ( WSCs, Watsan standing committees 
(WatSCs), LGIs) and sub -national and national MoWCA and DPHE staff (such as ToT based technical training 
for planning  and operations,  knowledge  and skills  related  to climate  risk management,  implementation  tools,  and 
capacities  for O&M  of water  and livelihood  solutions)  enables  sustained  engagement  of public  sector  institutions. 
GCF  resources  also leverage  GoB co-financing  for sustained  commitment  to secure  water  and livelihoods  for the 
coastal communities during and beyond the  project.  
 
Innovation, market development, and transformation  
 
166. Resilient adaptation technologies, such as aqua -geoponics and hydroponics, will be introduced and up -scaled 
along with innovative, sustainable practices in crab farming, sesame, etc. Women producer groups (WLGs) will 
engender economies of scale and consequent value -addition and financing to promote market development. 
Project investments in climate -resilient livelihood assets; technical, financial and business skills of communities; 
and community and government capacities for climate -risk informed livelihood planning and implementation will 
facilitate  transformative  impact  to secure  coastal  livelihoods.  The targeted  markets  of vegetable,  plants,  and crab 
(see Section C.5.) were identifi ed as having a substantive development potential due to sustained local and 
national demand for vegetables, and increasing demand for sesame and crabs in international markets. GoB 
identified  crab production  as a feasible,  climate -resilient  and environment ally friendly  sector  that is transformative 
in its potential to provide coastal communities sustained livelihood options in the light of increasing climate - 
induced salinization processes. The project also up -scales innovative platforms (PPIs) for private sector 
engagement, based on best practices, across resilient livelihood value -chains. PPIs will help spur market 
development through the facilitation of skills and knowledge exchange as well as linking producers to market 
actors  and investors.  The skills  and collateral  building  among  the WLGs  and value -chain  actors  will enable  access 
to finance further advancing scale and market  expansion.  
 
167. The project  also supports  scaling  up resilient  drinking  water  solutions  (including  innovative  RWH  and pond -based 
storage and filtration systems) introducing an innovative approach for community -based planning and 
management of water supply for year -round access to safe and reliable drinking water. The three -tiered O&M 
system, complimented by the fee -based model for acces s to drinking water, allows community ownership while 
easing the burden of major costs through government support and financial commitment. Project investments in 
DPHE’s  capacity  for innovation,  design  and implementation  of resilient  drinking  water  solutions  for the southwest 
coast  will also enable  a transformative  shift away  from ground  water  dependence  to secure  drinking  water  for the 
vulnerable coastal  communities.  
 
168. GCF  resources  – combined  with GoB co-financing  – will be used  to catalyse  a switch  from currently,  non-adaptive 
livelihoods  to diversified,  climate -resilient  livelihoods  and a shift away  from worsening  ground  water  resources  to 
resilient surface water solutions for enhanced drinking water security. The transformative impact is achieved 
through the inter -related support provided by the project to empower communities, focusing on women, in 
securing drinking water and agricultural livelihoods disrupted by climate -change induced  salinity.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and poli cies


---
*Page 64*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 112  
 
 
169. The project specifically supports the implementation of adaptation priorities identified in the National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA) and the NDC with focus on agricultural and water resources. It also contributes to 
the climate investment framework under Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) and 
supports  integration  of climate  change  into development,  focusing  on the poor and vulnerable.  With the focus  on 
gender -responsiveness, the project also contributed to the commitments under Climate Change and Gender 
Action  Plan (ccGAP)  to ensure  gender  equality  in climate  change  relates  policies  and programs.  Particularly,  the 
interventions  under  Output  3 promote  climate -responsive  planning  through  the development  of climate  scenarios 
and modelling for coastal livelihoods and drinking water security, adaptive livelihood planning tool -kits, and 
climate -risk incorporated  master  plan for drinking  wate r supply  for the Southwest  coast.  Innovation  capacities  are 
strengthened  for GoB to invest  in resilient  livelihoods  and drinking  water  solutions  beyond  the project  lifetime  and 
target areas.  
 
170. This project  also contributes  to national  policies  including  the Sixth  Five Year  Plan (SFYP)  of GOB  which  articulate 
the country’s commitment to addressing climate change and equitable development, and the forthcoming 
Seventh Five Year Plan (2016 -20)61 which puts emphasis on “Accelerating Growth, Empowering Every Citiz en”. 
The draft plan recognizes  that poor people’s  choices  are extremely  limited  because  of lack of assets  and income, 
and that the priority objective of 7th Plan is to reduce poverty. Strategic goals include employment generation, 
skills development, and reducing vulnerability. The project also contributes to the sectoral policy priorities of the 
National Water Policy, 1999, which called for institutional changes in enhancing the role of women in water 
management. The project particularly advances the righ ts of women as enshrined in the Constitution of 
Bangladesh and supported under a number of policies and sectoral  strategies.  
 
171. Recognizing the adverse impacts of climate change induced salinization on coastal biodiversity and the 
increasing  pressure  of scaling up climate  resilient  aquaculture  interventions  in the target  districts,  the project  will 
also invest in improving environmental management of clustered small -scale aquaculture interventions in mud 
crab farming,  particularly  in regards  to effluent  management  and bioremediation,  through  the development  of an 
appropriate code of practice. Furthermore, recognizing the essential role of mangrove integrity for the climate 
change resilience of target communities in terms of weathering SLR, storm surges an d cyclones, additional 
capacity building and support will be aimed towards enforcement of existing regulations prohibiting aquaculture 
pond  expansion,  fuel wood  collection  from mangrove  areas,  and other  livelihoods  activities  within  the Sundarbans 
Protecte d Forest,  with appropriate  support  at the community  and institutional  levels,  which  will be included  in the 
aforementioned code of practice. The project will similarly address the unsustainable dependence on wild crab 
stock required to expand crab farming activities and hence will also develop the GoB expertise and capacity in 
producing hatchery stock, while supporting a code of practice which reduces, and eventually eliminates, the 
practice of collecting of wild fry from mangrove areas. Finally, the projec t will address the issue of by -catch use 
for aquaculture feeds by also supporting the development of a code of practice which reduces the pressure on 
marine fish stocks, by developing plan -based aquaculture feeds. Institutional capacity and policy/regulato ry 
support in in regards to managing wild stocks, appropriate aquaculture effluent management from farms and 
hatcheries, water quality monitoring and biosafety protocols, and sustainable feed supply will be essential in 
ensuring the sustainability of clima te-resilient livelihoods over the coming  years.  
 
172. Overall the project also contributes to the implementation of identified priorities such as agricultural and water 
sector  resilience,  coastal  resilience,  and reduced  vulnerabilities  of the poor,  focusing  on women  and marginalized 
groups. Development of GoB capacities (MoWCA, DWA, DPHE, LGIs) in planning for and managing climate - 
risks on freshwater  resources  and coastal  lives also drives  in public  and private  sector  investment  into livelihoods  
and drinking water supply through the support to PPIs for climate -resilient livelihoods, O&M investments, and  
 
 
 
 
61 Presentation by Prof Shamsul Alam, Member, General Economics Division, 9 July 2015


---
*Page 65*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 112  
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Environmental co -benefits  
 
173. Maladaptive livelihoods, in particular, the poorly regulated large -scale switch to shrimp farming in the coastal 
districts of Bangladesh has had serious impacts on mangrove integrity, and has further exacerbated the 
salinization of soil. The environmentally sustainable adaptation measures financed by GCF w ill have the added 
benefit  of changing  baseline  practices  for the better.  Recognizing  that these  development  pathways  in response 
to changing environmental conditions must be regulated and controlled to maintain ecosystem integrity, the 
project  takes  a proactive  approach  to shifting  livelihood  strategies  while  also building  community  and institutional 
capacity in sustainable agricultural and aquaculture practices. The crab -farming livelihoods will make use of 
existing shrimp farms, modified according to int ernational best practice in aquaculture to control for salinity 
seepage, while building the capacity of local government institutions to control unregulated expansion of farms. 
The introduction of plant -based improved feed, and research into Integrated Mul ti-trophic Systems (IMS) where 
a polyculture  system  of crab farmed  with aquatic  weeds  to uptake  waste,  will be used  for improved  management 
of effluents. The project therefore presents an opportunity to improve the environmental management of small - 
scale clustered aquaculture interventions in terms of using sustainable polyculture systems, siting farms to 
minimize impact, effluent and water quality management, salinity seepage, fish/crab feed quality and 
sustainability and biosafety protocols, which curren tly present significant challenges in the coastal districts. The 
ensemble of these techniques will provide a significant opportunity to improve environmental management of 
small -scale aquaculture at the local and national  levels.  
 
174. Current  small -scale  traditional  methods  of crab aquaculture  depend  on wild stocks  of crab fry for profitability  and 
sustainability, and these resources have already been greatly depleted. The indiscriminate collection of crab fry 
from mangroves has serious impacts on biodiversity and can lead to human wildlife conflicts in the Sundarbans 
Protected  Forest,  threatening  species  of critical  importance,  such  as the Bengal  Tiger.  Reliance  on the mangrove 
for wild fry also encourages mangrove deterioration through unregulated aquaculture expansion and use of 
mangrove trees for fuel wood. In order to promote a switch from the current dependence on wild crab stock, the 
project has included the infrastructure for crab hatcheries, which will produce all of the fry necessary to support 
crab far ming livelihoods supported by the project. The hatcheries will also be among the first commercial scale 
hatcheries in Bangladesh and will provide the foundation for scale -up to eliminate reliance on wild stocks in the 
long-term.  The climate -resilient  livelihoods  support  at the community  level will include  appropriate  environmental 
awareness  and environmental  protection  measures  at the implementation  level for beneficiaries,  as well as build 
institutional capacity in environmental management of small -scale aquaculture, and mangrove conservation 
regulation and enforcement, and the switch to hatchery stock through the development of appropriate codes of 
practice. Finally, the promotion of aqua geoponics systems and hydroponics systems, and the use of low input  
cultivation of homestead gardens, plantations and sesame, will also have significant environmental benefits and 
will include  training  in sustainable  cultivation  techniques  and integrated  pest control  to reduce  community  reliance 
on pesticides and  fertiliz ers. 
 
175. In regards  to the water  provision  interventions,  RWH  systems  have  been  selected  based  on their appropriateness 
for the local context, both environmentally and socially, and promoting their use in the coastal districts of 
Bangladesh, will have significant and transformative environmental benefits, given that it will help to shift 
communities away from over -extracted and contaminated ground water resources to surface water solutions. 
Since the primary source of drinking water currently within the  target districts is groundwater extraction, and 
although there is insufficient information on the quality and quantity of groundwater aquifers, current research 
indicates that groundwater aquifers are becoming increasingly saline, and unsuitable for potab le water use. As 
such,  the use of purification  technologies  such  as reverse  osmosis  and desalination  would  be required  to provide 
good quality drinking water. However, these types of water treatment solutions have significant economic, 
environmental  and social costs,  due to very high energy  demands  and operating  costs,  and further  risk polluting  
groundwater aquifers (from brine discharge). Therefore, among the alternatives considered, the proposed 
solution with GCF financing is for RWH systems, which will be transformative in reducing this reliance. As


---
*Page 66*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 112  
 
 
highlighted above, the proposed RWH solution at the institutional, community and household levels and pond - 
based solutions, is a win-win-win economically, environmentally and socially, and has community buy -in 
(including willingness to pay for the O&M costs). These solutions are transformative for Bangladesh that has 
previously relied only upon small (2,000 litre) rainwater harvesti ng tanks, and extraction of contaminated and 
increasingly scarce ground water. The Environmental and Social Risk assessment has taken the range of risks 
associated with both the water provision and livelihood interventions into account, and the Environment al and 
Social Management Framework has been developed for this project, to both avoid and mitigate these risks, 
promote enabling regulation and policy, and build capacity to enhance the environmental benefits of the project.  
 
Social and gender co -benefits:  
176. The project has been structured to focus mainly on women and adolescent girls with all project activities 
addressing gendered climate resilience from the community level up to the institutional level. The interventions 
not only address  immediate  barriers  to women’s  resilience  and unequal  access  to resources  and climate  resilient 
livelihood options for extreme poor women and adolescent girls, but also take a multi -dimensional approach by 
addressing additional institutional constraints, knowledge gaps and ca pacities. Investing in better access to 
water, not only aims to address women and girls’ burden of unpaid work, and the disproportionate impacts on 
the health of women and girls in the face of salinity ingress and extreme weather events, but developing 
mechanisms for women’s community management of essential resources and livelihood assets, aims to 
transform  the role of women  in their communities,  at the intra-household  level and at the community  level.  These 
interventions will thus be gender -transformative  in changing women’s role in water management and climate - 
resilient livelihoods, but also transforming the norms within communities around women and girl’s agency, 
mobility, and productivity. Livelihood interventions have been designed to not only recogni ze women’s central 
importance in ensuring household nutritional security, but also their growing role in aquaculture value chains, 
drawing on lessons learned from similar interventions to address barriers and challenges. The project will be 
careful to targ et only those adolescent girls as direct beneficiaries that have been married early and are solely 
responsible for household income, so as not to create an incentive for adolescent girls to pursue secondary 
education.  The central  importance  of livelihood  diversification  and the adaptive  capacity  of the livelihoods  options 
supported in the target districts, has also been refined by applying a barriers and opportunities analysis with a 
gender lens, and aims to strike a balance between interventions which acco unt for women’s preferences and 
existing social constraints due to cultural norms and beliefs, while providing transformative opportunities for 
women  to more  meaningfully  and fully participate  in climate  resilient  value  chains.  Although  men and adolescent 
boys are not part of the principle beneficiaries’ for the livelihoods support, the project recognizes, and has put 
emphasis on gender relations at the household and community levels, with interventions and trainings designed 
to change  norms  around  women’s  mobility  and the shifting  community  perceptions  around  ‘appropriate’  work  for 
women, and will take a continuous learning approach to challenges encountered and lessons learned through 
gender sensitive project evaluations. The interventions aim to challenge  the beliefs and norms which contribute 
to women  and girls’ marginalization  and hence  disproportionate  vulnerability  to climate  shocks.  The project  aims 
not only at empowering women and adolescent girls though the proposed interventions, that will increase  
women’s agency, voice in and decision -making capacity within their households and communities, but also to 
support ministries of the GoB to breach the silos in which they operate to develop more gender responsive 
approaches to both DRR and resource use.  
 
177. Since, the climate resilient livelihoods intervention targets women by forming Women’s Livelihood Groups, we 
can expect increases in women’s autonomy and empowerment. By engaging in climate resilient livelihoods 
activities, women will generate their own st ream of income. With an increase in autonomy and income, it is very 
likely that they will allocate a greater portion of their budgets for education and health consumption for their 
households.  Furthermore,  increases  of autonomy  and income  for women  within  households  will provide  a positive 
example for adolescent girls within those households to do the same. Moreover, as women and girls become 
more empowered members of their communities they will be in a position to demand community level 
improvements of inf rastructure and institutions to better serve their needs, which can be seen as a way to 
increase  adaptive  capacity  of those  communities.  This support  also strengthens  the value  chains  that the trained  
women’s groups will utilize to sell their products. Not  only will directly trained women benefit from a strengthened


---
*Page 67*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 112  
 
 
value  chain  but other  entrepreneurs  and producers  may benefit  too. A strengthened  value  chain  may see positive 
spill-overs.  
 
178. The project interventions will help to transform existing gender norms around women’s capacity to manage 
resources  such  as drinking  water,  as well to work  in certain  roles  within  the fisheries  value  chain.  In Bangladesh, 
there is also a pressing need to address underlying gender norms and constraints, which contribute to women’s 
vulnerability,  as well as help to ensure  that women  have  the basic  assets,  training  and decision -making  power  to 
better  face the increasing  risks  of climate  change.  Importantly,  the development  of the rainwater  harvesting  tanks 
will provide free safe drinking water to not only extremely poor and vulnerable people but to the broader 
population. This will lessen the impact on local areas through reduced public health impacts such as  sickness 
from drinking  unsafe  water  and the disproportionate  impacts  on women,  such  as hypertension.  This will result  in 
an increase in productivity through a reduction in illness -related  downtime.  
 
179. Improving  drinking  water  quality  will result  in improved  health  benefits  for the coastal  communities  of the targeted 
districts.  Currently,  the vast majority  of people  in the target  communities  rely on saline  water  for drinking  and this 
salinity problem will be exacerbated as the climate changes (seawater intrusion into groundwater aquifers and 
surface inundation). High salt intake is associated with hypertension and cardiovascular disease, which is the 
leading cause of death globall y 62 . Moreover, there is complementarity between simultaneously improving 
livelihoods  resilience  and the resilience  of drinking  water  supply.  As the time dedicated  to collecting  and cleaning 
water by women is reduced, the amount of time they can dedicate to participation in the formal economy will 
increase through climate resilient livelihood  options.  
 
Economic co -benefits:  
180. The economic  co-benefits  of the project  include  increased  income  benefits,  increased  assets,  job and enterprise 
creation, and benefits  of enhanced productivity from improved health. The project support to 1017 women’s 
groups (25,425 women) for climate resilient livelihoods options in aquaculture and agriculture yields increased 
income benefits and enables participation in the formal econ omy, for a total expected increase in income of $15 
million (over the full life of the project). Project support increases the economic assets of the women and their 
households and spurs enterprise -development in the communities. The support to value -chain  and market 
development  creates  income  enhancing  opportunities  for upstream  and downstream  market  actors  and provides 
opportunities for job creation across the value -chains. Investments in drinking water supply also contribute to 
community -managed  asset  creation,  jobs (such  as caretakers  for O&M),  increases  opportunities  for private  sector 
engagement in drinking water provision, and improves the overall health and resilience of the beneficiary 
communities. The health benefits are estimated at $4 million o ver the project  lifetime.  
 
181. The project also yields indirect economic co -benefits at the macro -level derived by the contribution to livelihood, 
food security and self -sufficiency in the production of fish, shrimp and crab along with agricultural outputs, 
potentially  saving  on imports.  Shifting  women’s  livelihoods  to climate  resilient  options  will reduce  the likelihood  of 
the need for social protection and social safety net pay outs. Provision of safe drinking water will reduce the 
potential costs of water -related illness, both for the household, and the country’s health system. High salinity in 
drinking water leads to increased cardiovascular disease incidence and intensity. This places a distinct financial 
burden on Bangladesh’s health system. By imp roving drinking water quality through rainwater harvesting 
systems, the incidence and intensity of cardiovascular disease in the targeted populations will decrease thus 
reducing  the burden  on the health  system,  freeing  up government  resources  for other  priority areas.  Overall,  the 
livelihoods and drinking water interventions will improve the socio -economic status of the coastal communities 
and contribute to the local economies and long -term climate -resilient development of the country.  
 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the  Recipient  
 
62 World Health Organization. Global status report on non -communicable diseases 2010. Geneva: WHO; 2011.


---
*Page 68*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 112  
 
 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
182. An estimated 2.5 million poor people live along the southwest of Bangladesh, already suffering from shortage 
of drinking water, scarcity of water for agriculture, and significant changes occurring in the coastal aquatic 
ecosystems. Slow - and sudden -onset climate change impacts including SLR and intensified cyclonic events 
are further  compounding  the vulnerabilities  of the coastal  poor.  IPCC  reports  estimate  that by 2050 , another  27 
million people living in the coastal areas will be at risk from SLR. The coastal zone experiences devastating 
tropical cyclones originating in the Bay of Bengal and during 1961 -2013, 61 cyclones hit Bangladesh of which 
28 per cent hit the sout hwest coast. Every three years a severe cyclone strikes the area and causes havoc in 
the lives and livelihoods  of people  living  by the coast.  In 2007,  the tropical  cyclone  Sidr caused  a financial  loss 
of USD1.7 billion according to an estimate by GoB (2008). Combined with projected SLR, the country is 
expected to face intensified cyclones and higher tidal surges that could potentially inundate an additional 15 
per cent of the coastal  area by 2050,  exposing  and additional  9.7 million  people  (compared  to 3.5 million  in the 
no climate change scenario) to severe  inundation.  
 
183. Climate change -induced saltwater intrusion is compounding the non -climatic drivers for deterioration of 
freshwater resources causing a significant shift in coastal livelihoods and exacerbating drinking water 
insecurity. Worsened by cyclones and flooding and rainfall variability, communities have experienced direct 
damage  of crops,  decreasing  fresh  water  fish stocks,  and income  loss, which  leads  to an increased  vulnerability. 
Crop lo sses due to SLR -induced salinity intrusion have been estimated to be approximately 200,000 metric 
tonnes63 with salinity (+5 ppt) of irrigation water expected to lead to reduced farm productivity by up to 50 per 
cent64. Tidal surge inundation is estimated to cause an additional loss (above the baseline - without climate 
change)  of 422,642  tons of Aman  rice, 156,928  tons of Aus rice, and 116,060  tons of Boro  rice, which  will have 
impacts on both the country’s economy and food security65. Increasing climate -change induced salinity is also 
expected impact the reproductive cycle and capacity, spawning area and feeding, breeding and longitudinal 
migration of many of the fish species66 adversely impacting the aquaculture -based  livelihoods.  
 
184. Climate  change  induced  salt water  intrusion  has also compounded  the issues  of water  quality  and accessibility 
among the coastal communities. The World Health Organisation recommends that adults and children, 
including pregnant women, should have no more than 2g/day of sodium (5g/day salt)67, whereas in southwest 
Bangladesh  studies  have  shown  average  levels  of sodium  of 3.4 g/ day, up to 7.7 g/day68. Additionally,  women 
who source  their drinking  water  from shallow  tube wells  have  the highest  levels  of sodium,  correspondi ng to an 
estimated  salt intake  of 5-16g/day  during  the dry season.  Many  groundwater  sources  have  become  unsafe  and 
unreliable with projected rainfall variability expected to worsen water scarcity during the dry season. Cyclones 
have  also damaged  water  supply  infrastructure  – tubewells  and ponds  – with many  ponds  becoming  saline  due 
to inundation. Many coastal communities also rely on surface water –pond based or rain water harvesting – 
solutions but continue to face challenges with accessing year -round safe and reliable drinking  water.  
 
185. Overall reduction of agricultural livelihoods and the prevalence of maladaptive livelihoods have marginalized 
women further due to loss of land and fewer on -farm and post -harvest employment opportunities. Migration  of 
men due to cyclones and asset losses have increased the burden of household care and livelihood tasks for 
women. As the burden of collecting safe drinking water primarily falls on women and girls, the declining access  
 
63 Mainuddin et al. 2011, ‘Planning an d costing agriculture’s adaptation to climate change in the salinity prone cropping system of 
Bangladesh,’ Bangladesh Center for Advanced Studies  
64 Clarke, D., ‘Projections of on -farm salinity in coastal Bangladesh,’ Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015.  
65 Dasgupta S., Hossain M. M, Huq M., Wheeler D. (2014). Climate Change, Soil Salinity and the Economics of High -Yield Rice 
Production in Coastal Bangladesh. Policy Research Working Paper (forthcoming), Development Research Group, World Ban  
66 Ibid. 
67 WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF (United Nations Children's Emergency Fund) (2010). Estimates for the Use of 
Improved Drinking Water Sources and Improved Sanitation Facilities. World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s 
Fund, Joint Monit oring Program for water supply and sanitation, Geneva, Switzerland  
68 Alam, and Khan. Sodium Concentration in Potable Ground Water in Coastal Belt of Bangladesh Due to the Effect of Global 
Warming: A Potential Health Risk. IOSR Journal of Environmental Sci ence, Toxicology and Food Technology (IOSR -JESTFT) e - 
ISSN: 2319 -2402, p - ISSN: 2319 -2399.Volume 8, Issue 6 Ver. I (Jun. 2014), PP 21 -30 www.iosrjournals.org


---
*Page 69*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 68 OF 112  
 
 
to freshwater resources also exposes them to safety and health hazards as well as loss of income generation 
and/or educational opportunities. Women and adolescent girls are usually required to obtain drinking water 
from distant  sources,  up to 5 to 6 kilometres  each  day in some  south -western  districts.  Young  girls often  sacrifice 
their academic  activities  to fulfil these  responsibilities  and face the prospects  of an early  arranged  marriage  due 
to it. Even during their pregnancy women are forced to fetch water irrespective of the distance between the 
source and their dwellings. Premature birth, abortion and still birth are reported in alarmingly high numbers in 
these areas. In the absence of freshwater, adolescent girls and women cannot mai ntain hygienic reproductive 
health care and often report perinea rashes and urinary tract infections. The spread of diarrheal diseases, 
cholera and dengue fever as an aftermath of a coastal flood event often leads to loss of employment. Ethnic 
and religiou s minorities are particularly vulnerable, given their marginalization from social and political 
processes, and are among the poorest household in the study area. The main minority groups are Hindu 
households  (up to 30 per cent of the population  in the target  districts)  and the Indigenous  group,  known  locally 
as ‘adivasi’, belonging to the Munda tribe. These groups are often subjected to severe discrimination, 
repression, and exclusion and experience additional constraints in accessing potable water, as well as 
employment. Overall, indigenous groups are also more heavily on the environment and natural resources  for 
their living, making them doubly vulnerable to changing climatic conditions and water scarcity.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
186. While Bangladesh has made considerable progress over the past decades in growing the country’s economy, 
which is shifting from an agro -economy into a mixed economy, with an average GDP growth rate of 5.72 per 
cent in 1994 to 7.05 per c ent in 2016, the exposure to climate change risks and impacts on its economy will 
continue to undermine the development gains invested in by GoB, donors, and communities. The agricultural 
sector  employment  remains  high with many  rural poor populations  dependent  on the sector  for their livelihoods. 
About  50 million  people,  or 31.5 per cent of total population,  are still poor,  with one a quarter  in extreme  poverty. 
Coastal zone constituting 28 per cent of the total population has a slightly higher percent age of the population 
living below the absolute poverty line compared to the country as a whole (52 per cent vs 49 per cent). The 
GoB has labelled the coastal zone as an “agro -ecologically disadvantaged region” (GoB, 2005) owing to 
pressures in the region from scarcity of drinking water, land erosion, waterlogging, soil salinity and various 
forms of pollution (Islam and Ahmad,  2004).  
 
187. The extreme poor coastal communities targeted by the project lack awareness of climate risks and impacts on 
their lives and livelihoods  and have  limited  technical  and financial  capacities  to invest  their limited  resources  to 
support  additional  adaptation  costs.  These  rural coastal  communities  also have  limited  access  to markets,  basic 
public services and infrastructure. Margina lized groups within the communities, including women, children, 
elderly, and IPs, suffer disproportionately from poverty, social exclusion, lack of access to resources such as 
land and other assets, and limited decision -making power. Climate change impacts  compound these 
vulnerabilities by putting the same people at extreme risk, devastating their limited assets, and steeping them 
further into poverty and social exclusion. Many households have limited access to markets and inadequate 
provision of basic infr astructure and services. Given the factors described  above,  
 
188. Despite GoB’s significant financing, climate change is increasing the burden of the GoB as invested 
development gains are repeatedly jeopardized by the sudden -onset climate change events such as cyclones 
as well as slow -onset SLR and saltwater intrusion. External and public sector financing is, therefore, critical to 
address the financial needs of the country and the coastal communities. According to the BCCSAP (2009) 
estimate,  overall,  more  than USD1  billion  is needed  to address  the additional  stresses  and risks brought  on by 
climate change in the coastal region of  Bangladesh.  
189. The fiscal  constraints  of relevant  ministries  addressing  water  and livelihood  insecurity  and the related  gendered 
impacts  impede  their ability  to fund the additional  costs  associated  climate  change.  For instance,  MoWCA  has 
limited financial capacity to address incremental costs associated with reducing climate change vulnerabilities 
of extremely poor women and children. Conse quently, they are unable to allocate money for additional 
investments  to climate  proof  their investments,  by introducing  resilient  livelihood  support  and training  from their 
own budget allocations. MoWCA has a baseline budgetary commitment in the two target districts for the next  
6 years of approximately USD25 million, though this is earmarked to provide grants to women to address 
development needs. Similarly, DPHE has a total annual budget of USD69.60 million to address basic water


---
*Page 70*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GRE EN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 112  
 
 
and sanitation supplies to rural and urban areas. DPHE has an allocation of USD10 million over the next 6 
years in the two districts to provide water supply and sanitation systems. While there is significant coverage 
and drinking water provision, climate change stresses continue to render these development investments 
unreliable to supply safe, year -round drinking water. DPHE does not have the fiscal space to fully address the 
incremental costs of adaptation.  
190. Financial constraints are further compounded by limited institutional capacities to assess, plan for, and 
incorporate the evolving climate -risks into policies and programs for coastal resilience, which undermines the 
effectiveness of suppo rt to enable the poor to deal with worsening climate change impacts. There is limited 
awareness of current and predicted climate changes and technical capacity to promote adoption of resilient 
technologies and practices (such as saline resistant crops, hyd roponics, and resilient aquaculture practices) 
for climate -resilient coastal livelihoods. Institutional capacities are limited to incorporate the projected climate 
risks and scenarios affecting freshwater resources and drinking water supply. There is nasce nt understanding 
of salinization processes, projected rainfall variability, and cyclone risks to develop effective and climate - 
resilient technological and community -based solutions such as rainwater harvesting at different scales, pond - 
based  supply  and filtration  systems,  river water -based  systems,  etc. Limited  vertical  and horizontal  coordination 
and evidence based learning also constraint climate -risk informed planning results in short -term responses to 
immediate and observed  risks.  
E.5. Country Owners hip 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
191. The project contributes towards GoB’s achievement of priorities outlined in the Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) and its climate change strategies. The primary goal for adaptation in Bangladesh, 
according  to the NDC,  is to protect  the population,  enhance  their adaptive  capacity  and livelihood  options,  and 
to protect the overall development particularly by promoting climate resilient livelihoods, water security, early 
warning systems, and cyclone shelters. The project objective speaks to the top five key near -term areas of  
intervention  identified  by the NDC  to address  adverse  impacts  of climate  change.69 Namely,  they are 1) Food 
security, livelihood and health protection (incl. water security); 2) Comprehensive disaster management, 3) 
Coastal Zone Management, including Salinity Intrusion control, 4) Flood Control and Erosion protection, 5) 
Building Climate Resilient Infrastructure. Directly aligned to five of the fourteen70 broad adaptation actions 
prioritized by NDC, the project is implementing improved EWS, Tropical cy clones and storm surge protection, 
stress -tolerant  variety  improvement  and cultivation,  adaptation  on local-level perspectives  and biodiversity  and 
ecosystem conservation. The proposed project will contribute to achieve the adaptation target in 39 Union 
Parishad, in two coastal districts. The proposed project is also prioritized for inclusion in the country’s GCF 
Country Work Programme, currently under  development.  
 
192. Bangladesh signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in June  1992 
and ratified it in April 1994. The country also ratified the Kyoto Protocol in October 2001. GoB submitted its 
Initial National Communication (INC) to UNFCCC in October 2002, its second national communication in 
October 2012, and is now developing it s third national communication, scheduled to be submitted to the 
UNFCCC  in 2017.  In April 2016,  Bangladesh  signed  the Paris  Agreement  on Climate  Change.  The country’s  
Intended National Determined Contribution (INDC), beside its mitigation targets, also highlights adaptation  
 
69 The remaining are: 6) Increased Rural Electrification, 7) Enhanced Urban Resilience, 8) Ecosystem based adaptation (including  
forestry co -management), 9) Community based conservation of wetlands and coastal areas, and 10) Policy  and Institutional 
Capacity Building.  
70 The remaining are (in priority order): ii) Disaster preparedness and construction of flood and cyclone shelters; iv) Inland m onsoon 
flood -proofing and protection; v) Climate resilient infrastructure and communicatio n, vi) Climate resilient housing; vii) Improvement of 
Urban resilience through improvement of drainage system to address urban flooding; viii) River training and dredging (includi ng 
excavation of water bodies, canals and drains); x) Research and knowledge management; xii) Adaptation to climate change impacts 
on health; and xiv) Capacity Building at Individual and institutional level to plan and implement adaptation programmes and p rojects 
in the country.


---
*Page 71*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 112  
 
 
priorities including the promotion of climate resilient livelihoods, water security, early warning systems, and 
cyclone shelters, among others. The GoB also adopted the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) in 2005 and 
has recently committed to  adopt Sendai Framework of Action’s priority action, guiding principles and practical 
means for achieving disaster resilience for vulnerable communities in the context of sustainable development. 
The Bangladesh  National  Adaptation  Programme  of Action  (NAPA)  and Bangladesh  Climate  Change  Strategy 
and Action Plan (BCCSAP) were formulated in 2005 and 2009. Furthermore, the Climate Change Gender 
Action Plan (ccGAP), National Plan for Disaster Management (NPDM), and Seventh Five Year Plan (2016 - 
2020) of Go B boldly articulate the country’s commitment to addressing climate change and equitable 
development, while the National Plan for Disaster Management (NPDM) also specifies the need to address 
Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and climate change adaptation (CCA)  in all development plans, programmes 
and policies.  
 
193. The BCCSAP is the key climate change national plan and current basis for climate investment in Bangladesh. 
The strategy  is to integrate  climate  change  challenges  and opportunities  into the overall  develo pment  plan and 
programmes  involving  all sectors  and processes  for economic  and social  development  and provides  an overall 
framework for action recognizing the need for adaptation with a priority focus on poor and vulnerable including 
women and children. The BCCSAP incorporates a multi -pronged approach supporting general awareness 
raising, capacity building, and project implementation in vulnerable regions, with special focus on agriculture 
and water resources.  
 
194. The project is strongly aligned with BCCSAP,  ccGAP, NPDM, and SFYP. The project is designed to meet the 
two specific priority areas of BCCSAP investment in: Theme 1 - “Food Security, Social Protection and Health 
(T1)”, Programme “Livelihood protection of vulnerable socio -economic groups (including w omen) (T1P9)”, and 
“Water and Sanitation programme in climate vulnerable areas (T1P7)”; Theme 2 - “Comprehensive Disaster 
Management” (T2), Programme “Improvement of flood and cyclone storm surge early warning (T2P1, T2P2), 
Risk Management against loss on income and property (T2P4); and Theme 6 - “Capacity Building and 
Institutional Strengthening (T6)” Programme “Strengthening Gender Consideration in Climate Change 
Management (T6P4). The specific objectives of ccGAP that the project is going to address are “Introduce 
innovative agriculture and aquaculture technologies for female farmers and entrepreneurs”, “Enhance women 
knowledge  and access  to financial  instruments”,  “Ensure  women’s  involvement  in efficient  water  management”, 
and “Improve social security/pr otection of women, adolescent, and children pre, during and post -disaster and 
emergency situation” under Priority Sector I. Similarly, in Priority Sector 2 of ccGAP, the project is going to 
contribute to following objectives, “develop gender responsive pol icy based on disaster management, climate 
change and sustainable development”, “allocate adequate financial resources to address gender and DRR 
issues”, “ensure participation of women in community risk assessment (CRA) vulnerability and capacity 
assessment  activities”, “develop adequate communication facilities to ensure movement of women to reach 
safe places  in response  to early  warning”,  “equip  women  and men in providing  first aid and primary  health  care 
as first responders”, and “equip women and communit y with Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), Climate Change 
Adaptation (CCA), and Sustainable Development (SD) nexus in building the framework for  resilience”.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Experience and track record of the accredited entity  
195. UNDP is one of the world’s largest brokers of climate change grants for developing countries, with a current 
portfolio  of USD1.34  billion  in mitigation  and adaptation  grant -financed  projects  in over 140 countries,  supported 
by co-financing of USD6.7 billion. In Bangladesh, UNDP has a strong track record of delivering results in 
partnership with the government. It has worked closely with the GoB for the last four decades in supporting its 
development efforts. We have jointly col laborated in various programmes and projects in the areas of disaster 
risk management, climate change, poverty reduction, better governance and environmental management with 
technical and capacity building support. UNDP has focused on capacity building, po licy and community 
interventions,  targeting  the poorest  and most  marginalized  women,  men,  girls and boys.  The UNDP  Bangladesh  
country  programme  (2012 -2016),  the second  largest  in the Asia and the Pacific  region  has been  prepared  jointly 
with the government  to meet  its development  priorities.  UNDP  currently  manages  30 programmes  with GoB


---
*Page 72*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 112  
 
 
using funds committed by bilateral, multilateral and global funds such as Global Environment Facility (GCF) 
with an annual average delivery of USD70 million.  
 
196. The proposed  project  is built upon  UNDP  Bangladesh’s  extensive  track  record  in implementing  climate  change 
adaptation, social protection and disaster risk management work. UNDP has been implementing the world’s 
largest disaster management programme, the comprehensive disaster management programme (CDMP) in 
Bangladesh with 13 ministries, which has a budget of USD78 million. The CDMP has contributed GoB’s effort 
to make  a paradigm  shift from a disaster  response  centric  approach  to a more  comprehensive  management  of 
disaster and climate change risk. UNDP supported over 50 million people with various adaptive livelihood 
activities. UNDP has been supporting government in formulating key national polices and  strategies including: 
National  Disaster  Management  Plan,  National  Social  Security  Strategy,  National  Adaptation  Plan,  Seventh  Five 
Year Plans, etc.  
 
Experience and track record of the ‘Implementing Partner’ and ‘Responsible Parties’  
 
 
197. MoWCA (as the Executing Entity - ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology) is engaged in the formulation 
and implementation  of policies  and programmes  related  to the welfare  and development  of women  and children. 
The MoWCA  coordinates  development  activities  related  to women  (Women  in Development  – WID)  of different 
Ministries. Overall, the MoWCA works for the establishment and preservation of legal and social rights of 
women and children . Ministry has significant knowledge and capacity in implementing social developmen t 
programme for the poor and marginalized women and girls. The current annual budget of MoWCA is roughly 
USD200 million. The programme has been implemented through DWA that manages district and sub -districts 
offices throughout the country. UNDP has experie nce working with MoWCA on violence against women 
programme,  which  have  made  a measurable  progress  in the lives of women  and girls and received  a high rating 
as per the final programme evaluation. MoWCA has track record of supporting the livelihood of extreme 
vulnerable women, they have implemented UPVGD Programme of European Union, ICVGD programme of 
WFP, Micro -finance support to extreme poor women. The DWA (‘Responsible Party for the proposed project) 
is implementing these projects for last 20 years a ll over Bangladesh. Since 2013, DWA is also working with 
DPHE to implement climate resilient water supply projects in southern Bangladesh under Bangladesh Climate 
Change Trust  Fund.  
 
198. DPHE ( as a ‘Responsible Party’ for the proposed project) is the GoB’s ma in technical agency deals with rural 
water  supply  and sanitation.  DPHE  was established  in 1936  with the purpose  of provide  drinking  water  to rural 
inhabitants. DPHE has worked with several development partners to install rural water technologies since its 
origin. It has so far implemented around 1300 development projects since 1971. Currently, DPHE is 
implementing several relevant drinking water and sanitation projects in rural Bangladesh. These include: 
Bangladesh  Rural  Water  Supply  and Sanitation  Project  (July  2012 -December  2017,  implemented  in 33 districts 
of Bangladesh,  USD  48 million),  Ground  Water  Investigation  & Development  of Deep  Ground  Water  Source  In 
Urban  & Rural  Areas  in Bangladesh  (July  2013 - June  2019,  implemented  in non-coastal  areas  of Bangladesh, 
where  ground  water  is available  for drinking  purpose,  USD  13 million),  Water,  Sanitation  and Hygiene  (WASH) 
Project (January 2015 -June 2018, implementing in 28 districts, where DPHE is mitigating arsenic risks in the 
water  supply  system  including  in the GCF  project  districts,  USD  51.75  million),  and the Project  for Improvement 
of Comprehensive Management Capacity of DPHE on Water Supply (November 2014 -October 2018, 
implemented in 5 technically challenged areas for arsenic contamination, U SD 4.5 million). DPHE has offices 
and technical staff in each Upazila (sub -districts) and districts in Bangladesh including outreach staff at Union 
Level.  The DPHE  investments  currently  focus  on addressing  the challenges  of arsenic  contamination  and have 
financial and technical constraints in tackling climate change challenges in the water supply system. This 
proposed project will build strong capacities complementing current mandate and capacities to support DPHE 
in addressing climate change -induced salin ity impacts on drinking water supply for the coastal  communities.  
 
199. Field  execution  will be supported  by local government  institutions  (LGIs),  in coordination  with NGOs  who would 
be procured  through  a tendering  process.  The Union  Parishad  is the lowest  tier of the Local  Government


---
*Page 73*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 112  
 
 
Mechanism in rural Bangladesh. It is the closest government service point for citizens. It serves as a 
decentralized  point  for delivering  social  protection,  rural livelihoods,  water  and sanitation,  rural social  cohesion, 
local environmental protection, and basic service  delivery.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
200. The proposed project builds on past community consultations, comprising of several rounds of stakeholder 
discussions on adaptation priorities, including climate -resilient livelihoods and drinking water solutions. 
Stakeholder discussions took place over the period of 2014 -2017, initiated and led by the Ministry of Women 
and Children  Affairs  (MoWCA)  as main  implementing  partner,  as well as the Economic  Relations  Division  (ERD) 
of the Ministry of Finance as the  NDA.  
 
201. Following the first submission and in response to detailed review comments from  the GCF Board and its 
Independent Technical Assessment Panel (ITAP), the project has been redesigned, informed by continued 
consultations and engagement of the key stakeholders. Multi -stakeholder consultations included National 
Designated Authority (NDA),  MoWCA, DWA, DPHE, relevant national government agencies, international 
partners including donors and multi -lateral agencies, Civil Society Organizations, NGOs, Indigenous people’s 
organizations, the Private Sector, and the communities in the Khulna and  Satkhira.  
 
202. Led by MoWCA  and the NDA,  technical  meetings  with relevant  ministries  and major  donors  took place  over the 
period of 2015 -2017. The project re -design included consultations with and engagement of key bilateral 
partners for GoB. In June 2017, representatives from the Canadian High Commission, Royal Norwegian 
Embassy,  Embassy  of France,  Embassy  of Japan,  UK’s  Department  for International  Development  (DFID)  were 
consulted to reassess the revised proposal and to gather additional feedback. The con sultations yielded 
recommendations  for the design  and implementation  of the proposed  interventions  and long-term sustainability 
of the project, based on best practices and lessons learned from previous engagements in  Bangladesh.  
 
203. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) were consulted with the objective of gathering feedback, particularly on 
gender  considerations  and gender  empowerment  strategies  in Bangladesh,  as well as on the full design  of the 
project and the proposed activities, including the exi t strategy. Discussions included the greater responsibility 
and ownership to Union Parishads, with DPHE as an implementing partner for the water component. Several 
rounds of discussions with NGOs and CSOs have shaped the detailed design of the project. A l ist of detailed 
consultations with CSOs is included in Annex  XIIIc.  
 
204. The project, through stakeholder consultations with women’s group, extreme poor women and youth groups, 
has integrated gender considerations through increased women’s participation in dec ision-making through 
contingency planning for disaster and resilient livelihoods, water provision, disaster preparedness committees 
and early  warning  systems.  Field  consultations with  women  and adolescent  girls,  led by MoWCA  and the NDA 
were carried out in  12 locations and first -hand data was collected aiming to utilize key findings to prioritize 
adaptation  actions.  Baseline  development  needs  were  also discussed  and will be addressed  throughout  project 
implementation,  including  diversified  employment  opport unities  for women  and youth.  In addition,  as part of the 
preparation  of the feasibility  study,  six Focus  Group  Discussions  (FGDs)  were  conducted  aiming  to understand 
the impact of climate resilient grants, improved drinking water supply and disaster preparedness on gender 
relationships at the household  level.  
 
205. Indigenous  communities  (the Munda  community)  were  extensively  consulted  on their most  preferred  adaptation 
option to enhance their adaptive capacity. In the southern part of Khulna and Satkhira district, areas of key 
vulnerabilities were identified during stakeholder consultations with the Munda community. These include 
reduced access to safe drinking water, lack of employment opportunities, food insecurity, limited access to 
markets,  natural  resources  and to medical  facilities  and lack of participation  in Disaster  Management  Committee 
(DMC). To cope with these challenges, the Munda community has suggested undertaking strategies for 
livelihood enhancement and resilience to climate change, includin g fish culture, livestock rearing, support for 
crab culture  and fish culture,  rain water  harvesting,  rehabilitation  of existing  pond  and reservoirs  and others.


---
*Page 74*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 112  
 
 
206. The Private Sector has been equally involved in stakeholder consultations, as well as local Financial 
Intermediaries  including  SUS,  NGF,  UNNAYAN,  RRF,  NABOLOK,  PRODIPAN  and JJS consulted  with the aim 
of identifying a possibility in financing the adaptive livelihoods of targeted women beneficiaries, discussing the 
risks related to credit financing and microfinance schemes. Moreover, the Nawabeki Ganomukhi Foundation 
(NGF) was consulted in regard to upgrading crab hatcheries and assistance in the supply of crab -lets for the 
propose d project. Value chain actors were consulted through FGD (187 interviews), including 34 interviews 
with farmers, 17 interviews with Union Parishad Chairmen and multiple interviews with government officials 
including representatives from MoWCA, DAE, Livesto ck Officials, Statistical Officials and other key 
stakeholders. Value actors involved in the discussion provided information on bottlenecks in the value chain, 
savings  and access  to loans,  factors  in the enabling  environment,  potential  for upgrading  value  chains  and the 
impact of climate change on the selected value  chains.  
 
207. Community consultations were carried out in 39 unions and 5 Upazilas of Khulna and Satkhira district, both at 
Ward and Union level, aimed at identifying potential climate -resilient livelihoods as well mapping potential 
climate -resilient drinking water sources at a household, community and institutional level. Coastal livelihoods - 
related  issues  were  informed  through  a household  survey  carried  out in the target  areas.  Information  on socio- 
economic  and bio-physical  context,  household  income  structures  and market  structures  were  collected  through 
participatory  rapid  assessments  (PRAs),  both at community  and union  level.  Additional  consultations  were  also 
taken with Unions and communities to discuss and gather feedback on the O&M plan for the drinking water 
solutions. The proposed three -tier O&M plan has been endorsed by the communities, Unions, and DPHE. 
Please refer to the Stakeholder Consultations annex (Annex XIIIc) for deta iled information on the various 
stakeholder  consultations.  
 
208. Following a multi -stakeholder approach, the project would engage with numerous stakeholders, both at a 
national and local level in implementation activities. These include the implementing partner , and Civil Society 
Organizations (CSOs), NGOs, Indigenous people’s organizations, Private Sector organizations, Academia, 
Bangladesh fisheries research institute, Bangladesh livestock research institute, Department of Agriculture 
Extension and Upazila Nir bahi Officer (UNOs) and extension officers of DPHE and DWA. The roles and 
responsibilities of the various stakeholders are detailed in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan, Annex  XIIId.  
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Adequacy of the financial structure  
209. GoB seeks grant financing to address the information, technical, financial, and institutional barriers impeding 
long-term adaptation solutions  to secure lives and livelihoods of extremely poor, vulnerable coastal 
communities,  especially  women,  who are disproportionately  affected  by the adverse  impacts  of climate -change 
induced salinity. GCF and GoB resources will be combined to address the barri ers to achieving the project 
objective (see Section C.2 for detailed discussion of  barriers).  
 
210. While  project  investments  in livelihoods  do yield incomes  to the beneficiaries,  the expected  small -scale  financial 
returns will accrue to the poor households and  promote nascent private sector engagement that will underpin 
the financial viability and sustainability of these climate -resilient livelihoods in the long -term. The adaptation 
interventions to be implemented through this project for ensuring drinking wate r security are primarily public 
goods. Private sector investment is limited in provision of drinking water supply for the extreme poor whose 
affordability  and willingness  to pay is extremely  low owing  to their socio -economic  vulnerabilities  that are further 
compounded by repeated climatic impacts. Therefore, the project does not yield large -scale generation of 
revenue or recovery of costs to justify non -grant financial structures for the project. Grant financing will not 
crowd out private investment d ue to the barriers described above; rather, by removing these barriers, it would 
incentivize  private  sector  engagement,  especially  in support  of livelihood  diversification.  Grant  financing  would  
also ease the financial constraints of the MoWCA, DWA, DPHE, and LGIs in addressing adaptation costs 
additional to baseline development investments.


---
*Page 75*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 112  
 
 
Cost -effectiveness  
211. Project investments have been designed to leverage existing initiatives and take advantage of lessons learnt 
through past experiences, in order to provide cost -effective solutions and address recognized barriers to 
implementation.  The project  is built on several  best practices  as detailed  in Chapter  5, Feasibility  Study,  Annex 
IIa. 
 
212. The selection of climate -resilient and sustainable community livelihoods was done after detailed surveys and 
assessments  for each  location  and livelihood  group,  based  criteria  which  assess  their resilience  to the ongoing 
and expected impacts of climate change (particularly elevated salinity levels), the added value they provide to 
incomes, how well they link to existing markets, and ability to access finance where necessary. Importantly, a 
cost-benefit  analysis  was applied  to each  livelihood  and identifi ed the total cost and benefits  of each  production 
cycle,  including  potential  total revenues,  profit  margins  and cost-benefit  ratios  (see Section  E.6.3).  Switching  to 
climate -resilient  livelihoods  has a transformative  impact  not only on the beneficiary  households  but also on the 
surrounding communities, whose overall resilience is strengthened with project support to resilient production, 
value -chain,  and markets.  The project  support  to group -based,  enterprise  development,  with focus  on women, 
yields sus tained income benefits as well as jobs across the  value -chain.  
 
213. Drinking solutions will be implemented in collaboration with the local government and the private sector, with 
direct  involvement  of community  groups.  These  solutions  have  been  carefully  surveyed  and assessed  for each 
location, ensuring that drinking solutions are sustainable and cost effective. The criteria for drinking -water 
supply solutions included preferences to preserve and protect what already exists (i.e. ponds from increasing 
storm surges) and to bring existing potable sources nearer to vulnerable populations. This includes economic 
aspects related to O&M (including replacement of parts), which was part of the options analysis and involved 
prioritizing community -level solutions ove r household where possible, while ensuring accessibility. The project 
will support O&M of the technology and three -tier, community -centric O&M mechanism, and establish a link 
between  O&M  service  providers.  Both community  and government  contributions  are leveraged  to ensure  long- 
term viability  of the interventions,  thereby  enhancing  the benefits  resulting  from the investments.  These  include 
health  co-benefits  (estimated  at USD  4 million  during  the project  lifetime)  and creation  of jobs related  to drinking 
water provision, operation, and maintenance (such as the caretakers in the WMCs). It should be noted that, 
with the activity designed to ensure participatory, site -specific (ward and community level) vetting, mapping, 
and final selection  of technologies,  (Activity  2.1), there  is flexibility  ensured  to allow  the technical  experts  (from 
DPHE  – both national  and Union  level staff as well as project  procured  experts)  to select  the most  effective  and 
efficient  choices  for the particular  communities/areas.  There  is contingency  built in as well in the budget  to allow 
for adjustments.  
 
214. Moreover, the benefits of the livelihoods and water interventions accrue to the same communities (with 
significant overlap between the beneficiary HHs) ensuring that the benefits are synergistic and promote cost - 
effectiveness of the interventions.  
 
215. At the national level, several projects can be used to assess the cost -effectiveness of this project. While not 
entirely  comparable  in terms  of technologies  or geographical  coverage,  some  of these  provide  rough  estimates 
for comparison. The cost of comparable projects in the coastal districts of Bangladesh in water and livelihood 
sectors  range  from US$ 15 (Nobo  Jatra)  and US$ 1714  (O’Horizon)  per direct  beneficiary.  Nobo  Jatra  has both 
a water and livelihoods component, valued at US$ 15 and US$ 67 per beneficiary respectively. However, the 
Nobo  Jatra  project  primarily  rehabilitates  existing  water -supply  facilities  such  as deep  tubewells  and pond  sand 
filters, both of which cost significant ly less than the varied scales of rainwater harvesting and pond based 
systems with filtration treatment, proposed under the GCF project for their climate -resiliency. Furthermore, the 
US$ 15 per beneficiary calculation includes 167,000 beneficiaries for the  water component and the remaining 
beneficiaries (approximately 108,000) for the less costly sanitation component. The proposed GCF project 
costs  per beneficiary are  USD88  and USD102  for livelihoods  and drinking  water  respectively,  not accounting  
for EWs b eneficiaries. The costs are comparable to other GCF projects worldwide. (US$ 20 -80 for water and 
from US$ 59 to US$ 452 for livelihoods projects) It is important to note that the costs for water reflect the costs


---
*Page 76*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 112  
 
 
of providing household level RWH systems to ensure accessibility for marginalized households and that the 
distance to water source is less than one kilometer.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
216. The public  good  nature  of the project’s  Output  for drinking  water  implies  that there  is no revenue  generation  or 
cost recovery from the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries of water provision during the project duration. 
In addition,  the implementation  of climate -resilient  livelihoods  do not yield large -scale  revenue  flows  back  to the 
project financiers and only results in small -scale income generation for the targeted, extremely poor women 
beneficiaries. Therefo re, a comprehensive financial analysis of this project is not deemed  pertinent.  
 
217. The climate -resilient livelihoods supported by the project have been assessed, first, for their resilience in light 
of projected climate change. In addition, the livelihoods p roposed are selected for their potential for income 
generation, market potential, and long -term sustainability and scale. A Cost -Benefit Analysis (CBA) was 
undertaken  for each  of the livelihoods  (see Livelihoods  Assessment  Report,  Annex  IIb). Based  on these  CBAs, 
Table below provides an overview about the profitability potential of the different livelihoods per production 
cycle for one female  beneficiary.  
 
Table 1: Profitability overview of proposed livelihoods per production cycle  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
218. The proposed drinking water supply systems will be implemented through WUGs and community -based 
management structures. In addition to building beneficiary and community capacities for climate risk -informed 
planning and sustained management of systems, institut ional capacities across the Ward, Union, and 
National levels are also strengthened (through Outputs 2 and 3) to ensure sustained use and O&M in the 
long-term. Mobilization of community and GoB co -financing (as outlined in the O&M plan and the 
Commitment Le tter) also ensures that the project interventions will continue to be operationally and financially 
viable  post-project.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
219. The project design builds upon best practices identified through an extensive screening of past and ongoing 
projects (see Chapter 3, Feasibility Study, Annex IIa), conducted in comparable contexts and similar project 
areas in southwest Bangladesh, to design activities which address the disruption of livelihoods and drinking 
water security throug h climate -change induced salinity. The technological approaches and design build on 
traditional knowledge and practices, combined with innovative and proven technological solutions, e.g. for 
water -filtration or hydroponic planting systems, and management p ractices and organizational structures that 
are proved to facilitate and promote the sustainability of interventions beyond the projects lifetime, e.g. 
community -level interventions or the establishment of PPPs and water user groups.  
 
 
71 Based on a conv ersion rate of USD1 = 80.78 BDT  
Climate change  resilient  livelihood  Net profit per production cycle for 1  Woman71 
Homestead gardening  4 months  – (USD82.58) BDT  6,671.00  
Sesame  3.5 months – (USD235.38) BDT 19,014.00  
Hydroponics  4 months  – (USD51.52) BDT  4,162.00  
Aqua -geoponics  4 months  – (USD127.90) BDT  10,332.00  
Plant nursery  annual  – (USD156.63) BDT  12,652.48  
Crab farming  3 months  – (USD69.19) BDT  5,588.95  
Crab nursery  1.33 months – (USD20.70) BDT 1,672.10  
Crab feed  1 months  – (USD89.71) BDT  7,246.67


---
*Page 77*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 112  
 
 
220. In the design  of the livelihood  interventions,  the positive  experience  of using  saline -resilient  plant  varieties  with 
a low irrigation demand will be scaled up. The cultivation of such plants, in combination with advanced 
agriculture  growing  technologies  such  as aqua -geoponics  and hydroponics  (as identified  through  best practice 
analysis),  appeared  to be the most  feasible  solution  to enable  local people  to adopt  climate -resilient  livelihoods. 
The design  of crab cultivation  activities  is built on best practice  examples  of piloted  production  entities  in coastal 
Bangladesh  and international  best-practices  to ensure  environmental  sustainability.  Another  incorporated  best- 
practice is the community level intervention for livelihood support in adaptation projects (see Canadian 
International Development Agency (CIDA) funded project Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change (RVCC) 
project outlined in Annex IIb) to  enhance the resilience of women to climate change. Another best practice for 
sustainability and promotion of private sector engagement, applied in this project, is the formation of PPIs to 
give small producers a common voice and interact with relevant key  stakeholders in their  sector.  
 
221. Saline - and drought -tolerant crop varieties have been used in Khulna and Satkhira and learning from best 
practices, the project proposes to scale -up climate -smart agricultural practices to enhance the adaptive 
capacity  of smallholder  farmers  and fishers  to drought  and floods.  Projects  have  demonstrated  positive  results 
in changing farmer behaviour in relation to saline -resistant seeds that includes local varieties that have been 
adapted to the Bangladesh coast. Based on bes t practices, efforts to diversify incomes and introduce more 
women into the workforce, especially agriculture, will give women a greater say in household expenditure and 
decision -making and ultimately reduce poverty levels and improve better nutrition and health outcomes. 
Ongoing  efforts,  such  as the LoGIC  project,  show  that livelihood  support  to vulnerable  women  and their families 
should be maintained over sufficient time to enable their economic growth to be sustained, including follow -up 
activities to en sure the productive use of skills and  knowledge.  
 
222. The project design also applies best practices and lessons from recent projects that have been tested in the 
coastal  districts  for water  provision.  Past project’s  experience  in collecting  seasonal  rainfall,  which  is becoming 
increasingly unpredictable due to climate change, inform the technical designs of the water collection 
technologies and to ensure tank capacities store sufficient water for the dry period as well as protecting the 
water source. If not, p eople will look for other, poorer quality sources of drinking water, such as saline 
groundwater  or ponds.  Likewise,  different  structures  for O&M  have  been  trialled  in coastal  communities.  These 
prove that household and community -based drinking water soluti ons can be successful when using village 
structures,  including  with RWH  systems  that were  run effectively,  and involved  high community  participation  in 
operations  and development.  The Reducing  Vulnerability  to Climate  Change  Programme  (REEEP)  experience 
with rural water schemes illustrated that they are better managed through empowered local women who have 
a strong stake in obtaining clean drinking water and climate resilient  crops.  
 
223. Best practices from the coastal region show that there is a higher chanc e of success if community -level 
interventions  are accompanied  with building  the capacity  of individuals  in climate  hotspots,  resulting  in reduced 
climate -induced  impacts  by enabling  them  and their communities  to deal with slow- and sudden -onset  disasters. 
Through building capacity, awareness and empowerment, local communities and local government will 
contribute to emergency and development plans and to funds for maintenance of community assets. The 
effectiveness of applied best practices are discussed in C hapter 5 of the Feasibility Study (see Annex  IIa). 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)


---
*Page 78*
---

E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 112  
 
 
 (a) Total  project  financing  US$  _ 
(b) Requested  GCF  amount  US$  _ 
(c) Expected lifetime emission  reductions  overtime   tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a  / c) US$  _ / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b  / c) US$  _ / tCO 2eq 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as the result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
Other  relev 
generated  ant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
as the result of the project/programme)  n/a


---
*Page 79*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 112  
 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Approach and Methodology  
224. The economic  efficiency  of the investment  was determined  by computing  the economic  net present  value  (NPV) 
with an assumed  10% discount  rate, and the economic  internal  rate of return  (EIRR).  Economic  values  (benefits 
and costs)  are all measured  in real 2017  US dollars.  Economic  costs  of the project  are net of taxes,  duties,  and 
price contingencies. Furthermore, the analysis assumes a shadow wage rate of 1.00 for unskilled and semi - 
skilled  labor  in Bangladesh.  Given  that the economic  cost of labor  in Bangladesh  is likely  lower  than the market 
wage rate (financial cost), this assumption leads to significantly over -estimating the economic cost of the 
project, and under -estimating the true net economic value of the  project.  
 
225. As is common when undertaking the economic analysis of investment projects, numerous assumptions were 
used to delineate the “with project scenario” from the “without project scenario”. These assumptions are 
presented and discussed below. Conservative assumptions were made to under -estimate the true  net 
economic  value  of the proposed  investment  project.  The analysis  period  is 25 years,  including  implementation 
(though, Output -2 is limited to run for 10 -years  post-implementation).  
 
226. The economic analysis of the project centered on: (for full analysis i ncluding references for the assumptions, 
refer to Economic Analysis, Annex  XII) 
• Output -1 – climate resilient livelihoods for women. Women will be provided support for climate resilient 
aquaculture and agricultural livelihoods options through a range of tra ining, institutional and material support. 
25,425  women  in 1,017  women’s  groups  will be targeted  by this intervention.  The core benefit  from this activity 
is an increase  in household  income  from the climate  resilient  livelihoods  adopted  by women,  which  is sustained 
for the duration of project implementation and a 19 -year post -implementation period. This output also 
incorporates  an early  warning  system  which  will protect  the livelihoods  investments  made  (the potential  benefit 
of deaths and property damage averted are not being  considered).  
• Output -2 – climate resilient water supply. To reduce the reliance on saline water available to coastal 
communities,  the project  will invest  in rainwater  harvesting  infrastructure  at the household  and community  level. 
136,110 people  will be targeted  by this intervention.  The core benefit  from this activity  is improved  water  quality 
which encompasses a range of benefits including (but not limited to) health benefits and a reduced burden for 
acquiring and processing water for  consumption. The benefits stream is measured in terms of deaths -averted 
from improved water quality and is sustained for a 10 -year post -implementation  period.  
• Output -3 and project management costs are not amenable to economic analyses on their own. Howeve r, the 
total cost of these two project expenditures cannot be ignored. For purpose of the economic analysis, it is 
assumed  that this cost is distributed  across  Output -1 and Output -2 proportional  to their respective  annual  direct 
costs.  
 
227. The economic  analysis  included  sensitivity  analysis,  subjecting  the project  to conservative  assumptions  to 
determine if the net present value and economic internal rate of return remained  acceptable.  
Output -1: Climate Resilient Livelihoods  
228. The gain in income from activities in Output -1 used in the base case economic analysis is 15%. The World 
Bank’s Bangladesh Integrated Agricultural Productivity Project (IAPP) project provided a range of institutional 
and material  support  to farmers  in Bangladesh.  The project  evaluation  suggests  that “income  levels  of crop and 
fisheries  households  increased  by 15% and 37% respectively,  compared  to non-IAPP  households”.  Given  that 
the focus of the activities in Ouput -1 is on aquaculture, we are in a position to legitimately choose the IAPP 
income  gain of 37% for fisheries  as the primary  estimate  of income  gain used.  However,  we choose  to use the 
more conservative estimate of 15%. These estimates are confirmed by the International Food and Policy


---
*Page 80*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 112  
 
 
Research  Institution’s  evaluation  of four poverty -alleviation  interventions  on the poorest  segments  for a number 
of welfare  outcomes  including  income.  The two support  programs  evaluated  by IFPRI  that come  closest  to the 
interventions in Output -1 are the Income -Generating Vulnerable Group Development (IGVGD) and Rural 
Maintenance Program (RMP), with gains in income of 28% and 31%  respectively.  
Output -2: Climate -Resilient Water Su pply 
229. High sodium intake increase substantially the risk of cardio vascular disease. The project’s target population 
has high exposure  to saline  drinking  water  which  contributes  to hypertension  and cardiovascular  diseases,  and 
mortality, especially among vu lnerable groups such as expecting mothers, young children and young adults. 
Output -2 activities eliminate reliance on saline water, especially for drinking. Therefore, we expect to see a 
reduction in cardiovascular disease incidence in this population alon g with associated  deaths.  
 
230. Bangladesh’s all -cause mortality rate is 0.57%. Of these deaths, 27% are expected to be from cardiovascular 
disease i.e. this is the population average of deaths from cardio -vascular disease (which is, by definition, an 
underestimate for the project’s target population, since the target population has high exposure to sodium 
through saline drinking water). Assuming an 11% reduction in deaths from the project, about 5.25 deaths will 
be averted each year from the beneficiar y population.  
Outcome of Economic Analysis  
231. The base  case  analysis  for the project  has a positive  net present  value  of $16 million  with an economic  internal 
rate of return of 20% over a presumed 25 -year project life span (which includes 6 years of project 
implementation and 19 years of post -implementation operation for Output -1 and 10 -years of post - 
implementation  operation  for Output -2) using  a 10% discount  rate (all values  in 2017  terms).  This result  should 
be seen  as a conservative  lower  bound  on the net present  value  of the project  since  a limited  subset  of benefits 
was considered  along  with a conservative  set of assumptions  on benefit  generation.  Both Output -1 and Output - 
2 individually have positive net present values with economic internal rates of return that exceed the 10% 
discount rate used in the economic analysis. The net present value from the base case of Output -1 is $15 
million with an economic internal rate of return of 30%. The net present value from the base case of Output -2 
is $4 million with an economic internal rate of return of  17%.  
 
232. The economic  analysis  was subjected  to sensitivity  analysis  through  the construction  of three  scenarios  which 
entailed basic variations to benefits and cost, namely a 20% decrease in gross benefits generate d by Ouptut - 
1 and Output -2, a gross  increase  in all costs  (i.e. Output -1, Output -2, Output -3 and project  management  costs) 
and both a 20% reduction  in benefits  coupled  with a 20% reduction  in costs.  The table  below  shows  the results 
of these  scenarios.  
Scenario  Elements  Modified  NPV EIRR  
 
 
Base  Case  None.  $16 million  20% 
 
 
Scenario -1 20% Decrease  in Benefits  $7 million  14% 
 
 
Scenario -2 20% Increase  in Costs  $9 million  15% 
 
 
Scenario -3 20% Decrease in Benefits + 20% Increase  in Costs  $0 million  10%


---
*Page 81*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 112  
 
 
233. Overall, the three sensitivity scenarios we construct provide validation of the core result that this project has 
positive  net present  value  and an economic  internal  rate of return  greater  than the 10%  discount  rate chosen.  
Conclusion from Economic Analysis  
234. Each project output individually delivers positive net present values. Even under a range of conservative 
assumptions pertaining to the benefits (sensitivity analysis), the overall project is attractive from a benefit -cost 
perspective. The project level net present value is $16 million with an economic internal rate of return  of 20%. 
Please  refer to Annex  XII for a detailed  description  of the benefit -cost analysis  and the underlying  model  used.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Climate -resilient Livelihoods  
235. A multi -criteria screening and filtering of livelihood options was conducted  to identify alternative, climate - 
resilient  livelihoods  for farmers,  fishers,  and agri-labourers  in the vulnerable  coastal  communities  in Khulna  and 
Satkhira (see chapter 6 of Livelihoods Assessment Report, Annex IIb). The screening process was based on 
three steps: (i) stock take of existing and potential livelihood options; (ii) screening the portfolio of livelihood 
options  against  a 1st filter addressing  their climate  change  resiliency  potential;  and (iii) screening  the livelihood 
options against a 2nd filter in perspective to their gender responsiveness and their contextual feasibility. The 
portfolio of options was created through information gained through the PRAs on existing livelihoods in the 
wards  as well as a targeted  research  analysis  of best practices  related  to potential  climate -resilient  livelihoods. 
The latter were already tested and practiced in other regions of Bangladesh or in a comparable context. The 
most  weighted  filter applied  for the livelihood  options  considered  their resilience  to the projected  climate  change 
impacts including salinity tolerance and cyclone. The assessment also considered the livelihoods that could 
potentially become or are maladaptive. For instance, shifting to shrimp farming (which leads to further 
salinization  of surrounding  area due to the release  of highly  saline  water  after each  growing  cycle)  or cultivating 
highly freshwater dependent watermelons, have been maladaptive, leading to exacerbated vulnerability. This 
indicates that there is a limited awareness of climate change impacts by local households, particularly for the 
women within them, and capacity to incorporate climate change risks in strategic livelihood choices. Certain 
livelihoods such as household level handicraft production (as being practiced in n eighbouring countries where 
there is a high middle class or extensive tourism sector) seemed to have a limited market demand, high 
transportation cost to relevant markets, and limited potential for up -scaling. The production of more relevant 
products, such  as mat (mat -making) was dismissed as a feasible option due to the low salt resilience of the 
input plant Mele. This initial screening yielded 14 potential climate resilient livelihoods that were further 
assessed for their (i) gender responsiveness; (ii) p rofitability potential and market/ value -chain access; (iii) 
socio -economic considerations and community acceptance; and (iv) environmental  impacts.  
 
236. Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) assessment (see Section F.3) were rigorously applied to identify  
best design and implementation practices to promote sustainable, inclusive climate -resilient livelihoods and 
value -chains. For instance, ESS considerations also ruled out promotion of brackish water fish farming as an 
aquaculture -based livelihood due to t he invasiveness potential of species such as Tilapia and the high risk of 
creating  incentives  for the local population  to catch  fish seedlings  in the sensitive  Sundarban  mangrove  forest, 
leading to fish stock depletion.  
 
237. Two major  categories  of climate -resilient  livelihoods  and value -chain  chains  have  been  identified  for the project:  
(i) plant cultivation through resilient livelihoods such as homestead gardening, hydroponics, aqua -geoponics, 
sesame cultivation, and plant nursery and (ii) aquaculture through the resilient livelihoods such as crab 
nurseries, crab farming, and crab feed processing. The vegetables and plants produced would make use of 
salt resilient crop varieties that are not highly fresh water dependent. To enhance their resilience agai nst 
cyclones,  mostly  low-growing  crops  were  considered  and the locations  will carefully  be selected  during  the 
implementation phase of the project to ensure some shelter through existing building, embankments, and


---
*Page 82*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 112  
 
 
vegetation.  For most  of the crops,  there  is a market  demand  in the targeted  districts  and they can contribute  to 
income generation as well as food availability (security) of households and the local population. Sesame is 
consid ered due to its low demand  of irrigation,  salt resilience,  and high market  potential  as being  up-marketed 
into sesame oil and sold in larger cities or  exported.  
 
238. The crab production  is identified  as a priority  to promote  in the coastal  region  by GoB due to its salt resilience, 
increasing  market  demand.  To promote  adoption  and upscale,  with environmental  sustainability  as a key factor, 
two existing crab hatcheries in the project area will be upgraded to meet international environmental and 
biosecurity standards and to provide the crab nurseries and crab farms promoted through this project with 
sufficient  non-natural  crab lets. Similarly,  the formation  of 1,017  women  groups  to produce  crab feed,  based  on 
an overly plant -based mixture, reduces potential r isks to depend on wild fish stocks for nutrition of the crabs. 
The beneficiaries  will be able to take up the proposed  livelihoods  within  proximity  of their households  and won’t 
need to commute for more than 2  km. 
 
239. The promotion of group -based interventions  enables peer -to-peer leaning, cost -effectiveness, and economies 
of scale for sustainability and financial viability of the introduced climate -resilient livelihoods. In addition, the 
women groups will benefit not only from initial, upfront investments to i mplement these livelihoods, they will 
also be providing  technical  assistance  to enable  skills  and knowledge  transfer  and capacity  building  to plan for, 
implement, monitor and continue to adapt their livelihoods to evolving climate  risks.  
Climate -resilient Water Supply  
240. A long -list of water supply options was developed from the water supply technologies currently in use 
in the target coastal communities (as identified through the Participatory Rural/Rapid Appraisal (PRA) 
consultation process). The long -list of water supply options were assessed using a Multi -Criteria Assessment 
(MCA)) including resilience to increased salinity, provides safe drinking water, environmental impacts, 
sustainability of operations and maintenance, social acceptability, proven local technology etc.72 Lessons 
learned from other installations and best practices were examined and utilized in the comparison of the 
technology options. The technical evaluation process identified the preferred options as RWH and freshwater 
pond based systems  with embankment raising and filtration treatment. Three levels of RWH were designed, 
the household level and at community and institution buildings to supply clusters of households. RO 
desalination would be the most resilient option against climate change  induced salinity increases; however, it 
did not pass  the critical  success  factors  of environmental  impacts  or cost concerns.  Lower  impact  desalination 
technologies exist (such as zero liquid discharge RO and solar distillation) but they have not been proven in 
the local area and would  not address  the affordability  concerns.  Development  of improved  technical  capacities 
for innovation and design of climate -resilient surface water options such as RO is included in Output  3. 
 
241. The water supply gap was calcu lated using information gathered during the PRA process on the existing 
functioning (non -saline and providing year -round, safe drinking water) water supply resources in each ward 
and the households served (the baseline). The objective of the project is to ensure that the target households 
have  access  to safe non-saline  drinking  water  throughout  the year.  The water  consumption  rate will not change 
as a result of the project, but the beneficiaries will get safe non -saline drinking water from the project 
interventions.  As a result  of the project,  each  target  beneficiary  will have  access  to safe non-saline  drinking  
water of at least 2 L/person/day which they could not have due to scarcity of fresh water in the project areas.  
 
72 Cost per capita of supplying safe drinking water with each of the 8 assessed technologies is: Shallow Tubewell (STW) – USD4 per 
family/year; Deep Hand Tubewell (DHTW) – USD9 per family/year; Piped Water System (PWS) – USD45 per family/year; Pond Sand 
Filter (PSF) - USD14 per family/ye ar; Rainwater Harvesting (RWH) System – USD70 per family/year (for HH systems) to USD24 per 
family/year  (for institutional  100 HH systems);  Reverse  Osmosis  (RO)  Plant  – USD22  family/year;  Managed  Aquifer  Recharge  (MAR)  
– USD40 per family/year; Pond water t reatment using filtration technology – USD20 per family/year


---
*Page 83*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 112  
 
 
The water  supply  gap was calculated  in each  ward  by subtracting  the baseline  from the number  of households 
and taking  the combined  drinking  water  programmes  from World  Vision  and Oh Horizon  into consideration.  The 
RWH  systems  were  designed  at the three  levels  of household;  community;  and institution.  The available  rainfall 
data records were analysed and the worst -case scenario was found to be 180 consecutive days of dry period 
with no rainfall. Based on the expressed concerns of the communities and experiences of local NGOs, simple 
filtration and/or disinfection methods would be used to mitigate contamination of stored rainwater, along with 
improved maintenance of the roof  catchment.  
 
242. To enable accessibility, in each ward, at least 20 per cent of the target households will be provided household 
based  RWH  systems  to provide  coverage  for people  with no access  to community  or institution  based  RWHS, 
especially people living far away from these systems, people with disabilities and ethnic minority groups. The 
community and institution RWH locations were identified and defined. A building database was developed of 
community an d institution buildings in the target districts. The key parameters recorded included the location 
name,  roof area and the condition  of the building  and roof structure.  The building  database  was used  to identify 
four sizes of RWH storage tanks based on the  roof catchment  area.  
1. Small tank volume of 45m3 requiring a roof area of at least  75m²  
2. Medium tank volume of 90m3 requiring a roof area of at least  150m²  
3. Large tank volume of 135m3 requiring a roof area of at least  225m²  
4. Very large tank volume of 180m3 requiring a roof area of at least  300m²  
 
243. Site surveys were undertaken at institution buildings targeted for the installation of large and very large 
rainwater  tanks  (supplying  75 to 100 households).  The site surveys  included  preparation  of a site map and data 
collection on key design parameters including the building dimensions, condition assessment, roof materials, 
site boundaries, per cent of roof with existing guttering, roof shape, roof slope, number of households within 
1km of the building, area of land a vailable for construction of tanks, soil types, site elevation above mean sea 
level, existing power supply accessibility and availability and preliminary consultation undertaken with 
stakeholders on installation of RWH. Detailed technical discussion and de sign specifications for the proposed 
portfolio of options are summarized in the Drinking Water Assessment Report (see Annex IIc) and Chapter 6 
of the Feasibility Study (see Annex  IIa). 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations


---
*Page 84*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 112  
 
 
244. The residual risk level of the project has been categorized as medium in relation to the level of impact and 
probability of a range of environmental and social risks. The project has mainstreamed environmental 
sustainability,  social  equity  and gender  considerations  into the design  of the project,  the structuring  of individual 
project activities, as well as in the implementation structure, monitoring plan, and budget. The livelihood 
interventions have been chosen and designed to provide integrated benefits, not only for climate resilience and 
women’s empowerment, but also to enhance environmental sustainability and social equity benefits, while 
carefully considering the adverse impact s that may arise as a result of project activities. Having identified the 
lack of potable water as a major constraint to the resilience of beneficiary communities, and to women’s unpaid 
time burden, the potential water provision options were then ranked an d chosen based on their economic, 
environmental and social feasibility. RWH is identified not only as one of the potable water solutions with the 
least adverse environmental impacts, but an option with significant environmental benefits. Potential risks 
identified in regards to implementation of RWH include potential issues with Operation & Maintenance (O&M), 
cyclone proofing, and minimizing construction impacts. These risks are further outlined below and thoroughly 
addressed in the Environment and Social M anagement Framework (ESMF). (See Annex  VIb) 
 
245. The livelihood  interventions  have  also been  screened  for environmental  and social  risks.  The portfolio  of climate 
resilient  livelihood  options  proposed  includes  production  of vegetables  in hydroponic  systems  at the community 
level,  homestead  gardening,  sesame  cultivation  and plantations,  all of which  has limited  adverse  environmental 
and social impacts. The use of pesticides and fertilizers will be prohibited, and training in integrated pest 
management will be us ed to enhance environmental benefits. Recent innovations in coupled aqua -geoponics 
systems for simultaneous plant and fish cultivation, will be used to enhance, household resilience and food 
security, while using a sustainable method for cleaning of pond w ater. The aquaculture interventions, including 
crab farming, and brackish water fish in coupled aqua -geoponics systems, have a range of potential significant 
adverse environmental impacts, including salinity seepage, water quality deterioration, effluents resulting in 
eutrophication, unintended pressure on wild stocks, disease outbreak, and impacts on local biodiversity and 
ecosystem  integrity.  These  risks are also outlined  in more  detail  below,  as well as in the ESMF.  Managing  these 
impacts in a sustainabl e manner is a focus of the project and will require strict regulation and monitoring by 
project  staff and government  institutions,  ideally  not only to minimize  any adverse  impacts  of the project  activities 
themselves,  but also to build  the overall  capacity  of GoB,  LGIs  and communities  to manage  these  impacts  going 
forward. That is, the project presents an opportunity to regulate climate -resilient livelihoods in a manner that 
does not lead to maladaptation or effect ecosystem integrity, and to improve enviro nmental management in the 
target districts. Threats to mangrove conversion and pressure on existing fisheries resources will be addressed 
though the building of crab hatcheries and through community awareness programs and the development of a 
code of pract ice. The development of sustainable crab feed that reduces reliance on wild fish stocks, and the 
necessary training in aquaculture environmental management, biosafety protocols and water treatment will be 
given at both the community (beneficiary level) as well as the institutional level. Interventions also consider the 
ecosystem impacts that the expansion of shrimp agriculture has had on the coastal districts of Bangladesh and 
address these though the promotion of best practices in aquaculture and careful s iting in already tidally 
inundated, saline areas. That is, while recognizing that increasingly saline conditions and market demands, as 
well as climate  constraints  of other  agriculture  based  livelihoods  have  created  a demand  for more  salinity  resilient 
livelihoods,  such  as mud crab farming  and brackish  water  fish, the ESMF  strived  to ensure  that these  livelihoods 
will not result in further  maladaptation.  
 
246. In order  to avoid  significant  irreversible  impacts,  the aquaculture  interventions  will be kept small -scale,  and semi - 
intensive,  and will be appropriately  geographically  dispersed  as to avoid  cumulative  impacts  of effluent  releases 
on receiving estuary rivers. All crab farms will be strictly sited away from sensitive mangrove areas, but within 
the tidal zone, which is already subject to salt water inundation and hence will not contribute to salinization of 
water and soil. The project will introduce protocols to limit inputs (chemicals, antibiotics) and carefully manage 
feed, in order to manage the im pacts on water quality in ponds and receiving waters. Water quality and soil will 
be regularly tested as part of the environmental monitoring program. Crab farms will use rehabilitated and 
improved shrimp ponds, and polyculture with aquatic weeds will be d eveloped for improved sustainability  of 
systems. The project recognizes the essential role of mangrove habitats in the climate change resilience of 
coastal communities, and hence will be particularly strict about managing potential degradation of mangrove


---
*Page 85*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 112  
 
 
habitats, will respect national legislations which limits activities within a 10 km buffer zone of the Sundarbans 
Protected Forest, and furthermore will include support for institutiona l capacity building, enabling policy and 
enforcement for mangrove preservation. Finally, the pressure on wild stocks both in terms of crab seed and for 
the production of fish feed, will be addressed by building crab hatcheries to meet the demand for crable ts and 
will support enabling policy and enforcement in regard to the sustainable management of wild stocks.  
 
247. In regards to social risks, there are risks associated with beneficiary selection exacerbating existing social 
tensions, particularly in regard to marginalized minorities, such as the Hindu religious minority population in 
target districts (up to 30 per cent of the population), as well as for ethnic minorities, such as the Munda ethnic 
group. Measures to address these potential impacts are included i n the ESMF and a separate Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared to address the specific needs of the indigenous 
population in the target  areas.  
 
248. This project  goes  beyond  simply  considering  gendered  impacts  of a climate  change  adaptation  project,  and puts 
the Fund’s Gender Policy at the centre of the project. That is, this is a gender -focused programme that will 
deliver project assistance by not only addressing the gendered vulnerability of women and girls, in a highly 
hierarchi cal social structure, but also addressing multi -faceted constraints to climate resilience from the 
household level, through the community and institutional levels. The project is aimed at extreme poor 
households where women are doubly marginalized, unequal , and vulnerable to climate change impacts due to 
their socio -economic constraints. The clear objective of the project is thus to work towards establishing social 
equity and justice through targeting women and girls from the most disadvantaged families, wh ile helping to 
alleviate the gendered impacts of climate change through the proposed water provision and livelihood 
interventions (see Gender Analysis and Action Plan, Annex  XIIIe).  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
249. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and 
regulations available  here.  Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the 
UNDP  Programme  and Operations  Policies  and Procedures  (POPP)  available  here. UNDP  has comprehensive 
procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s POPP. The 
policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, 
and they apply to a ll procurements in  UNDP  
(see here: https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=211&Menu=BusinessUnit)  
 
250. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following these 
guidelines  here.  UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the implementing partner by undertaking an 
evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT ). All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial 
rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and  policies.  
 
251. The NIM guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP POPP. The 
NIM guidelines were corporately developed and adopt ed by UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s 
procurement and financial management rules and  regulations.  
 
252. The national executing entity MoWCA (also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP 
terminology) is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures (including the NIM guidelines). In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s 
signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with  a UNDP project 
document,  which  will be signed  by the Implementing  Partner  to govern  the use of the funds.  Both document  
require compliance. Prior to signature of the project document, Ministry of Women and Children Affairs


---
*Page 86*
---

F APPRAISAL SUMMARY   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 112  
 
 
(MoWCA) as the national Implementing Partner, needs to have undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP to assess capacities to implement the project. During  
implementation, UNDP will  provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project 
confirmation to be agreed with the GCF. This may include, but is not limited to, monitoring missions, spot 
checks, facilitation and participation in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation 
reviews, and audits at project level or at implementing partner level on the resources received from  UNDP.  
 
253. The Harmoni zed Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes, namely: i) macro 
assessments; ii) micro assessments; iii) cash transfers and disbursements; and iv) assurance activities. 
Assurance activities include planning, periodic on -site rev iews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, 
scheduled audits and special audits. During micro -assessment, there can weaknesses identified for which 
actions are required to addresses the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will  
mean that the level of assurance activities will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that 
implementing partner will have to be reviewed if necessary. All details are available here:  
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID= 167&Menu=BusinessUnit  . 
 
254. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits73, informed by and 
together with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will 
be appointing  the auditors.  In UNDP  scheduled  audits  are performed  during  the programme  cycle  as per UNDP 
assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A 
scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transf erred to the implementing partner were used for 
the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial 
audit or an internal control  audit.  
 
255. All GCF resources will be provided to the executing entity, less  any agreed cost recovery amount. Under 
UNDP’s national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the executing 
entity  for the implementation  of agreed  and approved  programme  activities,  in accordance  with UNDP  standard 
policies and the NIM Guidelines. The executing entity reports back expenditure via a financial report on 
quarterly basis to UNDP. Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the  AMA.  
 
256. A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document 
signature) is provided in Annex  XIIIa.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 All UNDP  projects  are subject  to audit  following  UNDP  Financial  Rules  and Regulations  and applicable  audit  guidelines  and policies. 
Office of Audit and Investigation (OAI) will monitor the compliance of audit process and assess the results of project audits on annual 
basis. OAI also issues specific TOR for the audit that has specified scope of audit services to be carried out in accordance with 
Internatio nal Financing Reporting Standards (IFRS). The audit also covers the overall management of the project’s implementation, 
monitoring and  supervision.


---
*Page 87*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 112  
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
257. Livelihood interventions related risks include the limited capacity of government officials and community 
members  to plan and adopt  resilient  livelihoods,  which  is linked  to the potential  resource  constraints  or inability 
of beneficiaries to re -invest and self-sustain their running business (livelihood) costs, such as seeds or land 
lease. These potential risks will be mitigated through adequate capacity building and the matchmaking of 
beneficiaries with financial intermediaries. Another risk arises from lim ited coordination between women 
producer groups, value chain actors, and government decision makers that reduces the value chain and 
market linkage development, and creates barriers to ensure free flow of goods upstream and downstream of 
the value chain. T his risk will be mitigated through the creation of adequate organizational structures that 
foster sectorial network creation and facilitated regular value chain stakeholder meetings at different 
governmental  levels.  
 
258. While a selection of the most significa nt Social and Environmental risks are presented in section G.2, the 
detailed risk assessment undertaken for the project covers all livelihood options including hydro -geoponics, 
mud crab aquaculture, homestead agriculture, sesame, plant nursery and the crab  feed value chain. A 
comprehensive Social and Environmental risk assessment can be found in Annex VI (a) Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); Annex VI (b) Environmental and Social Management Framework and 
Annex VI (c) Indigenous Peoples’ Plan ning Framework. In addition, the screening and assessment of these 
livelihoods is also detailed in Annex IIb, the Resilient Livelihoods Assessment Report. Other implementation 
and operational risks for livelihoods are detailed in G.2  below.  
 
259. For the water provision interventions, the biggest risks are related to the Operation and Maintenance and 
maintenance of the systems. If RWH systems are not properly maintained, there are potential public health 
risks stemming from microbial contamination. Poor operatio n and maintenance of water provision systems, 
both for RWH and pond based filtration treatment systems may also result in technologies being abandoned 
or rendered useless over time in the target communities. These risks will be mitigated through the use of  a 
code  of conduct  for the RWH  system,  as well as through  community  managed  O&M  committees.  There  is mild 
risk associated with installation of the tanks, which can be mitigated through the application of a construction 
management plan, including the manage ment of waste and a soil erosion and sedimentation plan. Other 
implementation and operational risks are detailed in G.2  below.  
 
260. The principle environmental risks arise from the adverse environmental impacts of aquaculture interventions, 
particularly relate d to crab hatcheries, crab farming and fish feed processing, as well as some risk in regards 
to the agricultural interventions if project practices in regards to prohibition of pesticide and fertilizer use are 
not implemented. There is a possibility that p romotion of crab farming will negatively affect by biodiversity by 
increasing  pressure  on wild crab stocks,  however  this has been  directly  addressed  though  the creating  of crab 
hatcheries to provide crab stock for the farms, as well as parallel regulatory support to manage the collection 
of wild fry and to shift communities involved in crab farming and fattening to shift to hatchery produced stock. 
There  is also a risk that the fish required  to produce  fish feed,  as well as the feed used  for crab will put pressure 
on wild fish stocks.  This will be managed  by promoting  the use of sustainably  sourced  feed,  including  the use 
of fish processing waste and research into high -quality plant based feeds. Aquaculture interventions will also 
have impacts on soil acidification, the potential exacerbation of water quality impacts and the potential for 
disease. Many of the aquaculture impacts are also derived by lack of institutional capacity to manage the 
cumulative impacts of many clustered small -scale aquaculture interventions. These impacts will be mitigated 
by careful siting of aquaculture interventions and the use of international best practice in small scale 
aquaculture management, including planned water releases, water treatment through bioremediation, carefu l 
application of feed and consistent soil and water  monitoring.  
 
261. There are some environmental risks associated with the promotion of agricultural livelihoods. As the 
agricultural  interventions  take place  in proximity  to waterways,  the use of pesticides  and fertilizer  can have  an 
impact on water quality and public health. These possible impacts will be mitigated through prohibition of 
pesticide and fertilizer use in homestead gardens, plantations and aquageoponics systems. Furthermore, 
training  in integrated  pest control  and organic  agricultural  methods,  and regular  monitoring  of water  quality  will 
take place.


---
*Page 88*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 112  
 
 
 
262. Social risks arise from the socio -cultural context of the target districts where communal tensions between the 
majority  Muslim  populations  and the minority  Hindu  populations  have  occurred.  Furthermore,  there  is a risk of 
conflicts arising from beneficiary selection. Finally, previous  aquaculture interventions in the target districts, 
and more generally in the coastal areas of Bangladesh have been subject to elite capture. Finally although 
the project  is ultimately  a gender  focused  intervention,  there  is a risk that existing  social  norms  around  gender 
empowerment and the perceptions of decent work for women, as well as restrictions on women’s movement 
outside  the homestead,  and the related  restriction  on decent  work  will result  in limited  outcomes  for beneficiary 
women, where income from livelihood generation activities ultimate remain in the control of men, despite 
focusing livelihoods assets and training towards women beneficiaries. There are also some risks that as 
gender norms are challenged, and existing power dynamics challenged , that women will become more 
vulnerable to violence and abuse already present in the targeted communities. The mitigation measures, 
which address each of these environmental and social risks, are described in detail in Section  G.2. 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk  Factor 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 1: Vulnerability of both water provision solutions 
(RWH tanks and pond based systems) as well as 
livelihood options (aqua geoponics, hydroponics, 
plantations,  crab farms)  to storm  surges,  extreme  winds 
and cyclones. Cyclones can cause RWH tanks to be 
moved or dislodged from base causing damage to 
nearby houses, storm surges can impact the quality of 
water used for pond based systems and the assets 
associated with the  livelihood options can be  damaged  
by extreme winds, floods and cyclones   
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The RWH tanks will be secured to cement platforms to minimize the risk of dislodging from the base. The community 
and institutional -scale  RWH  tanks  will be made  of reinforced  concrete.  Institutional  and community  level systems  have 
been prioritized over household level systems where practical to minimize the possibility of damage to beneficiary 
houses.  The pond  based  filtration  units  will be installed  in a well-protected  superstructure,  resilient  to disaster  shocks. 
To improve climate -resiliency and prevent saltwater intrusion during intense cyclonic events, selected fresh w ater 
ponds (not in the vicinity of and exposed to shrimp farming), will be supported by raised embankments. All roof 
materials  will be checked  for structural  integrity  and guttering  secured  to ensure  that catchment  systems  are resistant 
to extreme weather.  Although the aquaculture interventions will be susceptible to cyclone damage, beneficiaries  can 
use the early  warning  systems  in the case  of an impending  extreme  weather  event,  to minimize  damage  to assets  and 
harvest all stock to minimize losses. These m easures keep the risk at  Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 2: Exacerbation of soil and water salinity in pond 
culture of mud crabs. Since brackish water is used for 
pond culture, salt contents is exported to neighbouring 
fields  through  seepage,  pond  water  discharge  and pond  
sediments   
Social and 
environmental   
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The siting of crab farms will be strictly regulated by the project team, and in close consultation with government 
authorities to obtain the necessary licences and permits. Farms will only be allowed at the small and medium scales


---
*Page 89*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 112  
 
 
at low densities, spatially dispersed to minimize cumulative impacts and will make use of existing shrimp ponds, in 
tidal zones already inundated by brackish water, with a strict prohibition of new ponds on existing agricultural land or 
expansion of farms. Pe rimeter ditches will be installed and clay pond lining used to control seepage into surrounding 
soil and groundwater,  if deemed  necessary  after soil testing.  Soil and water  salinity  will be carefully  monitored.  These 
measures keep the risk at  Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 3: Expansion of crab farming will exacerbate 
already depleted wild stocks of crab fry and create an 
incentive for communities to enter mangrove areas  and 
the Sundarbans Protected Forest for collection of wild 
fry with impacts on biodiversity. Currently crab farming 
in Bangladesh depends on collection of crab fry from 
mangrove  areas,  which  has led to the depletions  of wild 
stocks. Crab farming feed demand can also put a 
pressure on wild stocks due to the need for fishmeal, 
which currently comes from  by-catch.   
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Crab hatcheries will be built as part of the livelihood component of the project in order to produce crab lets for use in 
crab farming by target beneficiaries. The project will also support environmental awareness training in communities 
and a code of practice to ensure that wild fry is not used, and  will support enabling policy and regulations at the local 
government and national levels to promote the switch from reliance on wild stock to hatchery produced stock. The  
stock  produced  by the hatcheries  will meet  the demand  created  by the creation  of crab farms  under  the project.  These 
measures keep the risk at  Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 4: Inadequate biosafety protocols in crab 
hatcheries. Water and airborne pathogens, poor 
hygiene  of staff and equipment,  and any organisms  that 
are not adequately quarantined before entering the 
hatchery can negatively affect crab hatchery stock. A 
high level of biosecurity is required for high larval 
survival  and production  of cablets  for the nursery  phase 
of crab  culture.   
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Hatchery facilities will be designed according to international best practice and will ensure that functional areas are 
separated to minimize spreading of contaminants between areas. Sterilization areas will be kept separate from 
operations areas, and staff will be trained to maintain proper hygiene and sterilization. The operation schedule of the 
hatchery will include regu lar shut down periods for cleaning and disinfection. Inlet and outlet water and wastewater 
will be thoroughly  treated.  Training  will be given  to all crab hatchery  staff on best practice  in biosecurity  and knowledge  
dissemination, technical exchange and capacity building will be emphasized. These measures keep the risk at 
Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 5: Improper water management and effluent 
management of Mud crab farming. The proposed 
livelihood support for mud crab farming will be done at  
a small scale at the community level in extensive and   
Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Medium


---
*Page 90*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 112  
 
 
semi -intensive systems. Regardless, discharge 
wastewater from ponds into surrounding waterways, 
pollutes receiving systems and causes detrimental 
impacts, such as eutrophication, toxicity, and spread of 
disease.  Untreated  wastewater  laden  with uneaten  feed 
and fish faeces contributes to nutrient pollution in the 
receiving  estuaries.     
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Crab will be cultured according to international best practice to produce limited effluent and rely on a limited amount 
of external feed high quality feed which will be produced as part of the project. Farming will be carried out at low 
stocking densities. Best aquaculture practice will be applied, including minimal use of chemical inputs, antibiotics, 
drugs, and growth hormones, and supply  chain linkages such as harvesting, processing, storage, and transportation 
will include environmental considerations and will be subject to an ESIA. All farms will be geographically dispersed to 
avoid accumulative impacts on water quality and polyculture systems with aquatic weeds with appropriate salinity 
tolerance will be researched to develop sustainable nutrient recycling systems (bioremediation) and scaled -up based 
on success. Water quality will be monitored on a regular basis and all aquaculture inte rventions sites will be subject  
to an Initial  Environmental  Examination  and located  an appropriate  distance  from environmentally  sensitive  mangrove 
areas. These measures keep the risk at  Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Risk 6: Crab disease risk. Crab culture, both in the 
hatcheries, and in the ponds is susceptible to disease, 
the incidence of which increases with higher stocking 
densities and poor water quality.   
Social  and 
environmental   
Medium  (5.1- 
20% of project 
value)   
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
International best practice will be used in mud crab aquaculture to minimize disease risk, including biosafety protocols  
used for the crab hatchery facilities. Training, low  stocking densities (no more than 1.5/m2) and water quality, feed 
consumption and disease incidence will be strictly monitored. These measures keep the risk at Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Risk 7: Depletion of fish stocks due to demand as  input 
for crab/fish feed processing for feed for crab farming 
and for the brackish water fish in the aqua -geoponics 
systems.  Fish feed processing,  as well the feed used  in 
for crab requires  inputs  of small  low-value  fish, dried  fish 
and shrimp heads which can put pressure on wild fish 
stocks if not sustainably sourced. Shrimp heads are 
also used locally for human consumption and feed 
demand may disrupt  supply.   
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project  will support  the research  and development  of high quality  crab/fish  feed from plant -based  sources  that are 
locally available and do not rely on small fish and fish oils. In the initial phases, a formulation based on fulfilling the 
protein/fat requirement of the feed will be based on a low fish -processing by -product and shrimp head formulation, 
supplemented  by vermiculture.  This will  be optimized  over time for crab.  A code of  practice  will also be developed  for 
the GoB to move  away  from the use of small -fish and by-catch  in aquaculture  feeds.  These  measures  keep  the risk at 
Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 8


---
*Page 91*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 112  
 
 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Risk 8: Lack of gender integration in aquaculture value 
chain. Women are playing an increasingly important 
role in the aquaculture value chain, however due to 
local norms and beliefs around appropriate work for 
women, restrictions on movement outside of the 
household (purdah) and the women’s burden of unpaid 
work,  women’s  participation  have  been  largely  limited  to 
seeding  and feeding  of ponds  and attempts  to integrate 
women int o other aspects of the aquaculture  value  
chain has had mixed results.   
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Lack of participation arises from multiple factors, which will be addressed by the project. Lack of knowledge and 
technical skills in aquaculture will be addressed through training designed for women beneficiaries, and training will 
be designed in a gender responsive manner, including use of flexible times, provision of household based t rainings 
when  required,  and the use of female  trainers.  Male  household  members  will also be integrated  into separate  trainings, 
coupled with norm and behaviours change programs at the community level. The project will ensure proper working 
conditions for f emale beneficiaries and will include training in negotiation skills, financial management and access to 
markets. The project will primarily use pond aquaculture rather than cage culture, which has shown better integration 
of women. The project will collect  gender -disaggregated data on the effectiveness of interventions and apply lessons 
learned from the project and other interventions in the target districts to refine interventions. Continuous  stakeholder  
consultations with women will ensure that beneficiary concerns and perspectives are incorporated over subsequent 
years of the project. These measures keep the risk at Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 9: Elite capture of aquaculture interventions and 
issues  with land tenure.  In the shrimp  aquaculture  value 
chain,  it has been  observed  that due to the demand  and 
profitability  of farms,  there  was an effective  privatization 
of resources which may have previously been under 
common  property  regimes  for some  or all of the year (by 
intermediaries,  local elites  and companies),  and this led 
to profits  and assets  being  controlled  by powerful  actors 
and local ‘elites’ rather than poor small -scale  farmers.   
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The projects will ensure that land tenure arrangements for beneficiaries are secured in the early stages of project 
implementation, including collective rights to community interventions for women. Project monitoring of possible elite 
capture  will be supported  through  the project.  Stakeholder  engagement  of communities  will ensure  knowledge  of land 
tenure security and access to the grievance redress mechanism. These measures keep the risk at  Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 10  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Risk 10: Generation  of waste  materials  from installation 
of rainwater systems and tanks.  The project will involve 
the installation of very large rainwater tanks at 19 
government building locations for institutional level 
rainwater  harvesting,  228 tanks  at community  sites,  and 
smaller tanks at the household level. There is potential 
for waste  materials  to be generated  from extra  pipe and 
guttering that exceeds the needs of the  project.   
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
Low (<5% of 
project value)   
 
 
Low


---
*Page 92*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 112  
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Prior  to installation,  a full site evaluation  will be undertaken  to assess  all sites,  with consideration  of proximity  to water 
sources, suitability of existing roofing materials and proximity to environmentally sensitive areas. Appropriate 
measures  will be taken  to ensure  a specific  amount  of material  is procured  according  to RWH  system  design,  thus,  
reducing waste. These measures keep the risk at Low.  
Selected Risk Factor 11  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Risk 11: Sediment movement during installation of 
rainwater  harvesting  tanks.  During  the installation  of the 
rainwater tanks, it will be necessary to undertake earth 
works to provide a level platform to construct the  tanks. 
The earth  works  will move  sediment  that, if not properly 
contained, may be removed either as air pollution or 
through overland flow during a rain  event.   
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
Low (<5% of 
project value)   
 
 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The installation of the rainwater tanks will be undertaken by experienced  companies who will at the same time, train 
local staff in the construction  of the tanks.  To ensure  that the sediment  is not mobilised  through  current  movement  that 
will result in an impact, it will be necessary to prepare an erosion control sediment plan and install silt curtains to 
restrict sediment movement from the site. Further, any earthworks should be undertaken during the dry season and 
compacted  sufficiently  to reduce  sediment  movement.  The plan should  contain  aspects  including  but not limited  to the 
installation of sediment curtains to reduce sediment movement and the quick placement of footing material. These 
impacts will be spatially and temporally restricted. These measures keep the risk at Low.  
Selected Risk Factor 12  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Risk 12: Contamination of existing surface water. 
During the installation of the rainwater tanks, it will be 
necessary to undertake earth works to provide a level 
platform  to construct  the tanks.  There  is the potential  for 
the release of chemicals, nutrients, heavy metals and 
other material that may be within the existing sediment 
and for these to enter waterways and groundwater 
systems during the works. Furthermore, semi -intensive 
aquaculture syst ems also risk degrading surface and 
ground water quality (see Risk 3) if not properly 
managed.   
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As with the above, to ensure contaminants etc. do not enter waterways and groundwater systems, a water quality 
monitoring  plan and management  framework  along  with an erosion  control  sediment  plan will be developed  to ensure 
sediments are not released. This will involve testing sediment prior to movement and p lanning so that the works are 
not undertaken during rain events. Where rainfall is anticipated, appropriate material should be placed under the 
sediment  prior to excavation  to ensure  there  is no seepage  into groundwater  systems.  The water  quality  monitoring  
for the sources  will be designed  to identify  potential  impacts  so that management  measures  can be proactively  rather 
than reactively enacted upon. These measures keep the risk at  Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 13  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 13: Discrimination against vulnerable groups 
(Adivasi’s  and Hindu  religious  minorities)  and 
beneficiary selection challenges. Extremely poor ethnic  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Medium


---
*Page 93*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 112  
 
 
and religious minority groups, who are often 
discriminated against, inhabit the two target districts. 
There are extreme poor Hindu families living in the 
target  areas  (-30 per cent of population  in both Satkhira 
and Khulna), as well as indigenous (adivasi) families 
belonging to the Munda ethnic group. These groups 
may suffer  discrimination  in access  to water  (community 
and institutional level) and as well as in selection for  
livelihood interventions, and there is risk of conflict if 
selected or overlooked for household systems  in both  
cases.     
Mitigation Measure(s)  
A strict and transparent beneficiary selection process will ensure that project benefits are distributed in an equitable 
manner  among  the most  vulnerable  in the target  districts,  and that the selection  is not based  on any religious  or basis. 
The selection process will be clearly documented and explained in stakeholder consultations with beneficiary 
communities. The final beneficiary selection will proportionately reflect the minority population. Siting of RWH tanks 
will also account for the preference of ethnic minorities to have a separate water access point and the final selection 
for HH tanks should be proport ionate to the population of religious minority households at the ward level. Project 
evaluations should take a human rights -based and conflict sensitive approach and ensure that project benefits are 
distributed equitably. In case of any conflict or discrim ination, minorities groups, along with all other project 
beneficiaries, can file a complaint using the grievance redress  mechanism.  
The GRM focal point will also be given sensitivity training in regard to social marginalization. These measures keep 
the risk at Medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 14  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 14: Public health and sustainability risks from 
improper maintenance and operation of Rainwater 
Harvesting  System.  Rainwater  Harvesting  tanks  require 
relatively simple operation and maintenance. There is 
some  risk that improper  operation  and maintenance  will 
lead to microbial contamination or that water in tanks 
may become a breeding site for  mosquitoes  
that water in tanks may become a bre eding site for  
mosquitoes   
 
 
Technical and 
operational   
 
 
Low (<5% of 
project value)   
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
An environmental  code  of practice  has been  developed  for the operation  and maintenance  of the rainwater  harvesting 
tanks,  as well as a detailed  O&M  plan with the participation  of the user groups.  A pre-filter will be used  prior to the tank 
storage  to ensure  that rainwater  is free from microbial  contamination,  in conjunction  with a first flush  system  to ensure 
that debris  and other  contamination  from the catchment  surface  does  not enter  the tank.  RWH  tanks  will be subject  to 
regular  operation  and maintenance  driven  by a community  led water  management  committee  and a caretaker  funded 
by the committee. The water management committee will be formed by representatives of the cluster of  households  
(with a priority for women) that will collect water from each tank. Finally, water will be subject to regular water quality 
monitoring as per the ESMF. These measures reduce the probability of the risk from medium to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 15  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Risk 15: Extreme weather events and/or disasters may 
affect  project  progress  due to national  and local urgency 
to address immediate disaster  emergencies  Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 94*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 112  
 
 
Devastating cyclones hit the coastal areas of Bangladesh almost every year, usually accompanied by high speed 
winds, which infrequently reach 250 km/hour or more and 3 -10 m high waves, causing extensive damage to life, 
property  and livestock.  Much  of the target  area is threatened  with cyclonic  storm  surge.  In order to mitigate  these  risks, 
the construction of the water supply technologies will be undertaken outside of the cyclone season. The duration of 
the project has been set to minimize the impact of delays which may be caused by circumstances such as storm 
surge. The risk of salt water inundation into the ponds from storm surges will be addressed through raising the pond 
embankment based on local knowledge of the historical height of flooding as well as survey data. The dissemination 
of EWs  will also support  the preparedness  and response  activities  to mitigate  implementation  delays.  These  measures 
reduce the probability of the risk from medium to  low. 
Selected Risk Factor 16  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  
occurring  of risk 
Risk 16: Lack of Community Ownership and Buy -In to 
the water supply solutions  Other  Low (<5% of  
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The social acceptability of the water supply solutions was considered during option selection. The final siting (for 
community -scale RWH tanks and pond treatment systems) and selection of beneficiaries and grouping (for access 
and distribution) will be undertaken during the first year of implementation to enable ownership and community buy - 
in. The formulation  of Water  User Groups  (WUGs)  and Water  Management  Committees  (WMCs)  will enable  sustained 
community buy -in and management of the proposed water solutions. Site surveys were undertaken at institution 
buildings targeted for the installation of large and very large rainwater tanks (supplying 75 to 100 households). The 
site surveys included preliminary consultation with stakeholders to gain their permission for the future installation of 
RWH systems and tanks. These measures reduce the probability of the risk from med ium to  low. 
Selected Risk Factor 17  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  
occurring  of risk 
Risk 17: Insufficient water stored in the rainwater tanks  Technical  
and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The rainwater  tanks  have  been  sized  to provide  sufficient  storage  for the historical  worst  case  of 180 days  without  rain 
based on the thirty years of climate records for both Satkhira and Khulna. Most years, the dry period without rain is 
much shorter than  180 days. Climate change predictions are for the peak monsoon months (June, July and August) 
to become  warmer  and wetter  and the dry winter  months  (December,  January,  February)  to become  warmer  and drier. 
Specifically a 5% decrease in rainfall is forecast  for the dry winter months by 2050. The long -term average rainfall for 
the six driest months (to correspond with the 180 day design period) is 197mm in Satkhira District and 142mm in 
Khulna District. The design drought of 180 days with zero rainfall is mor e conservative than the climate change 
prediction  for a 5% decrease  in rainfall  during  the dry months.  The caretaker  of each  community -scale  and institution - 
scale rainwater tank will be responsible for monitoring the distribution of the 2 litres of drinking water per person per 
day to the target  households.  The caretaker  will be supported  by the WUGs  and WMCs.  These  measures  reduce  the 
probability of the risk from medium to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 18  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability  
occurring  of risk 
Risk 18: Pond based filtration treatment technology fails 
due to poor water quality  Technical  
and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 95*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 94 OF 112  
 
 
The ponds  that are currently  used  by villagers,  but do not have  any functional  PSF installed  at it, have  been  considered 
as potential  locations  for the pond  based  systems  with filtration  treatment.  The suspended  solids  and salinity  in these 
ponds are expected to be low as the water is currently being drunk untreated. Water quality testing will be carried at 
the proposed pond sites to select the most appropriate filtration technology . If a proposed pond location is found to 
be unsuitabl e during site selection, alternative water sources will be confirmed (for example additional community - 
scale or institution -scale RWH systems). Ongoing water quality monitoring will be carried  out. 
Installation with warranty would be procured to ensure ro bust technical support for long -term viability of filtration 
treatment solutions. These measures reduce the probability of the risk from medium to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 19  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Risk 19: Household level RWH systems fail either 
during installation or due to lack of 
maintenance/repairs   
Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The implementation success of the household level RWH systems will be ensured through community mobilization, 
WUG formation for clusters of households with household level RWH, technical support from the caretaker and 
ongoing institutional support from DPHE. The project will initiate and facilitate, through c apacity building and peer -to- 
peer learning activities, continued monitoring of the availability and quality of the systems. A nominal household fee 
will be collected  to cover  the materials  for regular  minor  maintenance  as well as a contribution  towards  the caretaker’s 
salary.  In addition  to this nominal  fee, households  with household  level RWH  will also be encouraged  to pay an amount 
of US$19 per year as a set -aside to cover the household contribution to the major repairs/replacements for the short 
life assets  of household  roof catchment  and gutters  etc. These  measures  reduce  the probability  of the risk from medium 
to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 20  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
 
Risk 20: Increase in community conflict and 
Gender Based Violence (GBV) due to 
challenging community gender norms and 
targeting women as primary beneficiaries of 
project interventions.   
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)   
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
In designing the project interventions, a balance was considered between providing opportunities that would be 
considered suitable for, and preferred by, women with an expansion of opportunities in value chains in which women 
are already participating, such a s aquaculture, for which additional skills and conditions are required to have access 
to fair and equitable  economic  opportunities.  The norms  and beliefs  of community  members  in regards  to “appropriate 
work for women” as well as exposure to GBV will be add ressed through ongoing consultations and community 
sensitization  activities,  including  women  beneficiaries,  as well as family  members  and the broader  community.  Finally, 
a robust, gender -sensitive grievance mechanism will be put in place, which will allow beneficiary women to report any 
incidences of social conflict arising from their involvement in project activities. The GRM will include women focal 
points, available to record and manage grievances that women beneficiaries may hesitate to report to male  focal 
points  
Selected Risk Factor 21  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring


---
*Page 96*
---

G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 112  
 
 
 
Risk 21: There is a possibility of increased 
application of pesticides  and fertilizers in the 
target areas due to the expansion of plant 
cultivation activities. Given that hydroponic 
systems will be used, there is the potential for 
eutrophication and public health impacts (from 
pesticides).   
 
 
Social and 
environmental   
 
 
Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)   
 
 
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will train beneficiaries in organic plant cultivation methods. Plant cultivation will be maximized using 
techniques such as mixed cropping, high quality seeds, raised beds, and organic fertilizer. Pesticide use will be 
prohibited, and avoided by offering training in Integrated Pest Control methods, such as hand collection, Neem 
extract application and bagging. Organic fertilizer use will be regulated and Water quality will be  monitored in  
hydroponic and aquageoponics systems


---
*Page 97*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 112  
 
H.1. Logic  Framework.  
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level74 
Paradigm shift objectives  
 
 
 
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development  The paradigm shift for the project is to move away from focus on short -term responses and technology -led 
interventions towards community -centric solutions that build ownership and capacities for sustainable, long -term 
adaptive responses to safeguard water security and livelihoods. Awareness, enhanced livelihood asset base, skills 
building,  value -chain  and market  linkages  will promote  a transformational  switch  from current,  non-adaptive  livelihoods 
to climate -resilie nt livelihoods that can, in turn, reduce the vulnerabilities of the extreme poor against future climate 
change risks. Climate -resilient water technologies provide the communities with a means to shift away from their 
dependence on ground -water to surface w ater systems that can address seasonal variability and cope with slow - and 
sudden -onset changes. Institutional capacities, knowledge, and learning builds capacities across a variety of 
stakeholders  for evidence -based  implementation  of adaptive  solutions  and creates  an enabling  environment  to support 
communities, particularly, women as ‘change -agents’ for climate  action.  
 
Expected Result   
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)   
Baseline  Target   
Assumptions  
Mid-term 
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
 
 
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A2.0 Increased  resilience  of 
health and well - being, and 
food and water  security  0 Total Number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries;  
Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total  population; 
disaggregated by  gender  
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 Number of males and 
females  benefiting  from the 
adoption of diversified, 
climate - resilient  livelihood 
options (including fisheries, 
agriculture,  etc.);  
 
Number of males  and 
females with year - round 
access to reliable and safe 
water supply despite  Project reports: 
annual reports; 
mid-term and 
final evaluations;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender - 
sensitive field 
surveys, 
regional 
database, 
project 
monitoring 
(livelihood and 
water access  57,73775 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
076 136,11078 245,516  
direct80; 
 
473,71381 
indirect;  
 
719,229  
Total 
(50.2%  
female) 
(around 
16.25% of  
the total 
population 
the two 
districts82) Community -buy in and 
adoption of livelihoods.  
Completed 
infrastructure and 
sustained maintenance 
for water supply 
systems  
Uptake of training and 
capacity building by 
community and women 
on water management 
and climate -resilient 
livelihoods.  
Uptake by government 
institutions of capacity 
for climate -risk 
informed management 
of livelihood and  
 
74 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at  
the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  
75 Aggregate based on the baseline value for the water interventions and EWs (conservatively chose the higher if the two numbers)  
76 Currently none of the targeted beneficiaries in the selected wards are practicing resilient livelihoods.  
78 The aggregate of mid -term beneficiaries was used (the superset of the number of bene ficiaries under livelihoods, water, and EWs  
– to avoid overlap).  
80 Direct beneficiaries consider the aggregated coverage of people targeted through the livelihood interventions, water interven tions, 
and early warning systems (25,425*4.4=83,904+ 600 value chain actors: 30,025 beneficiaries for livelihoods; 136,110 for water, and 
245,516 for EWs). To aggregate the three constituent beneficiaries of direct water provision and livelihood interventions, a 
conservative  approach  was chosen.  In the wards  from Zone  2 for water  provision,  where  50 per cent of the ward  is targeted  for water 
supply, the aggregate direct beneficiary number is taken as the highest of the water and the livelihoods targets. Based on th is, the 
total direct beneficiary number for just the water and livelihood interventions is 178,075 people. When considering the 100 per cent 
coverage  of the ward  population  through  the EWs  interventions  the aggregate  total direct  beneficiaries  of Output  1 and 2 are 245,516 
people, of which 50.2 per cent are women. The target is cumulative of the  baseline.  
81 Indirect beneficiaries include (i) water users - including the existing baseline population with functioning water supply as the quality 
and quantity  of their water  supply  could  be improved  (depending  on water  source,  for example  saline  intrusion  into groundwater  could 
decrease when the extraction rate decreases) – 57,737 (see FN 16) ; and (iii) EWs beneficiaries – which include 80 per cent of the 
remaining population of the non -targeted wards of the targe ted 39 unions (which is 719,229 people) as the project builds capacities 
of the Union  level DMCs  to support  last-mile dissemination  of EWs  to the remaining  wards.  Aggregate,  this is 80 per cent (see FN 
83) of the total population of 899,036 of the targeted  39 unions minus the direct beneficiaries (719,229 -245,516=473,713).  
82 The total direct and indirect beneficiaries is 719,229, which is 16.25 per cent of the population of the two targeted distric ts, which is 
(based on the 2011 BBS census data and a 4.4 people per household average): 4,427,662 people


---
*Page 98*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 112  
 
 
 climate  shocks  and 
stresses  and quality 
surveys)  73777 
people 
with year - 
round 
access to 
safe 
drinking 
water  19,06979 
women (of 
which 50.2% 
are female)  
136,110(of  
whom 
68,327 are 
women)  25,42583 
women  
 
136,11084 
(of whom 
68,327 are 
women)  drinking water 
solutions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 The baseline for the existing safe drinking water supply is based on the people supplied by non -saline drinking water sources (e.g. 
deep tube wells rather than shallow tube wells) that provide year -round access of at least 2 LCPD drinking water to recipients. The 
baseline does not include w ater sources that are being used but are saline. Current baseline is 13,122 HHs (13,122 * 4.4 = 57,737) 
in the target  wards  out of a total of 56,298  households  as measured  through  the PRA process.  This is equivalent  to 23 per cent of the 
households in the target  wards.  
79 The mid -term beneficiary figure of 19,069 is based on a conservative estimate of 75 per cent of the total target beneficiaries of 
25,425 (see footnote 9 for more details on the computation of the total direct beneficiaries for livelihoods) . Despite, the total target 
number  of women  will have  received  assets,  tools,  and inputs  to start an alternative,  resilient  livelihood  by mid-term,  only 75 per cent 
will be considered due to the continued training the women receive throughout the entire pr oject cycle and the perceived time it will 
take the women to develop capacities to sustainably and independent continue their livelihoods and access  finance.  
73 The number of beneficiaries are the same for the mid -term and target and included. The project is expected to establish all 
infrastructure and provide access to year -round safe water by mid -term.  
83 The target population for the livelihood interventions were identified based on current livelihood practices in the selected wards. 
The distribution of women and households currently engaged in non -adaptive livelihoods, e.g. fisheries, agriculture, agriculture day 
labourers (which ranged between 15 -70 per cent of the entire ward population), were targeted as being direct beneficiaries. This led 
to an identified  need  to form 1017  women  livelihood  groups  of 25 women  to provide  25,425  women  (1017*25=25,425)  with alternative, 
adaptive  livelihoods.  
78 (see FN 73).


---
*Page 99*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 112  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities, and Inputs at Project/ Programme level  
 
 
Expected Result   
 
Indicator   
Means of 
Verification (MoV)   
 
Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if     
applicable)   
Final  
Project/programme 
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  0 Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public -sector services 
of Fund -supported 
tools, instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to respond 
to climate change and 
variability  Gender sensitive 
project reports, field 
verification, and 
surveys (including 
questioned based 
surveys/interviews/q 
ualitative scorecard 
assessment)  57,73785 136,11086 245,516  
direct87 
(50.2% of  
whom are 
female).  
 
 
. Community -buy in and 
adoption of livelihoods.  
Completed 
infrastructure and 
sustained maintenance 
for water supply 
systems  
Uptake of training and 
capacity building by 
community and women 
on resilient livelihoods 
and water 
management.  
      Uptake by government 
institutions of capacity 
for climate -risk informed 
planning and 
management of 
livelihood and drinking 
water solutions.  
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85 Aggregate based on the baseline value for the water interventions and EWS (conservatively chose the higher if the two numbers ) 
81 The number of beneficiaries at mid -are the same for the mid -term and target. The project is expected to establish all infrastr ucture 
and provide  access  to year-round  safe water  by mid-term.  The estimation  of 136,110  was made  as follows:  The first step for calculating 
the number of target direct beneficiaries for water supply interventions was to subtract the baseline from the num ber of households 
in the ward  to determine  the water  supply  gap. The second  step was to multiply  the number  of households  without  existing  functioning 
drinking water supply in each ward by the zone factor of either 50 per cent or 100 per cent to obtain the  number of target direct 
beneficiaries for water supply interventions in each ward. The zone factor is 100 per cent for Zone 1 (Paikghacha and Assassu ni 
upazila) as there is no overlap with other planned donor -funded interventions and 100 per cent of the h ouseholds in the identified 
vulnerable wards are targeted as beneficiaries for potable water provision. The zone factor is 50 per cent for Zone 2 (Dacope , 
Shyamnagar,  and Koyraupazila)  as 50 per cent of the water  supply  gap in these  upazila  will be covered  by other  projects.  The female 
ratio was estimated at 50.2 per cent based on the PRA process and census  data.  
87 See FN 74


---
*Page 100*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 112  
 
 
 Number of women in 
targeted wards with 
improved assets and  
income from climate 
resilient livelihoods  Baseline and 
Endline surveys.  088 19,06990 25,42592 
women  Uptake of training and 
capacity building by 
women/ women groups 
on resilient livelihoods  
  Monitoring and 
social auditing 
reports     No major disaster 
occurs in the project 
locations that may  
      damage or destroy  
      livelihood assets and  
      yields.  
      There is capacity of  
 
 
 
 
1. Climate -resilient 
livelihoods, focusing on 
women, for enhanced 
adaptive capacities of 
coastal agricultural 
communities   
 
Number of males 
and females with 
access to timely, 
gender -responsive 
early warning 
information   
 
 
 
 
Impact evaluation   
49,10389  
122,758  
people91(5 
0.2%  
female)  
 
 
 
 
Social  245,51693 
(50.2% of  
whom are 
female).  value chain actors to 
supply WLGs with 
supplies and to market 
produced goods, and to 
establish sectorial 
coordination through 
PPIs.  
 Social audit protocols 
established and 
operational across 
39 Unions for 
participatory 
monitoring of resilient 
livelihoods    
No social 
auditing 
protocols 
available for 
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods  auditing 
protocols 
developed 
and 
operation 
al across 
15 unions  Social 
auditing 
protocols 
developed 
and 
operational 
across 39 
unions   
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 Currently none of the targeted beneficiaries are practicing resilient livelihoods.  
89The existing EWS in the unions through male -based organizational structures (CPP program) currently effectively reaches 20 per 
cent (49,103 people) of the total population of 245,516 in the targeted wards (245,516*0.2=49 ,103people). While cyclone warnings 
currently  reach  around  80 per cent of the population,  the ability  to fully understand  the significance  of the warning  was found  to be 20 
per cent (Roy et. al,  2015).  
90 The mid -term beneficiary figure of 19,069 is based on a conservative estimate of 75 per cent of the total target beneficiaries of 
25,425  (see footnote  9 for the calculation  of target  beneficiaries).  Despite,  the total target  number  of women  will have  received  assets, 
tools, and inputs to start an alternative, resilient livelihood by mid -term, only 75 per cent will be considered due to the continued 
training the women receive throughout the entire project cycle and the perceived time it will take the wo men to develop capacities to 
sustainably and independent continue their livelihoods and access  finance.  
91 The formation  of one women  and girls volunteer  group  with 15 people  per ward  (with  three  subgroups  of 5 people  each)  will gradually 
build  up its capacity  throughout  the project  lifetime.  Thus,  a conservative  50 per cent coverage  of the total ward  population  of 245,516 
is considered by mid -term (245,516*0.5=122,758).  
92 The target population for the livelihood interventions were identified based on current livelihood practices in the selected wards. 
The distribution of women and households currently engaged in non -adaptive livelihoods, e.g. fisheries, agriculture, agriculture day 
labourers (which ranged between 15 -70 per cent of the entire ward popul ation), were targeted as being direct beneficiaries. This led 
to an identified  need  to form 1017  women  livelihood  groups  of 25 women  to provide  25,425  women  (1017*25=25,425)  with alternative, 
resilient  livelihoods.  
93 The total beneficiary numbers of the last-mile EWs through women and girl volunteer groups will reach the entire ward population 
of the 101 selected  wards  of 245,516  people  through  mock  exercises  and information  provision.  Target  is cumulative  of the baseline.


---
*Page 101*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE  FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 112  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Number of males 
and females with 
year- round access 
to reliable and safe 
drinking water  DPHE registration 
database for the 
water supply 
systems.  57,73794 
people with 
year-round 
access to safe 
drinking water  136,11095 
(of whom 
68,327  
are 
women)  136,11096 
(of whom 
68,327 are 
women)  Completed 
infrastructure and 
sustained 
maintenance for  
water supply  
      systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Gender - 
responsive access to 
year-round, safe and 
reliable climate - 
resilient drinking 
water solutions   
 
Total Number of 
project -established 
climate -resilient 
drinking water 
systems operational  Project monitoring 
reports - Mid Term 
Review; Project 
Evaluation Report  
 
 
Baseline and 
Endline surveys  
Field Verification  
 
Water quality 
monitoring results 
(aligned with activity  
2.3)  
 
 
0  
 
 
7000   
 
 
1359697 No major disaster 
occurs in the project 
locations that may 
delay the installation 
of the rainwater 
harvesting tanks and 
pond treatment 
systems.  
Sufficient rainfall can 
be collected in the 
rainwater tanks to 
help achieve water 
security.  
      Raising the 
embankment of the 
ponds prevents the 
ponds from becoming 
saline.  
      Community cohesion 
and O&M capacities 
and commitments.  
      DPHE and LGI are 
adequately mobilised 
to back up O&M  
 
94 In general, 100% people have access to some form of sources of drinking water. An estimated 61% people have access to some 
quality water sources (but not year round), and only 23% of the people have access to year round quality drinking water. (Sou rce, 
BBS 2011,  DPHE  2016  and PRA survey  2017).  The coverage  that qualifies  as year-round,  safe drinking  water  in each  of the targeted 
Unions  is treated  as ‘baseline’  in the project  logframe.  The baseline  for the existing  safe drinking  water  supply  is based  on the people 
supplied  by non-saline  drinking  water  sources  (e.g. deep  tube wells  rather  than shallow  tube wells)  that provide  year-round  access  of 
at least  2 LCPD  drinking  water  to recipients.  The baseline  does  not include  water  sources  that are being  used  but are saline.  Current 
baseline  is 13,122  HHs (13,122  * 4.4 = 57,737)  in the target  wards  out of a total of 56,298  households  as measured  through  the PRA 
process. This is equivalent to 23 per cent of the households in the target  wards.  
95The first step for calculating the number of target direct beneficiaries for water supply interventions was to subtract the baseline 
coverage  of year-round  non-saline  drinking  water  from the number  of households  in the ward  to determine  the water  supply  gap. The 
second s tep was to multiply the number of households without existing functioning non -saline drinking water supply in each ward by 
the zone factor of either 50 per cent or 100 per cent to obtain the number of target direct beneficiaries for water supply in terventi ons 
in each  ward.  The zone  factor  is 100 per cent for Zone  1 (Paikghacha  and Assassuni  upazila)  as there  is no overlap  with other  planned 
donor -funded interventions and 100 per cent of the households in the identified vulnerable wards are targeted as beneficiaries for 
potable water provision. The zone factor is 50 per cent for Zone 2 (Dacope, Shyamnagar, and Koyra upazila) as 50 per cent of the 
water supply gap in these upazila will be covered by the development projects being undertaken by World Healt h and Oh Horizon. 
The female ratio was estimated at 50.2 per cent based on the PRA process and census  data.  
96The first step for calculating the number of target direct beneficiaries for water supply interventions was to subtract the b aseline 
coverage  of year-round  non-saline  drinking  water  from the number  of households  in the ward  to determine  the water  supply  gap. The 
second step was to multiply the number of households without existing functioning non -saline drinking water supply in each ward by 
the zone  factor of either 50 per cent or 100 per cent to obtain the number of target direct beneficiaries for water supply interventio ns 
in each  ward.  The zone  factor  is 100 per cent for Zone  1 (Paikghacha  and Assassuni  upazila)  as there  is no overlap  with other  planned 
donor -funded interventions and 100 per cent of the households in the identified vulnerable wards are targeted as beneficiaries for 
potable water provision. The zone factor is 50 per cent for Zone 2 (Dacope, Shyamnagar, and Koyraupazila) as 50 per c ent of the 
water supply gap in these upazila will be covered by the development projects being undertaken by World Health and Oh Horizon . 
The female  ratio was estimated  at 50.2 per cent based  on the PRA process  and census  data.  The target  is incremental  of the baseline.  
97 Estimated 13,308 household RWH systems; 228 community -scale RWH systems; 19 institutional -scale RWH systems; and 41 
pond embankments.


---
*Page 102*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 112  
 
 
 Number of 
government staff 
across MoWCA and 
DPHE who 
effectively apply 
skills in climate -risk 
informed planning 
and management for 
livelihoods and water 
(disaggregated by 
gender).  Qualitative score 
card applied to 
assess capacities of 
MoWCA and DPHE 
to undertake 
gender -response, 
climate -resilient 
management of 
livelihoods and 
drinking water resp.  098 25099 
 
(of whom 
30 % are 
women)  525100 Skill building 
trainings do not 
result in 
accelerated  
turn-over of staff.  
 
The host 
departments allow 
their staff to be 
away for skill 
building for  
sustained period 
of time  
 
 
 
 
3. Strengthened 
institutional 
capacities, 
knowledge and 
learning for climate - 
risk informed 
management of 
livelihoods and 
drinking water 
security   
Evidence of 
policy/programs in 
other sectors 
integrating gender 
and climate change  Government 
websites verified for 
availability of 
tools/scenarios  
Other sectoral 
policies/programs 
assessed for 
integration og 
gender and climate 
change (e.g. NAPs, 
Delta Plan, 8th 5 
year plan, Forestry, 
Agriculture, etc.)  
Impact evaluation of 
the ‘a daptive 
learning’ 
intervention  No integration 
of gender and 
climate 
change 
through 
MoWCA into 
other sectoral 
policies/progra 
ms MoWCA’s  
capacity 
enhanced 
through 
developm 
ent of 
‘gender 
and 
climate 
change 
action 
plan’ to 
support 
integration 
into other 
sectoral 
policies/pr 
ograms  Integration 
of gender 
and CC 
into atleast 
2 sectors 
through 
MoWCA   
MoWCA/DWA  
successfully uptake 
training and 
knowledge.  
Willingness by other 
relevant Ministries to 
integrate gender and 
CC into design and 
implementation of 
progr ammes.  
  
 
 
 
Number of girls and 
boys with increased 
awareness through 
‘adaptive learning’ 
training through 
school and 
community based 
communications  Baseline and 
Endline surveys – 
project monitoring 
reports   
 
 
0  
 
 
1500   
 
 
3000101  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
 
1.1 Enterprise - and 
community -based 
implementation of 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods for women  
 
 
Gender -Action Plan  
related indicator(s):102 This activity will support the implementation 
of these climate -resilient livelihoods through 
organized groups of women, Women 
Livelihood Groups (WLGs), facilitating peer - 
to-peer learning for adoption, knowledge 
transfer, skills development, financial 
management, and capacity building for long - 
term viability of the resilient livelihoods.  
At each of the Union Parishads, these WLGs 
would be supported by ‘Women Standing 
Committees’, which are established  
structures that operate at the Union level  1.1.1  Participatory mapping 
for the portfolio of climate - 
resilient livelihoods through  
5 workshops across the 
Upazilas  
1.1.2  Development of 
livelihood profiles based on 
the community livelihood 
risk and adaptation 
assessment and selection  of Community -specific, participatory 
mapping will be undertaken. Based 
on the vulnerability and risk 
assessme nts, livelihood profiles 
would be developed. Beneficiaries 
will be selected in view of this 
assessment/profiles.  
Women will be organized into about 
1017 Women Livelihood Groups 
(WLGs) who will receive assets, 
skills development, and training to  
implement one or two selected  
 
98 None of the institutional staff would be trained on the project introduced/supported climate risk modeling, planning tools, o r 
mainstreaming of these strategies into their planning, monitoring, and implementation at the beginning of the project.  
99 By the mid -term of the project about half the bath trainings would be completed and staff would have been trained on the 
development of the scenarios/modeling/planning tool kits/gender action modules, etc. (see Implementation Timetable)  
100 By the end of the project 405 number of MoWCA/DWA and 120 number of DPHE staff would have undergone both initial and 
refresher trainings and engaged in the planning, monitoring, and implementation of the livelihoods and water solutions.  
101 Based on t argeting 150 students each in 10 highschools across the unions (grades 8,9,10) and 150 non -school going boys and 
girls among the targeted HHs across 10 unions. Mid -term target aims for reaching half the targeted youth.  
102 For further details, please see G ender Analysis and Action Plan, Annex XIIIc


---
*Page 103*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 102 OF 112  
 
 
Number of women 
and women -headed 
households in 
targeted wards with 
improved assets and 
income from climate 
resilient livelihoods  and comprise of local extension support 
(LGI) staff. The WSC will support them in 
addressing institutional barriers and 
enhancing vertical coordination linkages with 
Upazilas and districts.  
GCF  resources  will support  initial  investments 
into inputs and assets (and GoB co -financing 
inputs for additional production cycle for crab 
farming, crab nurseries, and homestead 
gardening); however, a phased approach will 
be supported to build the financial  capacity of 
the WLGs  to procure  their own inputs  through 
the subseq uent production  cycles.  
GCF and GoB resources will be blended to 
support technical training and community 
sensitization campaigns for skills transfer; 
promotion of best practices and norms; 
awareness raising; and O&M, financial 
planning, and marketing.  beneficiaries (Utilize 
ActionAid resilience index)  
1.1.3.  Formation and 
reactivation of 1017 Women 
Livelihood Groups (WLGs) 
based on the livelihood 
profiles (coordinating with 
Water User Groups – 
WUGs – under Output  2) 
1.1.4.  Procurement of 
inputs, assets and tools for 
community -based 
management (through 
WLGs) of climate -resilient 
livelihoods  
1.1.5  ToT approach and 
community 
sensitization/awareness 
through 8 workshops 
(across 6 years) in 39 
unions  for WLGs (involving 
WSCs/LGIs/MoWCA staff in 
39 Unions) on skills 
development on  climate 
resilient technologies, best 
practices and norms, 
sustainable management 
practices, and O&M of 
resilient livelihoods (in 
coordination with BFRI for 
aquaculture  interventions)  
1.1.6  ToT approach  through  
8 workshops (across 6 
years) in 39 unions  for 
WLGs (involving 
WSCs/LGIs) to support 
business skills development 
resulting in marketing and 
financing plans for resilient 
livelihoods  resilient livelihood/s. Monthly group 
meetings would be facilitated to 
support continued learning and 
implementation.  
WLGs wou ld be provided with 
upfront investments in inputs, 
assets, and tools to initiate new, 
climate -resilient livelihoods.  
Additional inputs would be provided 
for 1 year for homestead gardening, 
for 1 additional growing cycle for 
crab farms, and for 2 additional  
growing cycles for crab nurseries 
and then phased out as HH 
investment (and linkages with input 
service providers) is expected to 
phase in.  
ToT approach would be undertaken 
to build the capacity at various 
levels:  
- WLGs (at Ward level) would be 
trained in coordination with Women 
Standing Committees (WSCs) and 
the extension staff of LGIs at the 
Union Parishad level to support 
technical skills transfer as well as 
O&M capacities (bi-annual)  
MoWCA staff at the national level 
would also be annually  engaged in 
the ToT to build institutional 
capacities to support community - 
based climate -resilient livelihoods  
WLGs will also be sensitized in best 
practices and awareness raised on 
fair working condi tions, lend tenure 
arrangements and negotiation for 
the women; and sustainable 
management of inputs and 
production.  
Specific training would also be 
provided (part of training for all  1017 
WLGs) for business skills uptake 
and development of marketing and 
financing plans in light of value - 
chains and market access (Activity 
1.2) 
1.2. Strengthened 
climate -resilient 
value -chains and 
market linkages for 
alternative, resilient 
livelihoods  
 
 
Gender -Action Plan  
related indicator(s):  
 
Number of women 
with improved access 
to markets  GoB co -financing (with incremental support 
from GCF resources on incorporating 
climate risks) will primarily be invested in 
climate -resilient value -chain and market 
development activities for those resilient 
livelihoods that can leverage economies of 
scale, promote linkages across value -chains 
from production through market access, and 
enhance private sector engagement through 
establishment of public -private platforms.  
These linkages will enable knowledge 
sharing for improved technologies,  practices, 
and management for resilient production and 
scale of the resilient livelihoods. Combined 
with the capacity building across value -chain 
actors (Activity 1.3) on climate risk reduction  
strategies, these linkages engender adaptive  1.2.1.  Participatory, c limate - 
risk informed, value -chain 
development planning 
among WLGs, linking with 
value -chain  actors  
1.2.2.  Climate -risk informed, 
value addition investments 
for resilient livelihoods 
(upgrading of 2 existing crab 
hatcheries)  
1.2.3.  ToT based technical 
training, incorporating 
climate change risks, for 
operation and management 
of value -addition  Building on preliminary Ward - 
specific value -chain analysis and 
recommendations undertaken 
during project design (Annex IIb), 
WLG specific, participatory value - 
chain develo pment planning will be 
undertaken during initial phase of 
implementation.  
Project resources (GoB co -finance) 
will be invested in upgrading two 
existing crab hatcheries to enable 
the resilient, crab value chain 
development.  
Technical operators, including 
women, would be trained (initial,


---
*Page 104*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 103 OF 112  
 
 
Number of women 
with improved access 
to finance  capacities across communities and support 
the exit strategy for the project.  
In particular, GoB resources will be 
leveraged to fully finance the upgrading of 
two existing crab hatcheries (one 
Government owned and one private sector 
owned) to ensure the up -scaling of the crab - 
farming and carb -nursery related resilient 
livelihoods introduced by the pr oject. The 
project will also support the GoB in 
developing codes of practice to reduce 
adverse environmental stresses of the value - 
chains  advanced.  
Finally, this activity will also enable access to 
finance linkages between the WLGs and 
value -chain actors and the financial 
intermediaries. For the switch to climate - 
resilient livelihoods to be sustained, GoB co - 
financing will be targeted to build on th e 
collateral and financial capacities supported 
through investments in resilient livelihoods 
and connect the beneficiaries with financial 
intermediaries such as MFIs. Specifically, 
this Activity will support business and 
financial planning for beneficiarie s, 
awareness, and training for financial 
intermediaries on climate risks and resilient 
livelihoods, and networking through 
workshops and forums to connect lenders 
and borrowers  technologies and facilities ( 1 
training for 2 technicians per  
each hatchery ) 
1.2.4 Development of a 
Codes of Practice for 
sustainable production and 
management of small 
aquaculture as climate 
change risks evolve  
1.2.5. Establishment and 
facilitation  (through quarterly 
workshops ) of the PPIs at 
Upazila level to enable 
replication an d scale of 
climate -resilient livelihoods 
(39 networking events  at 
union level to form PPIs)  
1.2.6  Training (1 initial  and 
mid-project refresher)  of 
Upazila and District level 
staff (MoWCA and DWA 
staff, Department of 
Agriculture, Department of 
Fisheries, LGIs) o n 
supporting  PPIs  
1.2.7  Capacity building 
workshops and networking 
events ( annually in all 39 
unions ) for WLGs, value - 
chain actors, and FIs to 
promote access to finance 
linkages for sustained 
resilient livelihoods and 
value -chain  investments  and annual refreshe r) in the 
operation and maintenance of the 
facilities. O&M backstopping would 
be provided for the investments of 
the WLGs.  
Codes of Practice for (i) 
environmental management of 
small aquaculture, (ii) development 
of sustainable aquaculture feeds 
without fi shmeal from by -catch, and  
(iii) Switching from wild fry collection 
to hatchery stock in crab farming.  
PPIs will be established (and 
facilitated to meet quarterly ) at the 
Upazila level with the platform 
comprising of represented members 
of the WLG from each  union, value - 
chain actors and stakeholders from 
the ward, union, and Upazila levels, 
financial intermediaries, 
government representatives 
including DAE, Fisheries, etc. The 
platform will be hosted by MoWCA 
to facilitate public sector support to 
the PPIs whereas the decision 
making and governance of the 
platforms is retained by the private 
sector actors and  WLGs.  
Producers would be linked with FIs 
and capacities built for both actors 
to understand climate risks and the 
financing products relevant for 
group -based climate -resilient 
livelihoods. Training and networking 
events will be supported annually  to 
link WLGs, Value -chain actors, and 
FIs to promote access to finance.  
This is also enabled by business 
skills development of the 
WLGs/Value -chain actors 
under taken in Activity 1.1.


---
*Page 105*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 104 OF 112  
 
 
 This Activity focuses on building capacities 
for women, value -chain actors, and 
institutional support staff 
(WSCs/LGIs/MoWCA) in adaptive planning 
and management of the new livelihoods in 
light of evolving climate risks including slow - 
and sudden -onset climate change events.  1.3.1. Awareness and 
capacity building through 
101 workshops (initial, and 
5 annual at all wards)  for 
women groups and value - 
chain  actors on climate risk 
reduction strategies  Workshops and training will be 
provided to enhance the awareness 
and capacities among WLGs and 
value -chain actors as well as local 
WSC and LGI staff in climate risks 
reduction strategies to safeguards 
lives, liv elihoods and assets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3. Community - 
based monitoring and 
last-mile 
dissemination of EWs 
for climate -risk 
informed, adaptive 
management of 
resilient livelihoods  
Gender -Action Plan  
related indicator(s):  
 
Number of women 
participating in 
training on 
implementation of 
climate -risk reduction 
strategies and on 
results monitoring of 
livelihoods  GCF resources will also be invested in 
capacitating and equipping women and girls 
to support last -mile dissemination of early 
warning and preparedness information to 
facilitate timely and effective response to 
extreme events. Union -level Disaster 
Management Committees (DMCs) will also 
be trained to support dissemination to other 
Wards of the targeted Unions.  
This Activity will also support the 
development of social audit protocols and 
training of the targeted beneficiaries as well 
as institutional staff (LGIs/MoWCA) in social 
auditing approaches to ensure that women 
are empowered to monitor their livelihoods, 
assess the effectiveness of the results, and 
adapt the imp lementation of the livelihoods 
to manage evolving climate change risks.  
This Activity closely links with Output 3 in 
which the institutional capacities and 
knowledge are promoted to create an 
enabling environment for climate -risk 
informed livelihood planni ng. Therefore, the 
capacity building under this Activity will 
foster upward linkages among communities, 
NGOs, and Government institutions to 
support evidence -based, community -driven 
adaptation planning for resilient livelihoods.  1.3.2. Formation of women 
and girl volunteer groups in  
101 targeted wards (15 per 
ward)  (including 
beneficiaries in WLGs) and 
(ToT) training (twice a year 
workshop ) on dissemination 
and delivery of actionable 
early warnings (in 
coordination with CPP)  
1.3.3  ToT based training, 
learning exc hange, and 
advocacy ( 39 workshops, 
twice during project ) for 
DMC staff, Union level CPP 
volunteer groups, BRCS, 
and MoDMOR staff to 
enable replication of the 
volunteer mechanisms 
across other wards and 
Unions  
 
 
1.3.4  Development of 
climate -risk informed social 
audit protocol and toolkits 
for participatory monitoring 
and evaluation of climate - 
resilient  livelihoods  Targeting beneficiary HHs, women 
and girl volunteer groups will be 
formed in coordination with the 
‘Cyclone Preparedness Program’ 
(CPP). Through ToT -based training, 
distribution of basic equipment, 
preparedness/response activities, 
women and girls will be capacitated 
to support last -mile dissemination of 
early warning and preparedness 
information to facilitate timely and 
effective response to extreme 
events. 
The project will also build the 
capacity of Union -level Disaster 
Management Committees (DMCs) 
to facilitate the development of 
volunteers in other wards with 
similar skills to enable replication 
and scale. MoWCA will also support 
advocacy with CPP, Bangladesh 
Red Crescent Society, and Ministry 
of Disaster management and Relief 
(MoDMR) and coordinate with the 
NRP to scale up these women and 
girls volunteer groups and 
mechanisms for last mile 
dissemination of EWs to the 
remaining Unions across the two 
districts.  
   
1.3.5 ToT based training ( 8 
batch trainings)  for WLGs 
and institutional staff 
(LGIs/DWA) on results 
monitoring of livelihoods in 
light of evolving climate 
risks Social audit protocols and toolkits 
will be developed and training of the 
target ed beneficiaries as well as 
institutional staff (LGIs/MoWCA) will 
be undertaken in social auditing 
approaches to ensure that women 
are empowered to monitor their 
livelihoods, assess the 
effectiveness of the results, and 
adapt the implementation of the 
livelihoods to manage evolving 
conditions including that of climate 
change.  
2.1 Participatory, site - 
specific mapping, 
beneficiary selection, 
and mobilization of 
community -based 
management 
structures for climate - 
resilient drinking 
water  solutions  
 
 
Gender -Action Plan  
related indicator(s):  This Activity will build on the site -specific 
assessments and PRA process undertaken 
during project design which involved 
participatory community consultations at the 
ward and union levels. Combined with 
analysis of  secondary sources and 
assessment of existing and planned 
coverage information (triangulated with LGIs 
and DPHE), the PRA yielded a mapping of 
functional and potential drinking water 
supply solutions at household, community, 
and institutional levels.  
This Activity will be undertaken in the initial 
phase of implementation and includes  2.1.1 Consultations, in light 
of the selection criteria, to 
identify beneficiary HHs, 
raise awareness, and plan 
for distribution of access to 
proposed drinking water 
solution s ystems in light of 
climate change risks  
2.1.2. Participatory 
mapping, vetting, and siting 
of drinking water supply 
systems including 
identification of sites  Building on the design process for 
targeting of communities (based on 
salinity exposure and vulnera bility 
including extreme poverty), 
consultations would be undertaken 
in each of the communities for 
participatory, siting and 
identification of the beneficiary HHs 
(taking into account the planned 
water supply improvements by 
others in Zone 2).  
In consulta tion with the 
households/communities, water 
access and distribution will be


---
*Page 106*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 105 OF 112  
 
 
Number of women 
participating in 
mapping and 
planning of 
installation and 
management of RWH 
tanks  awareness raising and social mobilization to 
support further community/HHs level 
consultative planning, implementation and 
management of water solutions.  
The formulation of Water User Groups 
(WUGs) and Water Management 
Committees (WMCs) will enable sustain ed 
planning and management of the proposed 
water solutions. The WUGs group will be 
comprised of women members from each of 
the targeted household and will be clustered 
based on their access to the identified 
drinking water solution sites.  (sources and demand - 
supply) at ward -level 
2.1.3  
Formulation/reactivation/faci 
litation of WUGs and WMCs 
(synergizing with WLGs in 
Output 1)  
2.1.4 Detailed assessment 
including water quality 
testing at applicable sites to 
support customized design 
of the water supply s ystems  planned combined with vetting of 
water sources and locations. Siting 
will be undertaken for any of the 
non-institutional -scale tanks (these 
have already been sited and 
location -specific parameters have 
been determined) (Annex IIc)  
In each of the tar geted wards in 39 
Unions, one WMC will be formed 
whose main responsibility will be to 
look after the water supply 
technologies provided to ensure 
proper management of the systems.  
 The WMCs will be formed at the ward level 
and will comprise Local government 
representatives (Ward Councilor and 
representative from the Watsan standing 
committee), Representative from DPHE, 
representatives from associated WUGs, 
owners/representatives (at least 2) from the 
institutional/community buildings/facilities 
and technician/caretaker representatives for 
the cluster of water solutions.   Detailed assessments and 
necessary engineering parameter 
calculations will be undertaken to 
support customized, design under 
Activity 2.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Implementation of 
climate -resilient 
drinking water 
solutions (at HH, 
community, and 
institutional scales)  Considering technical, environmental and 
social sustainability of potential water 
technologies, the following water supply 
solutions will be supported by the project: 
Household based rainwater harvesting 
systems (RWH), Community based (small 
and medium -scale) RWH systems, 
Institutional (large -scale) RWH, and 
community based system for treatment of 
water from fresh water ponds, with 
supporting embankments for storm surge  
protection.  
 
 
This Activity will invest in design and 
construction of the portfolio of climate - 
resilient drinking water technologies in each 
of the 39 Unions of the targeted districts of 
Khulna and Sathkira. Each of these supply 
options and their designs  take into account 
projected climate change risks including 
irregular rainfall patterns and intensified 
storm surges.  2.2.1.  Customization and 
detailed design for each of 
the sites and water supply 
systems  
2.2.2.  Site preparation and 
construction of 13,308 
household RWH  systems  
including storage tanks, roof 
catchments, and 
conveyance  elements  
2.2.3  Site preparation and 
construction of 228 
community -scale RWH 
systems  including storage 
tanks, roof catchment 
preparation or new roof 
catchments, and 
conveyance  elements  
2.2.4  Site preparation and 
construction of 19 
institutional -scale RWH  
systems  including storage 
tanks, roof catchment 
preparation or new roof 
catchments, and 
conveyance  elements  
2.2.5  Site preparation and 
construction to raise 41 
pond embankments  and 
installation of f iltration 
systems  Customized technology and site - 
specific design will be developed 
through contractual services.  
Each of the water supply systems 
will be constructed at the HH, 
community, and institutional scales, 
as mapped and planned with the 
communitie s (Activity 2.1).  
The RWH systems, comprising the 
catchment, conveyance, storage, 
and the delivery, will be constructed 
to support year -round (with tanks 
sized for the worst case of a 
maximum of 180 days’ dry period) 
access to safe drinking water.  
Pond water is an alternative and 
popular option of potable water 
supply through use of a pond sand 
filter (PSF) which is a simple low - 
cost technology. Filtration treatment 
systems will be installed at selected 
pond sites to provide filtration and 
ensure qualit y of the drinking water 
to GoB drinking water standards 
and WHO guidelines for drinking 
water. To improve climate -resiliency 
and prevent saltwater intrusion 
during intense cyclonic events, 
selected fresh water ponds (not in 
the vicinity of and exposed to 
shrimp farming), will be supported 
by raised  embankments.  
  2.2.6. Water quality 
testing/verification of fresh 
water sources after 
installation and prior to 
commissioning  All water supply systems will be 
tested and verified prior to 
commissioning for use.


---
*Page 107*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 106 OF 112  
 
 
 This Activity will support capacity building for 
all the stakeholders in participatory, 
community -based water access, distribution, 
and delivery planning and implementation to 
ensure gender -targeted, inclusive, and 
equitable access to safe, year -round drinking 
water, in light of a changing climate.  2.3.1. Facilitation of WUG 
and WMC meetings (Initia l 
and alternative quarters 
from year 2 onwards)  for 
yearly, adaptive water 
distribution and 
management planning in the 
face of a changing  climate  
2.3.2  Awareness raising and 
capacity building ( batch - 
training, 1 initial and 5 
annual)  for HHs, WUGs, 
WMCs (involving LGIs) on 
climate change and disaster 
risk management for water 
solutions  
2.3.3  Development of fee - 
based, three -tier O&M plan 
including identification of 
O&M needs, financing 
sources, and technical 
support  
2.3.4  ToT based technical 
training, incorporating 
climate risks, on operations, 
maintenance and use for 
HHs, water user groups & 
WMCs, 
technicians/caretakers, 
LGIs, and DPHE staff (1 
initial and 5 annual, batch - 
training at different  levels)  
2.3.5  Implementation of 
community -based and 
three -tier system for  water 
availability and  quality  
monitoring and operations & 
maintenance (O&M) 
(including provision of water 
quality test reagents, 
caretaker costs, and O&M 
support)  WUGs will be facilitated to meet, 
discuss, and plan for water supply 
for the ir households, including 
continuous monitoring of water 
availability and quality as well as 
peer-to-peer learning on safe health 
practices.  
 GCF resources will be used to set up a 
community and tier -based O&M system 
comprising of the WUGs, WMCs, and 
LGI/DPHE staff. After initial GCF support, 
O&M (as outlined in the O&M plan, Annex 
XIIIb) will be co -financed by GoB with 
contributions from the WUGs.   
 
Awareness raising and training 
workshops on understanding, 
assessing and responding to 
climate risks i ncluding extreme 
events to safeguard drinking water  
security.  
 
2.3 Community - 
based, climate -risk 
informed Operation & 
Maintenance (O&M) 
and management of 
the resilient drinking 
water solutions  
 
 
 
 
Gender -Action Plan  
related indicator(s):  
 
 
Time saved by 
women in collecting 
and carrying water, 
due to 
implementation of 
drinking water 
solutions  Tier 1: The WUGs will be responsible for 
daily and/or monthly monitoring of the water 
supply systems, in particular, the HH and 
community -scale RWH systems.  
Tier 2: The WMCs (at the ward level) will 
staff a technician/caretaker for each 
community or institution -scale water supply 
point. The caretaker will be responsible for 
an associated cluster of WUGs including 
WUGs for nearby household RWH systems 
and will support minor repairs including 
yearly maintenance of RWH systems 
including roof catchment cleaning, tank 
cleaning and minor repairs of taps, joints, 
gutters and pipes.  
Tier 3: GoB co -financing will be leveraged to 
backstop and cover the O&M costs related 
to major  repairs, part replacements, and 
potentially full system rehabilitation in case 
of unanticipated cyclonic shocks. For the 
pond -based systems, installation with 
warranty would be procured to ensure robust 
technical support for long -term viability of 
these  solutions.  
Post-project O&M would continue to be 
supported through community and DPHE 
financing and the commitment letter (Annex 
IVb) indicates the O&M costs to be covered 
by DPHE beyond the project lifetime.  O&M plans will be developed for 
WUGs/WMCs in coordination with 
LGI/DPHE staff. The provision of 
and access to water will be 
anchored in a fee -based model 
(based on existing practices and 
DPHE’s mandate) that will 
engender ownership and 
commitment to securing drinking 
water for the targeted households . 
The fee will be standardized 
according to the water supply 
technology with one fee per HH for 
HH RWH, one fee per HH for 
Community/Institution -scale RWH 
and one fee per HH for treated 
pond water (the fee could be 
different from one ward to another 
but no t from one RWH site to 
another RWH site within the same 
ward). The fee supports basic 
operation needs including simple 
cleaning and repairs and will be 
used as an O&M fund to collectively 
contribute to the staffing of a 
technician/caretaker maintained as 
part of each  WMC.  
Technical training for WUGs and 
support staff across 
ward/union/national levels including 
on water quality monitoring, system 
condition assessment, end -point 
quality control.  
  O&M will be implemented according 
to three -tier model. Implementation 
of monitoring and O&M (co - 
financed by WUGs, GCF and 
DPHE)  
 
3.1 Strengthen 
MoWCA’s technical 
and coordination 
capacities for design 
and implementation 
of gender -responsive, 
climate -resilient 
coastal  livelihoods  This Activity will promote ma instreaming of 
climate change concerns into institutional 
planning and coordination within MoWCA to 
foster cross -sectoral and comprehensive 
approaches to resilient coastal livelihoods. 
GCF resources and GoB co -financing will be 
invested in building institu tional and 
technical capacities of MoWCA/DWA staff to 
assess climate change risks and scenarios 
and undertake adaptive planning and 
decision -making. MoWCA’s  cross -sectoral  3.1.1. Development of and 
training for MoWCA and 
DWA ( ToT approach – 50 
staff; 2 batch, 25 persons in 
each batch; 4 days training)  
on climate risks and 
livelihood scenarios for 
coastal livelihoods  
3.1.2 Development of and  
training (ToT approach – 
125 staff; 5 batch, 25  Support will be provided to develop 
climate change and adaptation 
scenarios, including socio -economic 
development considerations, to 
input into policy and decision - 
making for gender -responsive, 
coastal livelihoods. ToT approach 
will allow for capacity building of 
MoWCA and DWA in both the 
development of the scenarios and  
their application.


---
*Page 108*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 107 OF 112  
 
 
 coordination capacity will be improved to 
support integration of gender and climate 
change concerns into other socio -economic 
activities.  persons in each batch; 3  
days training ) for MoWCA, 
DWA, and LGI staff on tool 
kit for gender -responsive, 
climate -resilient livelihoods 
design and implementation 
for the Southwest coast  
3.1.3  Development of 
‘Gender Sensitive Climate 
Change Action’ Training 
Module and ToT ( 200 st aff) 
for gender focal persons 
across key  ministries  
3.1.4  Training for MoWCA 
and DWA staff (30 staff ) to 
coordinate and integrate 
gender and climate change 
across policy and  programs 
for other sectors in 
partnership with  DoE.  The toolkit will include modules on 
climate risks and impact scenarios 
related to various livelihoods, 
climate -risk informed livelihood 
planning, cost -benefit models, 
programme design and 
management, and M&E approaches 
to assess adaptive capacities and 
impacts of livelihood programs. A 
ToT a pproach would build MoWCA, 
DWA, and LGIs capacities to 
develop and implement these 
scenarios and tool -kit. 
A ‘Gender Sensitive Climate 
Change Action’ training module will 
be developed and disseminated 
including training of existing gender 
focal persons in each ministry.  
Training of MoWCA and DWA staff 
to advocate for gender sensitive 
adaptation and mitigation in policy 
forums like PEC, ECNEC, NDA 
Advisory Committee and to 
integrate gender and climate 
change across other sectors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Strengthen DPHE  
capacities for climate - 
risk informed 
management of 
drinking water 
solutions across the 
Southwest coast  This Activity (blending GCF and GoB 
resources) will invest in technical capacities 
for DPHE and LGIs to integrate climate 
change risks and projected im pacts on the 
freshwater resources and water supply 
infrastructure of the coastal communities into 
planning and implementation support. DPHE 
will be capacitated to undertake climate -risk 
modelling and assessment of drinking water 
needs in light of climate c hange. The current 
master plan for the drinking water sector 
would be updated/revised to incorporate 
climate risks to support planning of drinking 
water supply investments for vulnerable 
districts across the Southwest coast. A 
regional database would be es tablished, co - 
financed, by GoB to map water supply 
sources and infrastructure to support 
effective coordination across various 
investments. Finally, technical capacity of 
DPHE staff will be strengthened through 
training and field based work to support the  
implementation of climate -resilient surface 
water solutions (PSF, MAR, river based 
solutions, RO, etc.) for year -round, safe 
drinking water for coastal populations in light 
of projected slow - and sudden -onset climatic 
events.  3.2.1.  Development of and 
training ( ToT) (1 batch 
training)  for 20 DPHE staff 
on climate risks and 
scenario modelling for 
drinking water needs across 
the southwest  coast.  
3.2.2.  Establishment of a 
regional database for 
mapping of water supply 
sources and 
existing/planned water 
supply  infrastructure  
3.2.3 Technical capacities 
for R&D wing of DPHE 
(training and field -based 
studies) for innovation and 
design of climate -resilient 
water solutions across the 
coast, in coordination with 
technical institutes  Development of climate risks and 
scenario modelli ng (including ICT, 
software) based drinking water 
needs in the southwest coast 
including ToT -based technical 
training for DPHE staff on 
development and use of the 
scenarios is decision -making.  
A regional database would be 
established (ICT/software, data 
collection/entry, sharing), co - 
financed, by GoB to map water 
supply sources and infrastructure to 
support effective coordination 
across various investments.  
Build technical capacity of DPHE 
staff through training and field 
based work to support 
implementation of climate -resilient 
solutions (PSF, MAR, river based 
solutions, RO, etc.) for year -round, 
safe drinking water for coastal 
populations in light of projected 
slow- and sudden -onset climatic 
events.


---
*Page 109*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | PAGE 108 OF 112  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3. Establish 
knowledge 
management, 
evidence -based 
learning and M&E 
mechanisms to 
promote long -term, 
adaptive capacities of 
coastal communities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender -Action Plan  
related indicator(s):  
Evidence of 
policy/programs in 
other sectors 
integrating gender 
and climate change  
 
 
Number of girls and 
boys with increased 
awareness through 
‘adaptive learning’ 
training through 
school and 
community based 
communications  This Activity will contribute to the long -term 
sustainability of the project and create 
pathways for continued learning and 
evidence -based replication and scale of 
project impact. GCF resources will be used 
to codify knowledge products, such as 
climate risk and scenario analyses, decision - 
making and planning tools and products, and 
best practices and lessons learned and 
integrate them into training modules for 
academic and government institutes, and a 
web-portal for wider dissemination. The 
Activity will also support the development 
and promotion of C odes of Practice for 
environmental sustainability and resilience of 
the livelihoods.  
A targeted ‘Adaptive Learning’ activity will be 
undertaken to focus on young girls and boys 
in targeted coastal areas to build their long - 
term adaptive capacities. Learning will be 
related to various aspects of climate change 
such as causes of climate change, potential 
future changes, and adaptation 
technologies. The learning will also focus on 
their rights and resources and provide 
access to information and knowledg e on 
social, economic, and health risks and 
benefits in a changing  climate.  
GCF resources will also be used to 
undertake impact evaluation to enable 
evidence -based policy, planning, and 
implementation of climate -resilient programs 
for secure water and live lihoods.  
This Activity will also support the 
development of a replication roadmap, 
building on the analytical groundwork, 
knowledge, and learning established under 
this project, to support the GoB to replicate 
and scale project impact to other districts of  
the Southwest Coast.  3.3.1. Codification of 
knowledge, good practices, 
tools, and approaches such 
as climate risk and scenario 
analyses, tools for climate - 
resilient livelihood and 
drinking water solutions, 
and best practices and 
lessons  
 
 
3.3.2  Integration of 
knowledge and tools into 
training and informational 
modules of government and 
technical  institutes  
3.3.3  Establishment of a 
web-portal, co -hosted by 
MoWCA, for dissemination 
of climate and gender 
related knowledge, tools, 
and adaptation  practices  
3.3.4  Design and 
implementation of ‘Adaptive 
Learning’ for young boys 
and girls (3000 – in the 
project targeted HHs) 
through behavioural change 
communications  
3.3.5  Implementation of 
monitoring and evaluation 
framework including: (i) 
baseline climate risk and 
vulnerability asses sments 
(Incorporate ActionAid 
resilience index) and (iii) 
impact evaluation to 
quantify project  impacts.  
3.3.6  Development of a 
Replication Roadmap for 
replication and scale or 
climate -resilient livelihood 
and drinking water 
solutions, coordinating with 
donors, ministries, and 
multi -laterals  Codification of knowledge, good practices, 
tools, and approaches of climate change 
adaptive drinking water management and 
adaptive livelihoods.  
Support mainstream adaptive livelihood 
planning into curriculum of technical and 
research institutes such as BARD, RDA, 
NILG, etc. Support mainstreaming of 
planning tools for climate -resilient water 
solutions into BUET, RDA, Soil and Salinity 
Institutes, etc.  
 
 
Development of web portal for web -based 
knowledge management for wider 
stakeholder use, co -hosted by MoWCA 
and a CC think tank/partner  
 
 
Design and Implement awareness raising 
and BCC campaigns targeting girls and 
boys across the project HHS (under Output 
1 and 2)  
An impact evaluation (quasi -experimental) 
will be designed and  executed to quantify 
project impacts (subject to constraints 
imposed by the extent to which beneficiary 
selection can be feasibly modified).  
 
 
The roadmap, developed in coordination 
with relevant ministries, donor community, 
private sector, and multi -laterals, will 
identify priority districts and financing 
mechanisms (such as enhance micro - 
credit for livelihoods, private sector 
engagement for water provision) to support 
replication and scale of the project 
activities and  impacts.


---
*Page 110*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 109 OF 112  
 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and  Evaluation  
263. Project -level monitoring  and evaluation  will be undertaken  in compliance  with the UNDP  POPP  and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy . The primary responsibility for day -to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with 
the Project Manager. The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient 
implementation  of the project.  The Project  Manager  will inform  the Project  Board  and the UNDP  Country  Office 
of any delays or difficulties during implementation, including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the 
appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all 
project  staff maintain  a high level of transparency,  responsibility  and accountability  in monitoring  and reporting 
project  results.  
 
264. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements 
as outlined in the  UNDP POPP . Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting 
support will be provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. Th e project target groups and 
stakeholders including the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.  
 
265. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant 
parties to: a) re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall 
context that influence project implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, 
including reporting and communication lines and conf lict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results 
framework and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E 
plan; d) review financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrange ments 
for the annual  audit;  e) plan and schedule  Project  Board  meetings  and finalize  the first year annual  work  plan. 
The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. 
The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical 
Adviser, and will be approved by the Project  Board.  
 
266. A project  implementation  report  will be prepared  for each  year of project  implementation.  The Project  Manager, 
the UNDP  Country  Office,  and the UNDP  Regional  Technical  Advisor  will provide  objective  input  to the annual 
PIR. The Project Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are 
monitored  annually  well in advance  of the PIR submission  deadline  and will objectively  report  progress  in the 
Development Objective tab of the PIR. The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Board and other 
stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other 
stake holders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be used to inform the preparation 
of the next PIR. The final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding 
management response, will serve as the final projec t report  package.  
 
267. An independent mid -term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the 
final half of the project’s durat ion. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will 
follow the standard templates and guidance available on the  UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final 
MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional  Technical Adviser, and will 
be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report will be available in  English.  
 
268. An independent  terminal  evaluation  (TE) will take place  no later than three  months  prior to operational  closure 
of the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard 
templates  and guidance  available  on the UNDP  Evaluation  Resource  Center . The final TE report  will be cleared 
by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project 
Board. The TE report will be available in English. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project 
terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation 
report in English and the  management response  to  the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC)     
( https://erc.undp.org/ )


---
*Page 111*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 110 OF 112  
 
 
 
269. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E reco rds for this project for up to seven years after project 
financial closure in order to support ex -post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and 
evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project document. Monitoring, reporting and evaluati on 
arrangements will comply with the relevant GCF policies and Accreditation Master Agreement signed 
between GCF and UNDP.  
 
Methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project/programme  
 
270. Monitoring  and reporting  for the project  outcomes  are outlined  as the means  of verification  in Table  H.1.2  above, 
where progress on each indicator from the baseline to the mid -point and end -point targets for those indicators 
will be tracked.  For Output  1, detailed  HH surveys  will be undertaken  to monitor  the capacity  of women  groups 
and communities in adopting and implementing the diversified, resilient livelihoods. The project monitoring will 
be aligned  with the social  auditing  and monitoring  protocols  supported  under  Activity  1.3 to ensure  participatory 
assessment  of the adaptive  capacities.  Number  of user groups  and PPIs  established,  the engagement  of value - 
chain  actors,  and number  of EWs  volunteer  groups  functioning  would  be assessed  through  field verification  by 
NGOs and project staff. F or Output 2, field verification would be undertaken along with the examination of the 
registration data in the DPHE database (created under Activity 3.2) to monitor the installation of the drinking 
water supply systems. Survey instruments will also be appl ied to assess the quality and accessibility of the 
drinking water across the technologies and households. The questionnaires would be designed to elicit 
information, among other aspects, on access, ease of use, quality of water, functioning of the communit y 
structures,  quality  of support  from the institutional  staff,  and issues  around  O&M  of the supply  systems.  Output 
3 would  be monitored  through  the administration  of a qualitative  score  card to assess  the awareness,  learning, 
and capacities of various stakeholders across understanding of climate risks, climate -risk informed planning, 
and knowledge of resilient livelihoods and drinking water solutions. Tool -kits and climate -risk informed plans, 
would be verified through their availability at the institut ional websites. Knowledge products generated would 
be verified including through their availability on the web -portal and integration into government and technical 
institute  platforms.  The engagement  of youth  under  the ‘Adaptive  Learning’  activity  would  be monitored  through 
field verification of number of outreach campaigns, number of girls and boys (school -going and/or present in 
the targeted HHs) engaged, and schools  engaged.  
 
271. Beyond  tracking  and monitoring  of progress,  an Impact  Evaluation  would  be under taken  (as outlined  in Activity 
3.3) to assess the adaptive capacities of the project beneficiaries across livelihoods, water, and the targeted 
youth learning. Baseline and end -line surveys would help gather baseline data as well as evaluate progress 
across  variables such as incomes, health, access to resources, gender roles, and adaptive  capacities.


---
*Page 112*
---

I ANNEXES   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 111 OF 112  
 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☐ NDA No -objection Letter (Annex  I) 
☒ Feasibility Study (Annex II  (a)) 
☐ Livelihoods Assessment Report (Annex II  (b)) 
☒ Drinking Water Assessment Report (Annex II  (c)) 
☒ Union Reports (Annex II  (d)) 
☐ Integrated  Financial  Model  that provides  sensitivity  analysis  of critical  elements  (xls format,  if applicable)  
(Annex  III) 
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (Annex IV  (a)) 
☐ Post-project O&M Commitment Letter (Annex IV  (b)) 
☐ Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) (Annex  V) 
☐ Environ mental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (Annex VI  (a)) 
☒ Environmental and Social Management Framework (Annex VI  (b)) 
☒ Indigenous Peoples’ Planning Framework (Annex VI  (c)) 
☒ Environmental and Social Report(s) Disclosure (Annex VI  (d)) 
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) (Annex  VII) 
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) (Annex  VIII) 
☐ Map indicating the location of the project/programme (Annex IX)  
☐ Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex  X) 
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION  
☐ Project/programme confirmation (Annex  XI) 
☐ Economic Analysis (summary) (Annex XII  (a)) 
☐ Economic Analysis (excel) (Annex XII (b))  
☒ Procurement Plan (Annex XIII  (a)) 
☒ O&M Plan (Annex XIII  (b)) 
☒ Stakeholder Consultation ( Annex XIII  (c)) 
☐ Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex XIII  (d)) 
☒ Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex XIII (e))  
☐ Evidence of Internal Approval (Annex XIII  (f)) 
☒ Detailed budget sheet (Annex XIII  (g)) 
☐ Beneficiary Methodology and Calculations (Annex XIII  (h)) 
☐ Responses to GCF Comments on Funding Proposal (Annex  XIV) 
☐ UNDP Endorsement Letter (Annex  XV) 
☐ UNDP Responses to iTAP  comments  
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.19/22/Add.11  
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 114*
---

Page 1  
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Enhancing adaptive capacities of coastal communities, 
especially women, to cope with climate change induced 
salinity  
Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited  
entity’s website  2018 -01-18 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Bangla  
Link to disclosure  http://www.bd.undp.org/content/bangladesh/en/home/presscenter/art  
icles/2018/01/18/public -disclosure --environmental -and-social - 
management -framework.html  
A simplified impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the requirements 
for a category B project is cont ained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  http://www.bd.undp.org/content/dam/bangladesh/docs/News/Article/  
Bangla/Environmental%20 and%20Social%20Management%20Framewo  
rk%20(Bangla).pdf?download  
http://www.bd.undp.org/content/dam/bangladesh/docs/News/Article/  
English/Environmental%20and%20Social%20Management%20Framew  
ork%20(English).pdf?download  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited  
entity’s website  2018 -01-18 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Bangla  
Link to disclosure  http://www.bd.undp.o rg/content/bangladesh/en/home/presscenter/art  
icles/2018/01/18/public -disclosure --environmental -and-social - 
management -framework.html  
A management plan (ESMP) consistent with the requirements for a 
category B project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  http://www.bd.undp.org/content/dam/bangladesh/docs/News/Article/  
Bangla/Environmental%20and%20Social%20Management%20Framewo  
rk%2 0(Bangla).pdf?download  
http://www.bd.undp.org/content/dam/bangladesh/docs/News/Article / 
English/Environmental%20and%20Social%20Management%20Framew  
ork%20(English).pdf?download  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited  
entity’s website  Not applicable  GCF/B.19/22/Add.11


---
*Page 115*
---

Page 2  
 
 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of report/disclosure  Indigenous People’s Planning Framework  
Date of disclosure on accredited  
entity’s website  2018 -01-18 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Bangla  
Link to disclosure  http://www.bd.undp.org/content/bangladesh/en/home/presscenter/art  
icles/2018/01/18/pu blic-disclosure --environmental -and-social - 
management -framework.html  
Other link(s)  http://www.bd.undp.org/content/dam/bangladesh/docs/News/Article/i  
ndi/Indigenous%20Peoples%20Planning%20Framework%20(Bangla).p  
df?download  
http: //www.bd.undp.org/content/dam/bangladesh/docs/News/Article/i  
ndi/Indigenous%20Peoples%20Planning%20 Framework%20(English).p  
df?download  
 GCF/B.19/22/Add.11