=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20170314100251+09'00'
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2013
/ModDate: D:20170314105639+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VIII  
Funding proposal package for FP04 5 GCF/B.16/0 7/Add.08 
14 March 201 7 Meeting of the Board  
4 – 6 April 2017  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  11(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ Ground water recharge and solar micro irrigation to
ensure food security and enhance resilience in vulnerable tribal areas of Odisha ”
submitted by NABARD ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents  are presented as sub mitted by the accredited entity,  and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 8 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme Title:  Ground water recharge and  solar micro i rrigation  to ensure 
food security and enhance resilience in vulnerable tribal 
areas of Odisha  
Country/Region:   India/Odisha  
Accredited Entity:   National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)  
Date of Submission:  16 September 2016


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
 Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“MoEFCC -NABARD -16/09/2016 -CC 20.2.2 ”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 70 
 C 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Ground water recharge and Solar Micro Irrigation to ensure 
food security and enhance resilience in vulnerable tribal areas 
of Odisha  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     India  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change(MoEF &CC), Government of India  
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD)  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☒  Direct  ☐  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  Groundwater Division of Department of 
Water Resources , Govt. of Odisha   
 
Beneficiary:  5.2 million vulnerable populations of which 51% 
would be female.  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
 ☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐ Small (10<x≤50)   
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission   
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Dr. B G Mukhopadhyay, Chief General Manager  
Organization  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD)  
Email address  bg.mukhopadhyay@nabard.org , fspd@nabard.org , 
climate.change@nabard.org  
Telephone number  +91 22 26530007, +91 9769690750;  
Fax: +91 22 26530009  
Mailing  address  Farm Sector Policy Department (FSPD), NABARD Head 
Office, C -24, G Wing, Bandra Kurla  Complex, Bandra East, 
Mumbai 400 051 (INDIA)  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security


---
*Page 6*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 70 
 C 
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☐ 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. Climate Context:  The state of Odisha is highly vulnerable to climate change due to  high monsoon 
variability . This  has caused drought and flood affecting  the food security of agriculture dependent 
communit ies and pushed the vulnerable sections to margin. As per the climate change projection for the 
region , the temperature would breach 20 C barrier  by end of the  21st century.  Groundwater is highly 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change . Groundwater either  directly or indirectly is vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change  and t emperature is an important factor impacting the groundwater table through 
human stress and high evapotranspiration. The  rising temperature  may result in greater heat stress for 
people and ecosystems and it would enhance energy  and water  drawl , induce droug ht and impact food 
security.   
 
Food and Water security Context :  Many districts in Odisha  state face multi -hazard scenario  as 13 
districts  (out of 30 districts) are severely food insecure and 5 are extremely food insecure. Lack of adequate 
infrastructure for enhanced run  off has  implication on water conservation and overall enhancement of risk 
and vulnerability for the people living in the fringe. It is envisaged that annual 17 BCM replenishable  ground 
water has to be conser ved through some adaptive mechanism so that under the projected climate scenario 
it does not cause distress , migration and large scale social unrest. As of now as per Census  2011  in 
Odisha, around 38.5% families travel at least half a km to fetch drinking water in  villages. The number of 
such families was 32.5% in 2001, which increased by 6% in 10 years.  
 
2. To respond to these challenges the primary  objective  of this project is to enhance groundwater recharge 
in the community ponds through structural adapta tion measures and use of solar pumps for micro irrigation 
to ensure water security and food security in the vulnerable areas of the state.  
 
3. The following  results  are expected to be achieved by this project (i ) Augmentation of ground water 
recharge  to improve water table and water quality for health and well-being  of about 5.2 million vulnerable 
communities through water security  (ii) Improved food security  through resilient crop planning  
(through irr igation) through installation of Ground Water Rec harge Shaft  (GWRS ) in 10,000 tanks. (iii) Use 
of solar pumps for irrigation is not only improve energy access but also will be part of low emission 
climate resilient crop planning strategy  of the state1. In 1000 demonstration ponds to achieve energy 
saving  of 3.27 million kWhr  per year and avoided CO 2 emission of 2614  tonnes/year  as mitigation co -
benefit under this adaptation project. . 
 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  Not applicable  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Not applicable (the matching funds from state through state 
budget)  
                                                             
1 Stated as a priority in the State Action Plan on Climate Change and also contributes to the solarisation 
agenda of India’s INDC as well as solar mission under NAPCC


---
*Page 7*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 70 
 C 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: Year 2017                          End:  Year 2021  
Project/programme lifespan  5 years 00 months  (the renovated tanks and solar pumps will 
have a life span of 20 years).  
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme


---
*Page 8*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 70 
 C 
Component  Sub-component (if 
applicable)  Amount  
(for 
entire 
project)  Curre
ncy Amount  
(for entire 
project)  Loc
al 
cur
ren
cy GCF 
funding 
amount  Currency of 
disburse  
-ment to 
recipient  
Component 1: 
Ground water 
recharge system 
for concrete 
Adaptation  Sub-component 1.1 Baseline 
study for 10,000 tanks are 
conducted and database 
developed  3.788  
million 
USD 
($)          
250.000  
milli
on 
INR 3.788  
million USD 
($) Sub-component 1.2 Tank 
improvement plan and estimate 
for the recharge shaft 
installation developed  0.009               
0.575  0.009  
Sub-component 1.3  Standard 
Operating procedure for 
installation and maintenance 
developed  0.002               
0.100  0.002  
Sub-component 1.4 Ground 
water recharge system 
installed in 10,000 tanks  21.212        
1,400.000  21.212  
Sub-Total (C1)  25.010   1,650.675  25.010  
Component 2: 
Renovation of 
Community Tank 
(From 
Convergence 
Fund)  Sub-component 2.1  Tank water 
level and other assessments 
and renovation completed for 
all 10000 with necessary Dug 
well creation for irrigation  131.94  
million 
USD 
($) 
        
8,708.000  
milli
on 
INR 0 
million USD 
($) Sub-component 2.2 Crop water 
budgeting based on agro -
climatic zone prepared  0.068               
4.500  0.068  
Sub-component 2.3  Water 
sharing master plan developed  0.015               
1.000  0.015  
Sub-component 2.4 Livelihood 
improvement plan prepared  0.015               
1.000  0.015  
Sub-component 2.5 Water 
quality sample drawn from 
random wells  0.065               
4.300  0.065  
Subtotal(C2)  132.103  8,718.800  0.164  
Component 3: 
Integration of 
Solar Pumps for 
Irrigation  Sub-component  3.1 
Identification criteria for 1000 
solar pump installation 
developed  0.001  
million 
USD 
($)              
0.070  
milli
on 
INR 0.001  
million USD 
($) Sub-component 3.2  
Procurement plan and 
standard supplier contract for 
1000 solar pumps developed  0.001               
0.065  0.001  
Sub-component 3.3  1000 solar 
pump installed  and baseline 
audit completed  5.152           
340.040  5.152  
Sub-component 3.4 2000 
village level para -professionals 
are certified in operation and 
maintenance of pumps  0.024               
1.600  0.024  
Sub-component 3.5 Energy 
saving report generated  0.148               
9.750  0.148  
Sub Total (C3)  5.326    351.525  5.326


---
*Page 9*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 70 
 C 
Component 4: 
Capacity Building 
of stakeholders  Sub-component 4.1  Training 
need assessment for sample 
households in tank command 
and PPs completed  0.170  
million 
USD 
($) 
             
11.250  
milli
on 
INR 0.170  
million USD 
($) Sub-component 4.2  Training 
modules prepared and partners 
identified for both training and 
demonstration  0.023               
1.530  0.023  
Sub-component 4.3  Training of 
500 engineer 20,000 jal sathis 
completed and certified  0.161             
10.600  0.161  
Sub-component 4.4  Training 
and demonstration organized 
in convergence with relevant 
departmental programmes of 
the government  1.515           
100.000  1.515  
Sub-component 4.5 Landless 
and women members covered 
under capacity building for off -
farm initiatives  0.758             
50.000  0.758  
Sub-component 4.6  FPOs are 
linked  0.015               
1.000  2.627  
Subtotal(C4)  2.642  174.380  2.642  
Component 5: 
Quality 
Management & 
Monitoring  Sub-component 5.1  A 
geospatial tank quality 
management database and 
MIS prepared  0.131  
million 
USD 
($)              
8.675  
milli
on 
INR 0.131  
million USD 
($) Sub-component 5.2  Water 
Quality and dynamic ground 
water modelling tool developed  0.015               
1.000  0.015  
Sub-component 5.3 Baseline 
and independent assessment 
report based on project 
objective and indicators 
prepared  0.303             
20.000  0.303  
Sub-component 5.4 Process 
monitoring report that 
estimates adaptation and 
mitigation benefit prepared  0.153             
10.113  0.153  
Subtotal (C5)  0.603           
39.788  0.603  
Component 6: 
Knowledge 
Management 
Knowledge 
Management  Sub-component 6.1 
Preparation of policy briefs for 
Odisha ground water 
management and development 
regulation, state water policy 
and relevant facilitation  0.023  
million 
USD 
($)              
1.500  
milli
on 
INR 0.023  
million USD 
($) Sub-component 6.2 Process 
documentation and preparation 
standard operating procedure 
for development of solar 
pumping value chain  0.023               
1.500  0.023  
Sub-component 6.3  Science to 
policy knowledge product 
framework developed  0.015               
1.000  0.015


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 70 
 C 
Sub-component 6.4  Process 
document for convergence with 
other departments are 
developed  0.015               
1.000  0.015  
Sub-component 6.5 Quarterly 
project newsletter published  0.033               
2.200  0.033  
Sub-component 6.6  Ten peer 
learning workshops are 
conducted during the lifecycle 
of the project  0.011               
0.705  0.011  
Sub-total (C6)  0.120               
7.905  0.120  
Component 7: 
Project 
Management  Sub-component 7.1  Inter 
departmental steering 
committee for the project 
notified  0.038  
million 
USD 
($) 
               
2.500  
milli
on 
INR 0.038  
million USD 
($) Sub-component  7.2  Project 
Implementation plan 
developed and approved  0.045               
3.000  0.045  
Sub-component  7.3 
Agreements for good and 
services signed and service 
providers mobilized  0.023               
1.500  0.023  
Sub-component  7.4 Seamless 
reporting to AE established  0.023               
1.500  0.023  
Sub-component  7.5 Fund 
flows, physical work progress 
and web based monitoring 
ensured  0.364             
24.000  0.364  
Subtotal (C7)  0.492             
32.500  0.492  
Total project financing  166.297  millio
n USD 
($) 10975.573  mill
ion 
INR 34.358  million USD 
($) 
 
Co-Financing Arrangement:  
 
The new project being formulated by  Department of Water Resources ( DoWR ), Govt. of Odisha  includes a loan 
component of 7.064  million USD for tank improvement for 600 tanks from World Bank support . In addition  to this,  
Govt. of Odisha  has decided to upscale the tan k improvement exercise for additional 9400 tanks through 
convergence funding from the state’s own resource. The tentative budget for tank improvement in 600 tanks 
funded by World Bank will be 7. 064 million USD  which is 4.25% of the total project  cost. Gove rnment  of Odisha 
is not considering this project as a business as usual tank investment project . It is focusing on the long term  
resilience  of the chronically poor and drought -prone areas of the state considering both current and future 
vulnerability. The project is expected to be appr aised in July 2017 as DEA has already cleared it. After appraisal 
the exact terms of this IBRD loan will be determined. After the completion of the appraisal mission the joint 
commitment letter from World Bank and Government o f Odisha will be submitted to GCF secretariat. The 
community contribution  under the project is as per the provision of the Pani Panchayat Act (para 17 -20,22, Ch III 
of the Odisha Pani Panchayat Act) and will ensure long term sustainability and ownership.


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 70 
 C 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  166.297 million USD ($)   
(b) GCF 
financing  to 
recipient   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants *  
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
34.357 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) (  )  years  
(  )  years  
 
 
 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
 
 
 
 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  ……34.357 ………
…… Options   
(c) Co -
financing  to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
Loans  
Grant  
      
Options  7.0642 
124.876  
 million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
      
Options  IBRD  
………………  
State 
Convergence 
fund and 
community  
………………  (  )  years  
(  )  years  
 (  ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution:  State Government of Odisha (India) and World Ban k 
 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between GCF 
and AE  (if 
applicable)  Fee arrangement for the proposed project is aligned with the GCF Board’s decision number B11/10 
about the interim  policy on fees for accredited entities.  The same is presented in Annexure 8. 
B.4. 
 
B.3. Financial Market s Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non -concessional) determined?  
Not Applicable  
                                                             
2 The likely investment only for tank improvement or 600 tanks will be 7. 064 million USD ( 4.25%) of t his project cost. 
Financial terms of the loan would be finalized based on the final approval and appraisal mission scheduled in Jule 
2017. GCF would be updated on the same accordingly.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 70 
 C 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets  which 
could be tapped to finance  the proposed project/programme . 
Not Applicable  
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1 -year T -Bill, 5 -year government bond, 5 -year corporate bond (specify 
credit rating) and 5 -year syndicate loan.  
Not App licable  
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.   
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as t hese requirements 
may vary depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
4. The variability in precipitation (especially the erratic nature of the south west monsoon) and rise in temperature has 
predominantly affected the ground water table. Modelled temperature for the end century (2100) scenario shows 
(projection bas ed on 1986 -2005) significant rise in winter temperature. This shows the reduced rainfall towards the 
end of August. Reduced rainfall combined with high temperature will significantly impact the water balance. The 
historical evidence and the results indicat e that without proper consideration to variations in aquifer recharge and 
sound pumping strategies, the water resources of sampled aquifer could be severely impacted under a warmer 
climate. This is already starting to happen in several parts of south -weste rn Odisha, uplands in Central Odisha as 
well as Uplands in Northern Odisha. Temperature is an important factor impacting the groundwater table which gets 
further compounded due to human stress and high evapotranspiration. The modeled temperature scenario h as clearly 
shown a warmer climate for the state. The study conducted in the state by Panda et.al3 shows that in the pre -monsoon 
season, most of the monitoring stations experienced groundwater decline. Thus it is amply clear that ground water 
level is highl y susceptible to impacts of climate change.  
 
5. Susceptibility of ground water level due to climate change leads to higher probability of crop – water imbalance in the 
wake of higher evapotranspiration in warming climate. If the increases in evaporation is not compensated by adequate 
moisture, the crops will fail and livelihood of 13.86 million marginalized and resource poor population will be severally 
affected. As this section of population is dependent upon agriculture and highly vulnerable to impacts of climate 
change, their vulnerability due to climatic stress is further compounded by non -availability of ground water in the time 
of need. Therefore conservation of ground water in the state is of paramount importance in the state in the context of 
climate change.  
 
Policies, Regulations and Institutions:  
 
6. Under its INDC, India has mentioned to implement National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture, Prime Minister Krishi 
Sichai Yojana, National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture, National Water Mission (particularly conservation 
and management of ground water recharge). Project is in alignment with Prime Minister Krishi Sichai Yojana 
(PMKSY) which aims to cover each farm holding with some irrigation and emphasizes water use efficiency with the 
slogan “more crop per drop”.  It is also aligned with Water Mission under the National Action Plan for Climate Change 
and listed as a key priority under the State Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC). Proposed water management, 
social audits of the manageme nt proposed in the project is in line with provisions of Pani Panchayat Act of Odisha.  
 
7. Central Ground Water Board has prepared a plan for recharge of ground water based on the ground water availability 
of a particular geographical location across the stat e. In accordance to the selection criteria (plan of CGWB), a total 
area of 5338.98 sq. km across 14 districts (Angul, Balasore, Baragarh, Bolangir, Dhenkanal, Gajapati, Kalahandi, 
Keonjhar, Khurda, Koraput, Mayurbhanj, Nayagarh, Rayagada, Sonepur), were id entified for implementation of the 
artificial recharge structure. The technologies proposed for the ground water recharging are percolation tank, dykes, 
contour bunding, check weirs, flooding, induced recharge, recharge shaft. The project is in line with t he objective of 
the CGWB which aims at augmenting the ground water level through introduction of the structural measures such as 
                                                             
3 Panda, D.K., Mishra, A., Jena, S.K., James, B.K. and Kumar, A., 2007. The influence of drought and 
anthropogenic effects on groundwater levels in Odisha, India. Journal of hydrology, 343(3), pp.140 -153


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 70 
 C 
to construct 10000 recharge structures in 15 districts viz., Baragarh, Bolangir, Boudh, Gajapati, Kalahandi, 
Kandhamal, Keonjha r, Koraput, Malkangiri, Mayurbhanj, Nawarangpur, Nuapada, Rayagada, Sambalpur and 
Sonepur, to tap the additional water available during monsoon in the tanks (public/community/private) for post 
monsoon augmentation of the ground water. The major focus of th e project is to attain the ground water recharge 
objective at a comparatively lower cost in comparison to the measures proposed under CGWB plan and with least 
environmental impact. The project will contribute to the overall plan of the total ground water r echarge of estimated 
at 1076.32 MCM.  
 
8. Further, installation of 1,000 solar pumps for agricultural purposes is aligned with the Govt. of India’s national target 
of reaching 1, 00,000 MW solar power by 2022 under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission ( JNNSM). It is 
also linked to the scheme for installation of 1 lakh solar pumps for irrigation and improve the drinking water security 
of 7.6 lakhs poor families.  
 
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
Baseline scenario: water security  
9. As per the estimate of Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) estimate, the country would need 1,180 billion 
cubic meter (BCM) of water annually by 2050. India has, at present, annual potential of 1,123 BCM of 
'utilizable' water with 690 BCM coming from surface  water resources and remaining 433 BCM from ground 
water resources. Considering the fact that, Indian monsoon is the prime source of recharge, the climate 
change induced variability has put significant risk to the ground water affecting water security and food 
security.  
10. In Odisha, gross groundwater recharge has been estimated as 17.77 billion cubic meter (BCM) through 
different sources. Rainfall contributes 71 % in gross groundwater recharge. With 1.09 BCM of natural 
groundwater losses, net groundwater ava ilability in Odisha is 16.69 BCM. Out of this, only 4.36 BCM 
groundwater is drafted with irrigation sector extracting the highest (79.6 %).  Odisha agriculture is largely 
rain fed and high monsoon variability in recent years has negatively impacted its mai n crop paddy. Paddy 
in itself has relatively high water demand.  
11. Keeping in view of the reducing inflows from interstate rivers and spiralling water demands, it is projected 
that by 2050, Odisha will slip from its present water -rich status to water -stress s tatus.  This is based on 
both the water use and climatic models that show close to 1º C rise in temperature in several parts of the 
state. In addition, spatially, the state is growing at a rate of 8.5% per annum and several industrial and 
urban clusters ar e emerging in the state with higher water and energy demand.  
12. In the prevailing socio -political scenario, creation of additional surface -storage through new major / medium 
irrigation projects is not practically possible. Alternatively, ground water which is  widely accessible and less 
impacted by droughts and floods provides a vast scope for its recharge though community -based rainwater 
harvesting practices in the State, both in rural and urban sectors. Sub -surface conservation of water in 
aquifers is one of the best strategies to combat climate change impacts on water sector.  
 
 
 
Baseline: Food Security


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 70 
 C 
13. The World Food Programme4 has brought out the food security outcome indices based on three broad 
categories (a) Production factors (at the district level) infl uencing availability;  (b) Household and individual 
access to food; and (c)  Ability to absorb food.  The composite index is developed based on 12 indicators 
across these three broad categories. The higher the figure, the region is expected to be more secu re in 
term of food. Based on this indicators, the project districts have been chosen for the intervention so that 
water security and food security can be improved in these areas through the project interventions.  
Baseline: Energy security  
14. Odisha receives an average solar radiation of 5.5 kWh/ Sq. m. area with around 300 clear sunny days 
every year. The feasible potential for power  generation  in  the  Solar  Photovoltaic  and  the  Solar  thermal  
routes  have  been roughly estimated as 8000 MW and 2000 M W respectively. However, the state has 
only 66 MW installed solar capacity so far. In addition, it has very low rate of energization in agriculture 
and the grid energy availability in rural areas is only for 4 -5 hours in a day.  
Goal and anticipated outcome  against baseline scenario  
15. The primary objective of this project is to enhance groundwater recharge in the community ponds through 
structural adaptation measures and use of solar pumps for irrigation to ensure water security and food 
security in the vulnerable areas of the state.  
Incrementality  
16. The current project fits into twin goal of poverty reduction through efficient use of water for agriculture 
development and making it sustainable through innovative concrete adaptation structures. It also build s a 
solar energy integration component to keep this energization process in the state on the low carbon path.  
17. At the baseline scenario, the government has invested in decentralized system of tank based irrigation 
systems as the large scale dams and irrigat ion projects results into involuntary displacement and cropping 
up of socio -political disturbances. The tentative budget for tank improvement in 600 tanks funded by World 
Bank will be 7. 064 million USD. This is only 4.25% of the total project.  The remainin g tanks would be 
supported through state resources. The GCF grant will be used for construction of Ground Water Recharge 
System (GWRS) as a concrete adaptation activity.  This component is important for developing long term 
ground water reserve.  
Linkage to  climate change and the proposed adaptation solution  
18. The projected climate change scenario (end century 2100) based on downscaled and gridded data shows 
the following consequences for Odisha under A2 scenario: Coastal Odisha will remain relatively less warm 
than the rest of the state, even though it clearly breaches the 2°C barrier. North -western, western, and 
southwestern Odisha show the highest rise in temperature. Following are some other 'more likely' effect of 
climate change. (a) Late monsoon onset and more pre -monsoon rainfall. (b) Reduced post monsoon and 
winter rainfall. (c) Less rainfall in February, June and October. (d) More number of cloudy days (e) 
Increased day and night temperatures in all the months except July. (f) Maximum increase in temperature 
in post - monsoon followed by summer. (g) Extend ed summer up to the month of June. (h) Increased 
number of hot, humid summer days in coastal areas. (i) Warm and short winter with fewer cold nights in 
western Odisha. (j) more extreme weather events such as heavy rainfall and tropical cyclones.  These 
scenarios put tremendous pressure on ground water reserve of the state and also on energy use.  
                                                             
4 Food Security Atlas of Rural Odisha, WFP


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 70 
 C 
19. A recharge shaft as concrete adaptation measure has been proposed in the community ponds to ensure 
the aquifer recharge. Normally shallow water bodies like tanks o r ponds serve as good rainwater harvesting 
structures but their contribution towards ground water recharge is quite less due to the presence of low 
permeable soil layer in between the tank bed and underlying aquifer system.  
20. Further due to sedimentation pr ocess, layers of silt / clay get deposited on tank bed rendering the tank 
completely unsuitable for ground water recharge. By constructing recharge wells inside the tank, the 
connectivity between the water body and the underlying aquifer system can be esta blished bypassing the 
soil layers.  It is important to note that the normal tank design in the country does not include this adaptation 
solution but would be transformational once the benefits are established.  
Lives Impacted  
21. The project will impact 5.2 mil lion vulnerable population directly  in 15 priority districts with high level of food 
insecurity, water scarcity and high climatic stress (present and future scenario) and with high proportion of 
vulnerable SC -ST population.  About 2.59 million of this popu lation are males and 2.6 million are females. 
They account for 12% of the entire population of the state. It will directly impact 1.54 million vulnerable SC -
ST households.  
22. Financial barriers  
 In Odisha, Fourth State Finance Commission (2015 - 2020) has recom mended to empower local 
governing bodies to levy any tax at any rate without the prior approval of the state government except 
for those items for which central and state governments levy taxes.  The state government has still not 
taken a call on this and t his in turn is likely to reduce the investible surplus with panchayats to create 
more water bodies.   
 A study by Xavier University Bhubaneswar has estimated that with each 1% rise of debt ratio, primary 
deficit ratio is estimated to rise by 1.71% in Odisha . Hence, more borrowing to finance such large scale 
public investment projects is likely to widen primary deficit and also the fiscal deficit in the long run 
because of disproportionate growth between the revenue and expenditure in the recent past.  
 Perpetu al indebtedness and poverty has been observed to be on rise at the farmer household level 
due to increase in agricultural input prices, less profitability, repeated crop failure, and lack of risk 
transfer instruments. Hence, marginalized farmers are not in  the position to invest in new technologies 
like use of solar pumping for irrigation and advanced hybrid seeds.  
 Presently, the power supply infrastructure in Odisha is chiefly coal based and hence in the pooled 
average cost of power generation in the state , coal based power is observed to be cheaper than solar 
power.  
23. Institutional barriers  
 The project areas has high indigenous/tribal population with complex land tenure system and archaic 
tenancy law making implementation of water rights issue and water pricing extremely tenuous process.  
 The prevalence of traditional irrigation water governance system, institutional   framework and 
inappropriate crop selection choices coupled with difficult terrain, poor education level and low 
extension outreach is obser ved to make full cost recovery in decentralized system a difficult process.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 70 
 C 
 There is gradual decrease in the traditional water sharing system namely “Warabandi” and increase in 
water related conflicts despite increase in transparency of the water policies.  Also, there is incomplete 
understanding of rights and obligation of the farmers and Pani Panchayats (PPs) by the revenue 
officials who were earlier responsible for the water tax collection.  
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
 
24. The primary objective of  this project is to enhance groundwater recharge in the community ponds through structural 
adaptation measures and use of solar pumps for irrigation to ensure water and food security in the vulnerable areas 
of the state. The project will be implemented in the 15 vulnerable districts  viz Baragarh ,Bolangir , Boudh, Gajapati, 
Kalahandi, Kandhamal, Keonjhar, Koraput, Malkangiri, Mayurbhanj, Nawarangpur, Nuapada, Rayagada, Sambalpur 
and Sonepur. These districts were identified based on the state level consultations and meetings by Governm ent of 
Odisha based on their food insecurity and future climate related vulnerability. The hunger atlas prepared by WFP 
showed all the eight districts in the Eastern Ghats region lie in the most food insecure categories, as also most of the 
Central Table l and. These areas have high concentration of indigenous population. Enhanced food security in these 
areas will enhance their adaptive capacity. The project will have demonstration effect on SC and ST households in 
15 districts. 3.6 mn persons are of Below P overty Line (BPL) category of which  92% cases the head of the household 
earns < USD 75 (INR 5000) per month. Agricultural labourers  are also about 3.8 million in these areas.  
 
25. The sub -objectives  of the proposal  are as follows:  
• Augmentation of ground wa ter recharge to improve water table and water quality conditions in rural areas (Gram 
Panchayat) of the state through adoption of recharge systems in existing village ponds / tanks.  
• Sustainability of ground water based (domestic / irrigation) Schemes at G P level. Revival of defunct community 
tank used as drinking water sources for reducing vulnerability.  
• Use of solar pumps for irrigation as part of low emission climate resilient crop planning strategy . 
• Create a knowledge base for enabling policy and regulatory framework for market transformation  
 
 
26. It will help three concrete outputs under Green Climate Fund:  
 Improved ground water  table  which will improve food security  through resilient crop planning ,water budgeting,  
protective irrigation) through i nstallation of GWRS in 10,000 tanks.  
 As a co -benefit - Energy saving of 3.27 million kWh per year from 1000 solar pumps and avoided CO2 emission 
from solar 2614 tonnes/year  
 Increased resilience of health and well  being of about 5.2 million vulnerable commu nities through water security 
(household use with enhanced access year round)  and increased income of farming households.   
 
27. The specific components shall be as follows:  
 
Output 1:  10000 tanks will have Ground Water Recharge System as a concrete adaptation measure to ensure 
ground water conservation to reduce vulnerability in 15 water stressed districts of the state  
 
28. In the prevailing socio -political scenario, creation of  additional surface -storage through new major / medium irrigation 
projects is not practically possible. Alternatively, ground water which is widely accessible and less impacted by 
droughts and floods provides a vast scope for its recharge though community -based rainwater harvesting practices. 
A recharge shaft as concrete adaptation measure has been proposed in the community ponds to ensure the aquifer 
recharge. Normally shallow water bodies like tanks or ponds serve as good rainwater harvesting structures b ut their 
contribution towards ground water recharge is quite less due to the presence of low permeable soil layer in between 
the tank bed and underlying aquifer system. Further due to sedimentation process, layers of silt / clay get deposited 
on tank bed r endering the tank completely unsuitable for ground water recharge. By constructing recharge wells 
inside the tank, the connectivity between the water body and the underlying aquifer system can be established by  
passing the soil layers. Ground Water Recharg e System (GWRS) consists of two to six recharge wells (RW)  of  
suitable size constructed around the water body depending on the pondage area.  These wells during rainy season


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 70 
 C 
(June -September) provide an easy passage of excess rainwater to the underlying aqu ifers system through a filter 
pack of pebbles / gravels. The construction of RWs (made of precast RCC rings) is very simple and similar to the 
construction of any open well. These RWs are so designed that the excess rainwater / runoff from the tank during the 
rainy season will be diverted to underground aquifers for recharge. At the end of rainy season the average water level 
of at least 1.5 m in the tank can be maintained for pisciculture / community use. Periodic replacement of filter packs 
of the RWs is the only requirement as maintenance of the GWRS to ensure its efficient functioning. The constructional 
details of a typical RW and GWRS have been indicated in the drawings at Annexure -1. The average depth of the 
recharge well is 3.5 meters i.e. 2 m below the tank bed and 1.5 m above the tank bed. For construction of each well 
(1500 mm X 300 mm) size precast RCC rings are to be used. RWs are covered by perforated RCC covers on their 
top as indicated in the drawing, for entry of rainwater, in addition to lat eral inlets. The estimated cost of a typical 
recharge well of 3.5 meter depth is USD $ 424 (Approx)  as has been indicated in Annexure -1. It justifies the cost per 
meter depth of RW is USD $ 151 ( INR.10, 000 ). The average cost of a GWRS with five RWs (3.5 m depth) has been 
considered as USD $ 2121 (i.e. INR1,40,000) .   
 
29. These structures will be constructed phase wise based on the tank renovation plan given in the annexure 1 of this 
document.  A baseline study will be conducted during the inception of the project. The purpose of this study is to 
review the status of various tanks, mapping of area, sensitivity and adaptive capacity related indicators.  The 
preparedness of the local communities, nature of the cropping pattern current patterns of water use and energy use 
will also be covered in baseline. It is important to distinguish between baseline study and tank improvement plan.  
The tanks will be selected in a transparent m anner after this study is completed.  This study will feed into the project 
implementation plan and help develop clarity to the World Bank supported component. Each  selected tank will have 
a tank improvement plan (TIMP) with a recharge structure. One of th e success indicator shall be pre and post 
monsoon recharge in the tank and availability of life saving irrigation for the Kharif  crop and some residual moisture 
for the rabi crop in the tank command.  TIMP formulation is always done after the baseline stud y gets over and tanks 
are selected.  The estimates are prepared based on TIMP. This is a participatory planning exercise. The actual works 
contract are issued based on the tenders has been covered in activity 2.1.  
 
30. The state has been preparing for obtaini ng an IBRD assistance for the capital investment of the first phase 600 tanks 
under OCTMP II.  The subsequent capital investment for additional tanks ( 9400 ) in 15 districts (maps enclosed) that 
would be renovated would be made available by the state.  Only  the cost for construction of recharge structure in 
10,000 tanks has been requested under this component from GCF. Once the adaptation logic is established it will be 
expanded to all the tanks in the state (the cost norm will be revised and guideline devel oped) and though its own 
convergent budget.  Government of Odisha considering the chronic poverty and recurrent drought in the identified 
districts has already decided to have large scale water harvesting structures through convergence and financial 
assista nce of World Bank .  The farmers are familiar with the pumping system. The problem for them is the availability 
of reliable power supply for irrigation. The demonstrative effect of this project will help in developing an eco -system 
and value chain for the solar energy for which private and individual investments will flow in without increasing carbon 
foot print.  
 
Based on the study conducted in some select ponds in the state (as given in the feasibility report in Annexure  1), the 
quantum of recharge throug h recharge shaft (single unit) in pre -monsoon scenario is expected to be 13 hectare meter 
of ground water in a year. The aforesaid quantum of recharge will result in ground water table rise of 4.17 meter 
within a 500 meter radius of the tank and will posit ively impact an area of 25 hectare area. The proposed activity 
undertaken across 10000 community tank is expected to result in recharge of 131040 hectare meter of ground water 
in a year and benefit a total area of 250000 hectare. The cost estimate of recha rge system constructed on pilot basis 
at Keonjhar district  for one pond is estimated to be INR 140,000  (USD 2121.2) assu ming 5 recharge well in a pond. 
The details of the design and the cost estimation are presented in the Annexure 1 i.e. Feasibility Rep ort. 
 
 
31. The following concrete adaptation activities will lead to this output:  
 
1.1 Baseline study for the 10,000 tanks are conducted : The works under baseline study for the tanks would include the 
overall assessment of catchment area of  tank i.e. upstream and down stream, drainage system, existing depth and 
area of tank, soil type at bed level, quantum of run off in monsoon season,  i dentification of location for recharge


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 70 
 C 
well, assessment of command area and likely beneficiaries, existing cropping pattern and water requirement  of 
crops, etc.   
1.2 Tank improvement plan and estimate for the recharge shaft for these tanks prepared  – Tank imp rovement plan will 
consist of desiltation of tanks, use of soil, treatment of catchment area, tank bed, etc.  
1.3 Groundwater recharge system installed in the identified tanks  – GWRS would be installed in identified location of 
the tank to recharge the aquifer . 
Standard operating procedures prepared – For identification of ponds,  installation of recharge system and 
maintenance of tanks and solar syste m, etc the SOPs prepared.  
 
Output 2:  Increased resilience of health and wellbeing of about 5.1 9 million vulnerable communities through 
water security (household use with enhanced access year round)  
 
32. Currently, the tanks those are partially derelict or derelict are not able to harvest adequate rainwater and most of 
these water are getting wasted as r un-off. A study conducted  with respect to OCTMP reveals that in 65 intervention  
(sample)  tanks under phase I the water availability has improved from 28.7% in 2013 to 68.2% in 2016. The yield of 
paddy too increased from 3.5 tonnes/ha to 4.7 tonnes/ha.  The increased water availability and increased income 
through improved productivity led to increase d resilience of health and well -being.  
 
 
33. As per Census5 in Odisha, around 38.5% families travel at least half a km to fetch drinking water in villages. The 
number of such families was 32.5% in 2001, which increased by 6% in 10 years.  The enhanced ground water 
recharge at the aquifer level would help in making quality water available and would reduce drudgery and reduce 
disease burden.  Augmented water availabil ity would reduce risk of crop failure and enhance food security.  
 
34. The following concrete activities will lead to this output:  
2.1 Improved water availability in the tank command (where tank improvement plan has been implemented) : The 
tank improvement plan includes design and estimate with a participatory exercise with community.  This plan will be 
the basis for awarding the contract and the process must reflect in the execution of work. The community will involve 
in social audit of the work, so that water availability is not compromised in the tank command as planned. All structural 
aspects (e.g. de -silting, compacting, bunding, etc.) as per the plan will be part of this component.  
2.2 Crop -water budget prepared : Farmers are made  aware about the water requirements of various crops and water 
availability through various sources such as rainfall, surface water and ground water. The water losses through 
evapot ranspiration and various methods of irrigation will be briefed to the farme rs and efficient use of water by crops 
will be demonstrated. To enhance the water use efficiency and to reduce the vulnerabilities the crop water budget 
will be prepared for sustainability of the water resources.  
2.3 Water sharing master plan developed : For equity distribution of water among vulnerable  a detailed master plan 
is developed for each tanks. The preference to women headed households in the master plan is given and adequate 
representations  of fair gender in formation of Pani Panchayat is taken ca re. Rotational irrigation to ensure equity and 
adequacy will be preferred in each tank.  
2.3 Improved water quality from drawn samples  : Farmers are sensitized about the quality of water and less use of 
pesticides, fertiliser will be advised. The organic fa rming in each tank areas will be promoted to minimize the health 
hazard.   
2.4 Additional days of food available in a year as compared to baseline : The enhanced productivity of crops led to 
food  security of each household in tank’s command area.   
2.5 Imp roved nutritional status of children in the anganwadi centres (AWC) near the tank cluster  – Drinking water 
availability and irrigation facilities led to diversified farming system such as Crop plus livestock which improved the 
nutritional status of childre n. 
 
Output 3:  1000 solar pumps installed in the pilot locations for demonstration in 15 districts  
 
35. 4.3 million Rural  households are yet to be electrified in Odisha6. Even those rural areas electrified the quality of power 
is poor and availability is aroun d 4-5 hours in a day. Energization in agriculture in the state is about 10% but it is 
                                                             
5 Census of India, 2011  
6 As on 31st May 2016


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 70 
 C 
rapidly increasing. Considering that about one third of the blocks in the state receiving deficient rainfall in last five 
years the government want to provide 40,000 pump  sets to farmers to address the problem of water scarcity. Most 
of these would be fossil fuel based unless an ecosystem for solar pumping system is created in the state. This project 
aims to align the stated objective of Odisha to align its growth aspirati on in low carbon trajectory. Many of these areas 
(targeted 15 districts) are also having high energy poverty.   As a part of low emission development strategy the state 
intends to pursue solar based pumping interventions to address water security not to ne gate the adaptation benefit 
through higher emission. The Solar pump set either AC/DC, comprising of PV array, Motor Pump Set (Surface or 
submersible), Electronics (Maximum Power Point Tracker (MPPT) and Controls / Protections) and Interconnect 
Cables and “ On-Off” switch. The basic difference is the Motor Pump Set. The DC unit comprises of D.C. Motor Pump 
Set (with Brushes or Brush less D.C.) whereas AC system comprises of -A.C. Induction Motor Pump Set with a 
suitable Inverter that has been optimized for hi gh efficiency operations. These pumps when maintained well last for 
more than 20 years on the field. Typically, the eastern states like Odisha can be served by pumps upto 3 HP while 
some regions in states such as Punjab, Haryana, and Rajasthan would requir e higher configuration pumps.  
   
36. India has an installed base of around 176117 solar agriculture pumps. Three -fourth of these pumps are in north -west 
regions of India. Odisha will be a new entrant and the state government has also announced incentives for this.  The 
bigger problem of this sector is the AC pumps in the unorganized se ctor.  The panels eligible for subsidy too have 
low efficiency level.  
 
37. As per the last benchmark cost published by NABARD  for 3 HP solar pumps is INR 558400 (USD 8460.6)  which is 
followed by Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE), Govt. of India . Odisha Renewable Energy Development 
Authority (OREDA) is the technical partner for the project. OREDA is the single window agency to channelize 
subsidies related to renewable energy from MNRE to project participants. There is a well -established mechanism i n 
place for such transfer. In addition OREDA will pre -qualify vendors who would provide the pumps.  OREDA has been 
performing this role for more than two decades and have been co -opted to the project steering committee for this 
purpose for seamless integra tion. The procurement method followed by OREDA (given in Annexure 7) for solar 
pumping system for drinking water will be customized for solar pumps for irrigation.  
 
38.   Based on the stakeholder consultation with Pani Panchayats the following observations we re noticed:  
 
(a) The farmers have low awareness about the solar pumps  
(b) Many are not convinced about the performance of the solar pumps as compared to the diesel pumps  
(c) Easy availability of the subsidized diesel  
(d) Only a small percentage (1 out of 10) wanted to ha ve it as a second investment and rest think this can be used 
as a backup rather than prime irrigation equipment  
(e) Availability of battery and other after sales services is a major concern  
 
39. The project aims to tackle these issues as follows:  (a) Technical partner OREDA has standardized the procurement 
process for registered channel partners. A separate agreement will be developed by the project management unit to 
create an interface with pan i panchayats for this pilot. 1000 installations and post installation support clauses will be 
built into this agreement.  The mobilized suppliers will provide demonstration and handholding support for certification 
of para professionals (jal saathis) for p ump operation and maintenance.  (b) Awareness and positive precedence – 
and development of a complete value chain will help deepening the solar market.  Demonstration of a good working 
installations will build  the confidence among  the communit ies about  the system. Conversely, any poor installation 
makes the entire community apprehensive and restoring confidence is very difficult. It is, therefore, important that this 
pilot phase demonstrates all the claimed benefit addressing all the concerns raised by the farmers.  (c) Performance 
and quality assurance about the volume of water, less conveyance loss and saving of energy this need to be assured 
working closely with the suppliers and barefoot jal  saathis. As per the industry estimate it is possible to replace  0.4 
million diesel pump sets in Odisha. In other words these 1000 solar pump sets would help in building an ecosystem 
for a market of 0.4 million solar pump sets with resultant emission reduction.  
 
40. GCF fund will be used largely as a catalytic fund to dev elop the solar pumping eco -system in the state and enable 
private sector participation in the value chain. The state will address the agricultural vulnerability still being in the low  
carbon path.  
                                                             
7 MNRE as on January 2016


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 70 
 C 
 
41. The following activities are expected to lead to this out put: 
 
3.1 Identification criteria for the pilot sites for installation of solar pumps developed ; The selection criteria, availability 
of ground water, formation of WUAs, ownership of solar pumps, O & M charges, etc will be defined properly for 
effective im plementation of solar pumps. The process of beneficiary selection will be as follows:  
 
 The TIMP prepared by pani panchayats or village committees will identify beneficiaries in the following order 
of priority and approved by gram -sabha  (consist of all the adult franchise of a village) : 
 
 For individual beneficiary (based on wealth ranking and meeting the sharing criteria):  
 Vulnerable and SC-ST household  
 Female headed household  
 Others  
For group  
 Farmer Interest Groups/Framer producer Organisation  
 Women SHGs/landless  
 Village committee (for energy or water)  
 
In each case the project and beneficiary will have a MoU to abide by water -budget norms, water sharing plan, 
Environment and Social Management Plan (on pesticide use). This is required to contain unauthorized abstraction of 
water and water contamination.   
3.2. Procurement plan and standard contract for 1000 pumps both for channel partners and PPs developed  : To 
ensure transparency, procurement of pumps will be done through well established procurement policy.  
3.3.  Baseline energy audit of the installed pu mps established  
3.4.  20000 village level para professionals (jal -sathis) are certified for operation and maintenance  
3.5.  Monitoring of the solar pump functioning (energy saving/avoided generation, fuel, water delivery) is documented  
 
Output 4:  Capacity Building Plans for livelihood support systems for water users and landless in the tanks 
command to build resilience.   
 
The core investment for this would come from the existing programmes and projects.  However to safeguard 
the interes t of the landless people and women, the project will ensure training them in activities such as 
mushroom cultivation, backyard poultry and fishery.  
 
42. The project would build on the ongoing programmes (RKBY, NFSM, NHM) etc. The project would supply catalyti c 
support like technology transfer, input support based on area based deficiency (nutrition deficiency, soil health, etc.) 
(ii) promoting diversification to high value vegetable or horticulture crops through field demonstration and improved 
technology. (ii i) Improved yield by 20 -25% in cereal crops through rainfall matched sowing.  (iii)  Promoting less water 
consuming cropping system, adjusting crop schedule with volatility of the climate variables, crop -water planning, 
enhancement of soil organic carbon, etc. 
 
43. Capacity building will be done for the Pani Panchayat on these aspects and relevant module will be developed and 
delivered by the water and land management institute of the state and its partners. The plan also will focus on the 
collectivization of t he produce and market linkage for enhancing the farm income and value share. The jal -sathis will 
be trained with all aspects of the crop -water management and budgeting. DOWR will train its engineers on tank 
quality management and monitoring of the ground w ater recharge. A project management unit of WALMI will 
coordinate these activities.    
 
44. GCF fund will be used to develop capacity of the para -professionals at the village level, it will also heavily invest in 
water institutions on aspects of water budgeting crop choice, water use efficiency and cost recovery.  
 
45. The following concrete activiti es will lead to this output:


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 70 
 C 
 
4.1 Training need analysis report  of PP member along the tank command  
4.2 Training plan and modules prepared partners identified to train 300000 farmers and 150000 landless population 
trained on fisher ies and poultry  
4.3  T raining of 20000 jalasathis and 500 engineers completed and certified  
4.4  No of training and demonstration organized in convergence with relevant programmes of the government  
4.5  No of landless and women members covered under off -farm activities  
 
Output 5: Quality Monitoring System for ground water governance established  
 
46. It is important to monitor the programme both from adaptation and mitigation point of view. Policy briefs, knowledge 
products and modules would be prepared for its mainstreaming. A suita ble external agency (having suitable 
accreditation on energy audit) and working in the agriculture and water sector would be hired for this component. In 
addition the Accredited Entity (AE)  too would provide support in fund management and other operational  support.  
 
47. The monitoring shall be at three levels (a) Pani Panchayat level by the jalasathis. (b) an independent satellite based 
monitoring system to be used by the directorate of ground water survey and investigation for modeling the ground 
water develop ment efficiency (c) a project monitoring cell responsible for tracking all the indicators of the envisaged 
under the project as against baseline on a concurrent basis and generate the knowledge products and policy briefs. 
This also includes the concurrent energy audit of the functioning pumps and their performance.  The project level 
monitoring cell will interface with Accredited Entity (AE)  i.e. NABARD and assist them in their independent 
assessment providing all required information.  
 
48. PPs will be provided a simple set of indicators for tracking through the life cycle of the project.Similarly the satellite 
data obtained ORSAC. Finally project level monitoring will be undertaken by the PMU concurrently based on the 
standard adaptation bas eline and GCF accepted indicator sets. Tools to capture that will be developed by the agency. 
The agency would have requisite experience in climate change field in different sectors as well as expertise in energy 
audit and energy management.  
 
 
49. The followi ng results shall be delivered though this output:  
  
5.1.  A project MIS including a GIS based tank database developed   
5.2.  Quarterly monitoring report prepared  
5.3.  Baseline, independent assessment report prepared  
5.4.  Report on adaptation and mitigat ion benefits of the project assessed  
 
The concurrent monitoring system is integral to this project as lots of structural work is involved, The specialized wing 
of the DoWR will be responsible for quality monitoring and modelling the benefits. This is a sci entific exercise. The 
adaption and mitigation co -benefits to be measured through scientific sampling. In addition a quality manual will be 
prepared for community level quality check and social audit.  All the tanks will be geo -coordinated and its adaptatio n 
and mitigation benefit will be identified and quantified in a transparent manner.   
 
Accredited entity will support the project in financial and physical reporting and compliance requirement for which the 
fee structure has been proposed. AE will also man age the fund flow. AE will work with PMU to develop a master 
timeline and ensure that right agencies are mobilized on time and activities conform to time schedule.  
 
Output 6 : Knowledge management (institutional and regulatory) input provided for water an d clean energy 
market development  
 
50. The GCF funds will be used to improve the knowledge base on ground water conservation, regulatory frameworks 
and institutional set up governing the crop water management in 15 priority water stressed regions of the state.   It will 
also develop knowledge products and policy brief for transforming the nascent water market and solar pumping 
market.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 70 
 C 
51. The project will provide a unique opportunity to develop knowledge base on adaptation benefit in a decentralized tank 
system. Th e learning and knowledge management component captured through a process document component will 
help in upscaling this project in a programmatic mode. In addition the department has built in IEC component and 
training component for this concrete adaptatio n initiative. It will also provide further outlook in basin planning and tank 
cascade planning. The Prime Minister Krishi Sichai Yojana aims to reach to each farm  field and this would require a 
massive scale up and has potential not only in the state but a cross the region. The learnings from the project will be 
shared through regular newsletters, policy briefs and project based working papers. There will be a half yearly 
learning workshop each year after 2nd year to share the learning in the project. The pa rticipants and experts will be 
invited from the region. The process will be managed by the knowledge management unit.  
 
52. The following results are expected from this output:  
 
6.1.  Preparation of policy briefs for the Odisha Ground Water Management and Development Regulation and State 
Water Policy  
6.2.   Process documentation for standard operating procedure for establishing solar pumping value chain  
6.3. Process documentation for f unding convergence with agriculture, fishery, rural development, health and 
panchayat raj  departments  
6.4.  Knowledge products science to policy framework developed  
6.5.  Quarterly newsletter based on the project progress in English and Odia in digital an d physical form produced  
6.5. 10 workshops are conducted during the life cycle of the project  
 
 
Output 7 : Effective project management system established  
 
53. Effective management and timely execution of this project is vital for measuring the benefit. For e.g. the structures 
have to be in place before the monsoon season in each phase to measure depth to water level in both pre -post 
monsoon scenario and also both control and intervention scenario.   Since the project is tapping into convergence 
fund the oper ating procedure and modalities to be placed to an interdepartmental steering committee would be put 
in place as part of the project implementation plan not to have any future delay. To ensure effective project 
management at the state, district, basin and s ub-basin level, provide information communication and logistics support; 
provide project related consultancies; undertake concurrent M&E and ensuring quality supervision and monitoring of 
structural work. The project would engage a management unit as servi ce provider Activities to be financed include: 
(i) setting up and supporting (through capacity building and equipment) project management units at the state and 
district levels; (ii) design and establishment of a project specific Management Information Sys tem; (iii) setting up  and 
leading the project monitoring, evaluation and learning activities; (iv) contracting resource agencies including services 
of an external M&E agency to be engaged as consultants for the duration of the project; (v) providing suppo rt for 
emerging needs and innovations during implementation; (vi) liaison and convergence with other agencies and 
government departments; and (vii) documentation of project experience and its dissemination in the wider 
development community.  
 
54. The following  results are to be in place:  
 
7.1.  Inter-departmental steering committee notified    
7.2.  Project Implementation Plan developed and approved  
7.3.  Service providers mobilized  
7.4.  Modalities of engagement with other departments/agencies developed  
7.5.  Regular reporting to AE and other partners agencies and the government ensured  
7.6.  Fund flow and physical work progress, quality reports are web hosted  
 
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic 
framework in section H.  
 
55. The proposed project will ensure a paradigm shift by creating an enabling framework in legis lation and policy and 
strengthening the capacity of the grassroots level water institutions to ensure climate resilient development in crop 
water management in a decentralized tanks system not only in this project but also having a potential scale up in th e


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 70 
 C 
region in similar projects/programmes.  The fund level impact will be achieved both in adaptation and mitigation 
pathways:  (a) The proposed project will increased resilience of health and well -being, and food and water security 
of about 5.2 million vuln erable population in 15 food insecure districts of Odisha. (b) 2614 Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2eq)/annum in this pilot is expected to be reduced or avoided as a result of 1000 pilot solar pumps 
installed through this project.  The details ar e given in section H.  
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
56. The main sponsor of this project is the Department of Water Resources  (DoWR)  of Government of Odisha  (GoO) . 
The department is the nodal agency  for the Odisha state  to implement the National W ater Mission under National 
Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).  The DoWR has been involved in implementing climate adaptation projects 
in the state from ADB, World Bank and JICA. It has initiated several  policy changes that improves water governance 
and user accountability, access, equity and inclusion. Some of the projects include Odisha  Integrated Irrigated 
Agriculture and Water Management Programme, Odisha  Community Tank Management Programme and Integr ated 
Coastal Zone Management Programme having strong linkages to climate adaptation  implemented by the State 
Government include the following:  
 
Project  Objectives & geo. 
coverage  Amount 
Sanctioned  Funding Agency  Geographical 
Coverage  Implementation 
Period & 
Outcome  
OIIAWMIP  To   enhance   
productivity,   water   
user   efficiency   
and  
sustainability   of   
existing   major   
and   medium   
irrigation  
systems, revival of 
lift irrigation 
systems, creek and 
drainage  
systems  by  
realising  full  
development  of  
potential irrigation  
infrastructures  Total project Rs 
1084.2 crores  ADB North -west Odisha  2008 -17 
Resilience in major 
and minor 
irrigation projects  
ICZMP  Coordination of 
activities of various 
stakeholders in  an 
integrated approach 
for the  
Sustainable  usages 
of the coastal natural 
resources 
maintaining the 
natural environment.  INR 227.64 crores  World Bank  Coastal districts  2010 -15 
OCTMP  Overarching project 
objective for 
selected tank based 
producers to 
improv e agricultural 
productivity and 
water users 
associations to 
manage tank 
systems effectively.  127.8 million USD  World Bank  Entire state   2008 -13


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 70 
 C 
57. The Department of Water Resources  has been successfully managing and executing these  and  following all relevant 
operation procedures, safeguards and with reasonable national and international fiduciary discipline.  Considering 
that it will be linked to a loan proposal already in advanced stages with the World B ank for the Phase II of the Odis ha 
Community Tank Management Programme but with its own unique adaptation  solution it would follow already 
established procedures within the government and as per the operational guidelines of the World Bank. The design 
proposed to GCF is closely linked.  Invest ments related to desilting and tank renovation are covered  in World B ank 
financing while innovation and transformation are the focus of GCF.  Both project are expected to complement each 
other. It will have single project directorate, same project gov ernance. The district level structure will also be used for 
field level tank improvement and other project interventions. More rationalization of works streams will be done while 
preparing the project implementation plan developed by the World B ank project . No other changes to current result 
framework is envisaged at this stage. World Bank will also conduct its fiduciary risk assessment and due diligence 
during appraisal. The appraisa l document of OCTMP  I (implemented by World B ank) indicates that the financial 
management arrangement for the project execution is adequate.  The imple mentation completion report of W orld 
Bank also indicated that the OCTMP I had satisfactory Safeguard s and Fiduciary Compliance . From AE perceptive 
also financial management arrangements in place or as proposed for the project, are adequate. AE has been working 
with Govt. of Odisha for implementation of various infrastructure projects and overall performance of the State  
Government in terms of financial management is satisfactory.  
 
58. The total budget of the Department of Water Resources in 2014 -15 was Rs 3939 crore  (about USD 587 million @ 1 
INR= USD 66) . It is supplementing the resources with an Odisha  Community Tank Investment Programme through 
a loan from the  World Bank to the tune of USD 8 6 million. Rest is to be organized from the state budget and water 
user association (pani panchayat). The O&M of the tanks have been entrusted to water user associa tions  (WUAs) .   
  
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  
 
59. Based on the long -term average annual rainfall (1482 mm) it is predicted that only 47 % of total precipitation as 
available and remaining 53 % flows in to the sea. Keeping in view of the reducing inflows from interstate rivers and 
spiraling  water demands, it is projected that by 2050, Odisha will slip from its present water -rich status to water -stress 
status8.  This will trigger demand for pumping and also recharge system to keep the pumping sustainable. It is 
projected that the level of growth of pumping i n the range of 10 -15 percent per annum.  
 
60. The water market for irrigation is not well developed and this project might attempt a decentralized  water market for 
which f lexibility in the Pani Panchayat  Act has been given to the user associations.  Recently G ovt. of Odisha has 
fixed the rates of water based on the class of land (Class -I to IV) and season (Kharif and Rabi) under state water 
policy.  The rat es in kharif season vary from INR  63 (less than USD 1) for Class IV to INR 250 (about USD 4) for 
Class I. In Rabi the figures vary from crop to crop and are determined based on per ha per year basis. The ambition 
of the state is to reach every farm parcel with at least two -three critical irrigation.  
 
61. India  has around 18 million grid connected pump -sets and 7 million diesel pump -sets. The market is likely to grow 
between 15 -20% from 2015 -209. The leading companies operating in water pumps market in India are Kirloskar 
Brother Limited, Jain Irrigation, Sun Ed ison, Lanco Solar, Tata Power Solar Systems, Premier Solar System Pvt Ltd., 
OSWALs, and Shakti Pumps and also some of the international brands. Government has envisaged to install about 
1 lakh solar pumps under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture. Jain Irrigation is the market leader with about 
40% of the market share under this segment.  
 
62. The solar pumping system is eligible for capital subsidy from Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  (MNRE), Govt. 
of India . The state also provides additional subve ntions. A typical 3  Hp pump and accessories cost about INR. 0.5 
million  (USD 8150) .  While MNRE specifies the standards, it is important to ensure the efficiency of the supplier of 
the panel. This market is commoditized and a lot need to be done to ensure proper quality and it has cascading effect 
in low reliability and low adoption.  
                                                             
8 DoWR, Government of Odisha, Water Plan 2004,  Odisha State Water Profile, CGWB  
9 Shakti Foundation and MNRE estimate


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 70 
 C 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
 
63. The constriction activities under the proposed project would follow the standards schedule of rates with respect to 
material and labour payments. For the vendors of solar pumps, apart from trade licenses and prequalifying tender 
criteria there is no other licensing requirement. Well documented and transparent e -tender process is followed for the 
procurement of solar pumping system in Odisha. The ven dor has to have test certificate and qualified by MNRE. 
Odisha  Renewable Energy Agency is nodal agency for the procurement. The vendor apart from meeting per -
qualifying criteria has to provide insurance and warranty for the pumps for five years.  For the co nstruction related 
activities, the project will follow the established procedures under Odisha Public Works Department Code. The 
procurement processes are in line with the AE’s policies of procurement of goods and services for projects to be 
implemented . The water policy of the state has water charges and as long as that is not revised, the quantum and 
process of collection shall remain the same. PPs have been entrusted to collect the water taxes. This is a positive 
movement towards some amount of cost reco very. The project will follow the government’s tariff setting policies as 
specified from time to time by OERC  for the energy charges and other competent authorities from time to time.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations.  
 
64. The pump sellers have to have VAT registration in India.  The supplier has to have TIN registration no. and CST 
registration No. and PAN No. under the Income Tax Act and  Service Tax Registration No.  Many states are planning 
to waive the VAT on solar pumps (e.g. Karnataka) and Odisha might consider waiving it too under the new solar 
policy (now to be tabled as integrated renewable energy policy).  
 
65. In case of goods and services are procured by the implementing partners necessary tax provision would be applicable 
in case of GCF proceeds.  
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  
 
66. The solar panel shall be warranted for ten y ears with rated performance. Security cum Performance Guarantee Fee 
for the corresponding amount for the period warranty is to be provided to OREDA.  Solar submersible pumps of 2700 
Wp capacity depending upon the yield of bore well will be utilized for the  purpose of water supply in the village as per 
the requirement of the village and the vendor has to provide coverage, comprehensive maintenance for 5 years . 
 
67. The solar pumps vendors provide five year insurance cover (it is non -battery type only) as part of the tender 
conditions. This is bundled as part of the tender condition. The same would be applicable for the procurements done 
by GCF proceeds.   
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
 
68. A Govt. of Odisha has notified the S tate Level Steering Committee for the purpose  of proposed  project 
implementation .  This body will ensure inter departmental coordination for smooth execution of the project.  
Department of Water Resources shall be  the nodal department for the  execution of the project.  Panchayat Raj 
Department / Agriculture Department (Watershed Development Mission) / Forest Department and SC/ ST  
Development Department would be execution partn ers for activities related to tank renovation, resilient 
livelihood development, capacity building and knowledge  management .  This project will play a catalytic role 
and only try to access the support for training the groups, provide them “how to learning modules”.  OREDA will 
be the technical agency for managing the integration of solar system into the project and would manage t he 
tender.  The directorate of ground water survey and investigation will undertake the monitoring of the GWRS. 
The agriculture and fishery department will converge their schematic and programmatic investment. The project 
management will have an agency to support energy saving assessment, support in capacity building in 
agriculture and livelihood streams and preparation of policy briefs and ex -ante, ex-post surveys  and other 
knowledge management areas . This agency would have experience in the project areas related to resilience


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 70 
 C 
building in agriculture and water management systems  including areas related to energy and resources 
planning and management .  
 
69. AE-NABARD will provide concurrent fund mon itoring and operational support  in the entire project 
implementation. The same would in the form of financial management, monitoring and evaluation, reporting to 
GCF as well as to NDA as per the requirement and providing of technical support in terms adherence to 
technical, environment and social standards, procurement processes, during implementation.  
 
70. The project organization structure (including the integrated structure for GCF and new phase of OCTMP 
supported by the World Bank) has been given below. In addition to this the government will follow all established 
procedure s for the audit of the project as rigorously applicable for the externally aided programmes. The norms 
of procurement as applicable to OCTMP project supported by the World Bank . However, requisite flexible 
mechanism as needed for speedy execution will be built in the project development stage. In addition the 
panchayat raj funds will be subjected to local fund audit as required under devolution procedure.  However, the 
project w ill comply to World Bank operational procedures for procurement, finance and environment and and 
social management plan as good practices. The modalities  of which will be agreed during the preparation of 
project implementation plan and appraisal.  
 
Key sta keholders  Role  
State Level Steering Committee  provides overall project direction, governance, approves annual 
work plan and budget and ensures inter -departmental coordination 
and policy framework  
Department of Water Resources  The nodal department for project execution.  Led by Principal 
Secretary of the department though its various wings ( Ground 
Water Survey & Investigation  - GWSI, Minor Irrigation) provides 
direction and administration to the project and guides its 
mainstreaming. It also negotiates the OCTMP -II loan with the World 
bank for the core investment of the 900 tanks of the 1st phase. It 
develops its own budgetary resources for the balance tanks for 
mainstreaming.  Pilots the policy on state water policy and ground 
water.  
 
As executing entit y fully responsible through Project Director for all 
outputs  
 
Minor Irrigation Division for C1  and C2 and related activities  
Ground Water  Division for recharge monitoring, quality monitoring 
with inputs from paraworkers and Odisha Remote Sensing 
Applicat ion Centre  (ORSAC ) data C5 and related activities  
Department of Energy  Provided policy backing and regulatory support for renewable 
energy integration (solar) in the project.  
OREDA  OREDA acts as the technical partner for solar pump procurement 
and provides subsidy linkages available from  Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy ( MNRE ), Govt. of India.  
Responsible for Solar energy integration and related activities.  
Line Departments (Pancha yati 
Raj, Agriculture, Fishery & ARD, 
Women and Child Development, 
Drinking water and sanitation)  These line departments a re part of the steering committee and 
provided convergent funds and act as implementing arms for their 
respective activities . 
 
Convergence Fund and Activity stream linkage (C2 and C4)  
Odisha Remote Sensing 
Application Centre  (ORSAC ) Develops satellite based monitoring system for the tanks and works 
with project in developing a tank database.  Geospatial mapping 
and monitoring support to EE ( Ground Water Survey & 
Investigation  – GWSI  unde r DoWR ) under C5 and related 
activities.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 70 
 C 
Third Party Agency(ies)  Work as part of the PMU to coordinate the project management 
activity and also work on concurrent monitoring, energy audit 
knowledge management and facilitation of the policy and 
institutional change . Covers component C6  (knowledge 
management)  and related activities.  
Jal sathis and pani panchayat  Grassroots para -professionals provide the basic contours of self -
management and are critical for the sustainability of the programme 
for enabling self-management , cost recovery, efficient water use 
and crop choice . Linked to C1, C2 and C4 even C5 components. 
They are crucial backbone of this project.  
Village level women 
entrepreneurs  Provide linkage to solar eco -system  under C3.  
 
 
Figure 1 Integrated structure


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 70 
 C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Project organization structure  
Describe construction and supervision methodology with k ey contractual agreements.  
 
71.  The investment in head works shall be the responsibility of the Water Resource Department. It will also maintain the 
recharge shaft in the tanks.  It is estimated that about 500 JEs / AEs / Officers of IDs working at Block level will be 
trained to construc t / maintain / monitor the proposed Ground Water Recharge Systems (GWRS)  across 10000 tanks  
including preparation of DPRs. Implementing departments (e.g. Panchay ati raj, etc.)  in consultation with District 
Collectors will provide the list of engineers /officers to DoWR for training under the Scheme. Training including 
execution of few demonstrative GWRS will be taken up by the Directorate of GWS&I in a phased mann er. The training 
will be imparted at Bhubaneswar for duration of five working days including site visits. GWS&I shall take up all 
associated IEC activities to create mass awareness about the GWRS including its periodic monitoring and 
maintenance aspects wi th the jal sathis. TV -Radio related publicity and preparation of associated manuscripts / 
audiovisuals will be done by GWS&I on behalf of DoWR.   
 
72. . The Water Resource D epartment has established procedures to qualify contractors. The third party agency wil l be 
mobilized through Quality and Cost Based Selection Procedure. The agreement/MOU will be signed with other Accredited Entity 
(NABARD)              
project oversight, independent 
assessment and reporting, 
financial management  and risk 
managementState Level Steering Committee 
(inter -departmental in nature 
chaired by Chief Secretary, Govt. 
of Odisha)
Panchayati Raj Department with 
DOWR as implementing agency 
for tank improvement OREDA as technical partner for 
solar pump procurement and 
installation guidance to vendorsMonitoring and Quality Control
ORSAC for Satellite based 
monitoring system and 
preparation of  database. 
GWSI for water recharge 
monitoring and modellingThird Party Agency for 
concurrent monitoring, baseline, 
energy audit and knowledge 
management
Community level monitoring by 
the JalasathisIndependent assessment 
through NIE as well as GCFOther Line departments 
(agriculture, fishery and ARD, 
science and technology, SC -
STDD, Health) for convergent 
funding and executionDepartment of Water Resources 
(Executing Entity)
A Project Management Unit
(for project governance)
To mobilise service providers


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 70 
 C 
departments. The core tank related contracts will be executed by the contractors as per the agreement. The water 
user associations along with lin e department staff monitor the progress. Directorate of Ground Water Survey and 
Investigation (GWS&I) will conduct some geo -physical tests (VES) through out -sourcing, in the vicinity of tank / pond, 
to ascertain the lithological parameters which will help in assessing the performance of the recharge system. GWS&I 
will monitor ground water table and water quality twice a year (May & October) near all tank locations where the 
GWRS have been constructed through out -sourcing. This will help in assessing impact of GWRS in the locality. The 
captured monitoring data is to be entered into a dedicated software / website by GWS&I for scientific use and public 
information. These processes are in line with the Accredited Requirements for project execution.  
 
 
 
Figure 3: Contractual Arrangements and Fund Flow Structure  
The project implementation would include the following fund flow mechanism  and contractual 
arrangements : 
a. Based on the AMA and FAA with the GCF, the project funds would be released to AE – NABARD by 
GCF. NABARD in turn would enter into subsidiary agreement or execution agreement with the 
executing entity i.e. Department of Water Resources, Govt. of Odisha (DoW R, GoO).  
b. Once the arrangement with DoWR, Govt. of Odisha is finalized. Based on the action plan verification 
and fund released by GCF to AE the subsequent fund release would be made to EE – DoWR, GoO.  
c. All the execution arrangement and fund for execution would be handled by DoWR, GoO and entire 
accounting and procurement requirement would be handled by the DoWR, GoO with support of 
concerned line department (execution partner).  
d. The concerned line departments viz. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries, Women  & Child Welfare, 
Odisha Renewable Energy Development Agency, Odisha Remote Sensing Application Centre, etc. 
would support project activities. The fund release to the line department or service delivery partners GCF Fudning 
NABARD 
Water Resource 
Department 
PMU
Line Departments 
(Service Delivery 
Partners)
Agriculture & 
Fisheries 
DepartmentOREDA, Minor 
Irrigatiion, ORSAC, 
etc.
Vulnerable 
Community  Women & Child, 
Drinking Water, 
Sanitation Depts.World Bank 
Funding
Tank Rennovation 
ProgrammeUSD 34.357  
mil. 
USD 7.064 mil  
USD 110.671 
mil. 
USD 14.205 mil.  
Community Contribution  
 
 Subsidiary 
Agreement  AMA & FAA  
Specific Service Delivery 
Contract, and Agreements  
 
 Govt. of Odisha 
Budgetary 
Allocation


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 70 
 C 
would be based on the specific agreement or contracts between EE and the concerned line 
department/execution partner s. 
e. Similarly, the project funds under World Bank funding would be handled by DoWR, GoO, once the 
project is sanctioned World Bank. The State Government contribution would be through budgetary 
allocations on annual basis as per phasing of tank improvement plan . Govt. of Odisha would 
communicate commitment letter in this regard once the GCF project is sanctioned.  
f. The Project Management Unit (PMU) would be overall coordinating agency and would help in effective 
and timely implementation of the project.  
g. NABARD a s AE would be the administrator of GCF funds guide this entire process so that the 
necessary fiduciary requirements in terms of project execution as well monitoring, reporting and 
verification are fulfilled.  
 
The list of Contracts (including Subsidiary Agr eements) are as under:  
1. Funding Activity  Agreement (FAA)  between AE and GCF  
2. Subsidiary Agreement between Executing Entity (Dept. of Water Resources, Govt. of Odisha) and 
AE i.e. NABARD  
3. Contractual arrange ments be tween EE and executing partners at ground level.


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 70 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme  Implementation  
This time table will be further rationalized  during the project preparation of the World Bank loan. The appraisal for which is 
scheduled to be in July 2017.   
 
 
 
 
 
Task Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20
Output 1.
Baseline study for 10,000 tanks are conducted and database developed xx xx x x
Tank improvement plan and estimate for the recharge shaft installation developedx x x
Standard Operating procedure for installation and maintenance developed xx xx x x
Ground water recharge system installed in 10000 tanks xxx xx x x x x
Output 2.
Tank water level and other assessments and renovation completed for all 10000 
with necessary Dug well creation for irrigationxx xx x x
Crop water budgeting based on agro-climatic zone prepared xx xx x x
Water sharing master plan developed xx x x x x
Livelihood improvement plan prepared xx x x x x
Water quality sample drawn from random wells xx xx x x
Activity 2.6.  xxx x x x x x x
Output 3.
Identification criteria for 1000 solar pump installation developed xx xx x x
Procurement plan and standard supplier contract for 1000 solar pumps developedxx xx x x
1000 solar pump installed  and baseline audit completed xx x x x x
2000 village level para-professionals are certified in operation and maintenance of 
pumpsxx x x x x
Energy saving report generated x x x


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 70 
 C 
Task Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20
Output 4.
Training need assessment for sample households in tank command and PPs 
completed xx xx x x
Training modules prepared and partners identified for both training and 
demonstrationxx xx x x
Training of 500 engineer 20,000 jal sathis completed and certified xxxx xx x x x x x x
No of training and demonstration organized in convergence with relevant 
departmental programmes of the governmentxxx x x x x x x
No of landless and women members covered under capacity building for 
off-farm initiativesxxx x x x x x x
FPOs are linked xx x x x x
Output 5.
A geospatial tank quality management database and MIS prepared xxx x x x x x x
Water Quality and dynamic ground water modelling tool developed xxx x x x x x x
Baseline and independent assessment report based on project objective 
and indicators preparedx x x x x x x x x
Process monitoring report that estimates adaptation and mitigation benefit 
preparedxxxxxx x x x xx xx x x x x x
Output 6.
Preparation of policy briefs for Odisha ground water management and 
development regulation, state water policy and relevant facilitation xx x x
Process documentation and preparation standard operating procedure for 
development of solar pumping value chainxx x x x x
Science to policy knowledge product framework developed xx x x x x
Process document for convergence with other departments are developedxxx
Quarterly project newsletter published xxxxxxx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx x x x
Ten peer learning workshops are conducted during the lifecycle of the 
projectx x x x x x x x x x
Output 7.
Inter departmental steering committee for the project notified x x x
Project Implementation plan developed and approved xx xx x x
Agreements for good and services signed and service providers mobilizedxx xx x x
Seamless reporting to NIE established xxxxxxx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx x x x
Fund flows, physical work progress and web based monitoring ensured xxxxxxx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx x x x


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 70 
 
 
Project would include conducting of inception workshops at the beginning of project 
implementation at State as well as district level. Further, the project implementing would include  
independent mid -term / interim evaluation after two and half years from start of the project. The 
final independent evaluation would be conducted in six months after project completion.  The 
project duration is five years. The details on the same are provi ded under Section H2. The project 
calendar and expected dates are  given below:      
Milestones  Expected Dates  
Start of Project/Programme Implementation  01st May 2017*  
Mid Term / Interim Evaluation  (2.5 years after project start)  31st October 2019  
Project/Programme Completion  (5years after project start)  31st May 2022  
Final Evaluation  (in six months after project completion)  31th December 2022  
(*project start date depends on the execution of Funding Activity  Agreement (FAA) and Subsidiary 
Agreement/s  of the project )


---
*Page 34*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 70 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme , in consideration of  other alternatives . 
 
73. The project is tightly woven into the adaptation logic for fund objective  and also has mitigation co -benefits . It 
promotes investment that is climate resilient and addresses long term adaptation to climate change in food insecure 
tribal areas of a state which is amongst the poorest. It also promotes institutional and regulatory system for low 
emission planning and development through the integration of solar pumping system in agriculture sector. The 
former is directly and indirectly likely to touch the lives of 5.19 million vulnerable population  in the 15 food insecure 
district s of the state.  The project also balances regional inequa lity, as many multi -lateral projects and irrigation 
projects have historically been in the coastal region  of the state  and mostly dis aster centric (e.g. ICZM, ADB project) . 
However as per the climate projections, the water resources of the state in south, south western and central and 
northern Odisha are at the highest risk. This project would help in addressing these issues in a systemic manner.  
 
74. The proposed project uses  (a) an innovative concrete adaptation measure  through a recharge shaft integration 
to improve recharge and reduce run off (run off is increasing as the climate change has induced heavy rains in too 
few days) and to improve ground water  recharge, a resource use only in scarcity (b) it tries to resolv e the institutional 
barrier by integrating Pani Panchayat and Jal sathis for gradual cost recovery and preparing ground for climate 
smart agriculture through water use efficiency (c) it is trying to remove financial barrier through directing the subsidies 
through convergence in climate resilient development and vulnerability reduction wit h this fund providing a catalytic 
support not as a core investment. It also avoids regressive capital intensive large dam paradigm affecting many lives 
negatively (through displacement). (d) it addresses social inclusion by integrating indigenous communities and also 
women and landless by off -farm income generation options and providing leasing rights to SHG groups. The project 
also integrates the climate resilient water res ources and livelihood strategies at the grassroot s level through 
involvement of community based organisations (CBOs) such as Water Users Associations and Gram Panchayats 
(Village level democracy structure in India).  
 
75. Odisha has less than 10% energization and the ecosystem for solar energy integration is negligible. A successful 
demonstration of this p roject will open up the private market for solar energy integration. The project plans to train 
barefoot para -professionals (women) for assembling and mainten ance of the solar panels and accessories. This will 
help in resolving the last mile maintenance problem. Pre -qualified channel partners will have a mobile app based 
system to integrate these trained hands on ground.  The penetration of solar energy is close ly linked to the resilience 
building and energy access for vulnerable communities  
 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy   
 
76. The ground water recharge system is a concrete adaptation option. This is not a standard specified for the tank 
systems. This design aims at reducing ground water vulnerability and improve the water regime. This would help in 
reduced vulnerability and sustain the tank as an economic asset. The enhanced income will help empowering user 
associations to recover the O&M cost. The solar energy integ ration leveraged through GCF support would help in 
wider replication, opening of the private market for solar pumps and large scale adoption .  
 
77. The project has been designed in the principle of self -management and cost recovery of various services. It is q uite 
clear that the capital investment made by the fund on recharge structures are not difficult to recover and the 
maintenance of the structures can be easily handled by the PPs and Jal saathis from the devolution that they receive 
at the end of the proje ct period. The capital investment in tanks however, would be by public agencies and its O&M 
will be by the PPs.  The goal of the tank system project is not to cover the capital investment but in the long term to 
transfer the asset so that the operation and  maintenance cost will be take n care of by the water user associations.  
The pani panchayat act empowers water users for this.  The trained para professionals will have capacity to  act as 
bridge between community institutions like  pani panchayat, user groups, farmer producer groups. The corpus 
generated as part of the project activities , levies on water  and devolutions will help  them at elast meeting the O&M 
expense in the long run.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 70 
 
 
 D 
 
78. The certified professionals will reduce the transaction cost and develop the ecosystem for the channel 
partners/distributors of the solar pumps and they will also have gainful engagement based on the experience they 
gain from the project. The trained jal  sathis can act as formal investigator for CGWB and other government and 
private agencies engaged in research. The non -farm sector economic enterprises will continue to thrive as the 
collectivization of produces and market linkage is a stated goal of the ca pacity building under agriculture and allied 
sector in this project.  
 
79. The policy environment created will ensure gradual cost recovery and reduced dependence on risk transfer doles 
and subsidies.  
 
80. Under solar mission , the Government has declared solar fi nancing to be covered under priority sector and this would 
require lower provisioning and lower cost of funds  (for banks) . It will also open up an ESCO market under the private 
sector in solar. Government will leverage funds from RKVY and enhance market ac cess for produces. This will help 
in price stabilization  and livelihood enhancement. It will also leverage a flagship scheme under Prime Minister Krishi 
Sichai Yojana for training and empowering pani panchayats.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 70 
 
 E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
 
81. The project will impact 5. 19 million vulnerable population directly (about 1.03 million HHs) in 15 priority districts with 
high level of food insecurity, water scarcity and high climatic stress (present and future scenario) and with high 
proportion of vulnerable SC -ST population.  2.59 million of this population are males and 2.6 million are femal es. They 
account for 12% of the entire population of the state.  
 
 Categories of population                          In Million  %age  
A Total Population (Odisha)                                       41.97   
B SC-ST (vulnerable section)  Population (Odisha)                                       16.78  40% 
C Total Population (15 districts)                                       17.22  41% 
D Female (Odisha)                                       20.76  49% 
E Male (Odisha)                                       21.21  51% 
F Agricultural labourers (15 districts)                                         3.85   
G SC-ST (vulnerable section)  agri-labourers                                         1.54   
H Marginal workers (15 districts)                                         3.83   
I No of BPL  (15 dists)                                         3.60   
J Higher of (F,H,I)                                         3.85   
K Assumed 25% BPL are from other work                                         0.72   
L Cultivators (15 districts)                                         2.06   
M 30% Cultivators vulnerable due to water scarcity                                         0.62   
L Total vulnerable population                                         5.19  12% 
 Male (15 districts)                                         2.59  49.90%  
 Female (15 districts)                                         2.60  50.10%  
Figure 4 The break up of the vulnerable population in target areas  
The indirect beneficiaries would be 10.78 million population  i.e. about 2.16  million HHs  (out of 15.97 million total population 
of 2846 gram panchayats  in project areas   - based on the average gram panchayat pupation of 5611 per GP as per 2011 
census ).  
 
As per the OCTMP – I studies about 293 HH are benefitted per tank. Considering variable sizes of tanks the actual 
beneficiaries will be arrived during the tank level surveys  during project imple mentation . However, this project also benefits 
water security and food security and inclusive in nature both direct and indirect beneficiaries would be more as the 
livelihood plan, health and nutrition plan may cover land -less, women and additional recharg e can augment net sown areas 
and reduce marginalization and migration.  
 
The 1000 solar pump installations will avoid emission 2614  tonnes of CO 2 per year and would ensure 3.27 million kWh of 
energy saving during its life time.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 70 
 
 E 
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  As Co -benefit:  Avoided CO 2 emission 
from solar 2614  tonnes/year. Energy 
saving of 3.27 million kWh per year from 
1000 solar pumps.   
Lifetime  Lifetime energy saving shall be 65 million 
kWh from this pilot only.  
Assuming that government of Odisha 
converts 40,000 pumps to solar it will have 
potential energy saving of 130.68 million 
kWh per year.  
 Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by 
gender  (reduced vulnerability or 
increased  resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population , disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  5.19 million most vulnerabl e people are 
going to be directly of which 1.5 million are 
from SC -ST (vulnerable)  community and 
50.1 % are women10. The indirect 
beneficiaries would be 10.78 million 
population i.e. about 2.16  million HHs  
Percentage 
(%) 12% of the total population of the state.  
Other 
relevant 
indicators   
82. There are 3.6 million below poverty line (BPL) households where monthly Income of highest earning 
household member < INR 5000  (USD 76)  (that’s 92% of all BPL households), 3. 8 million marginal workers 
who M ostly depends on agriculture and highly vulnerable. About a third of cu ltivators too loo se their c rops 
due to water scarcity. Of the total 49% are female, f ood insecure and vulnerable.   However, the ground 
water in these area will cater to 17.22 million population of which 8.62 million are male and 8.63 million 
are female and cater to 40% of the total  population of the state.  
 
83. The food security to 5.1 million food insecure households can be ensured through this project.  The water 
quality for this area is certainly likely to improve as the access to drinking water. Currently 4.1 million 
people have access to drinking water in these 15 districts.  
 
84. Other indicators proposed are as follows:  
 % increase in groundwater recharge rate  
 Groundwater quality improvements as against the applicable standard (OPSCB)  
 % increase in cropping intensity  
 % increase in nu mber of days of food availability in a year for the targeted household  
 % reduction in water borne diseases  
 Amount of energy/fuel saving  
 
85. There are overlap between marginal workers and agriculture laborer. Similarly there is also BPL census does not 
distinguish category wise. It is most of the BPL category would be either, landless, marginal/agricultural laborer . 
Therefore highest of 3 categ ories have been taken with an assumption that about a quarter of BPL population are 
possibly from the landless and are part of other workers category. Similarly about one fifth of the cultivators who are 
also part of pani panchayats (Water Users Associatio ns) are extremely vulnerable due to climate change related 
vagaries even though they are landed and spend more than 180 days in a year in agriculture activity but move/depend 
to other professions. These figures have been added together to compute food rela ted vulnerability.  This figure roughly 
matches the WFP estimate adjusting for decadal growth rate of population in the region.  
 
                                                             
10 The share of women employment  in marginal and agricultural labor is higher as compared to male in 
Odisha


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 70 
 
 E 
86. The calculation for the 1000 solar pumps and mitigation and additional livelihood benefit from irrigation has been given 
in ann exure 2.  For this region 3  HP pumps and the head and discharge for these pumps and their diesel consumption 
has been considered. The diesel subsidy has been estimated at Rs 10 per litre. But this is a declining subsidy regime 
and to that extent the quantum of subsidy may reduce in f uture. The grid baseline has been assumed to be 0.8 
tCO2/Mwh . For computing the mitigation cost or avoided CO 2 cost ( 194 USD/t CO 2)11 the cost for the solar pump 
component has been taken in to consideration (with  40% from GoI ).  
 
87. There has been no such comparable project on climate change adaptation of this nature. However some related project 
on tribal livelihood which tried to enhance the adaptive capacity in the same region has the following outreach and 
investment.  
 
88. The Odisha  Tribal Empowerment and Livelihood Programme (OTELP)12 had been financed by the DFID support of 
USD 40 million contributing 44 percent of the total programme cost as grant; and the IFAD loan of USD 20 million 
which contributed 22 percent of total programme cost as soft loan. WFP contributed USD 12 million in the form of food 
assistance. The contribution from the Government of Odisha was USD 9.6 million. The project reached out to 0.6 
million people in 7 di stricts of Odisha of which 10% were vulnerable/destit utes.  
 
89. Phase I of the Odisha Community Tank Management Project  (OCTMP) that deals with decentralized irrigation system 
and close to the proposed project had an outlay of  US Million $ 127.8 or INR 546 crores. Of which World Bank Loan 
was 112 mn USD, Government of Odisha contribution was 11 mn USD and balance through community/PPs. The 
project covered 1.3 mn people in 29 districts of Odisha.  
 
90. In terms of targeting and per capita investment and the diversity the proposed project is far better than the above 
projects as well as the disaster related projects in the coastal zone that is largely capital investment in infrastructure.  
The proposed project far higher climate relevance, better resilience fo cus and aimed towards cost recovery and market 
transformation (both water market and solar market).  
 
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
 
91. This a dual pathway project having paradigm shift potential both in adaptation and mitigation.  
 
Adaptation Logic:  Enhanced climate resilient development in the most vulnerable areas of the state to  ensure water security 
and food security . 
Mitigation Logic:  Shift to a low emission pathway from the business -as-usual method of water supply to agriculture through 
a large number small solar pumps to ensure energy and water use efficiency . This will be the co -benefit in this 
predominantly adaptation project.  
 
92. The proposed project primarily is an adaptation project focused on climate resilient development. The recharge shaft 
integration i s a business -as-usual tank improvement programme  improves ground water recharge, therefore is a 
concrete adaptation activity. Gr ound water is mostly used in the climate stressed condition and is equivalent of a family 
silver. It has critical importance for future climate stress as much it has at present. Its result areas are closely linked t o 
(a) enhanced water availability through  recharge (b) enhanced food security through livelihood diversification 
                                                             
11 Estimated against the total net inve stment and amount of GHG mitigated total project for its lifetime of 
10 years  
12 http://www.archive.india.gov.in/citizen/agriculture/viewscheme.php?schemeid=12 08


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 70 
 
 E 
agriculture fishery as well as off -farm activities for land less and women (c) reduced disease burden (water -borne) 
diseases due to improvement in water quality. (d) capacity of the co mmunities enhanced for better operation 
management and providing last mile linkage (e) learning and informing the policy makers providing input for water 
policy, ground water regulation and as well as water budgeting and sharing (f) better project governan ce and 
mainstreaming through policy and operational guidance.  
 
93. The mitigation logic is established through a pilot project of 1000 solar pumps. It is quite possible to adopt to diesel 
based pumping system which the farmers are familiar with. The ecosystem  is already in place. However a rigorous 
demonstration and success of this pilot will not only help in avoiding abo ut 2614  tonnes of CO 2 per year but also 
develop an eco -system for solar market. This avoided emission is a mitigation co -benefit.  This will be achieved by 
mobilizing right vendor who train t he barefoot para professionals ( especially the women) in solar panel, battery 
maintenance and management. These people will be the vehicle of market transformation. The stability of the system 
and demonstra tion thereof will help development of the private market for a potential replacement of 2.88 million13 
pump sets in the state which has low energization.  
 
94. At the baseline scenario the government has invested in decentralized system of tank irrigation as the  large scale 
dams and irrigation projects results in involuntary displacement and un sustainable socio -politically. The GCF grant will 
be used for ground water recharge system as concrete adaptation activity. In addition grant will be used for solar pump 
integration (with capital subsidy), capacity building and monitoring of energy saving and adaptation benefit to show 
case the project for mainstreaming across the state/region/country.  
 
 
95. The learning and knowledge management component captured through a pro cess document component will help in 
upscaling this project in a programmatic mode. It is expected that some of the adaptation action proposed under this 
project may be mainstreamed to other programs when the dissemination takes place, new guidelines may e volve. , In 
addition the department has built in IEC component and training component for this concrete adaptation initiative. This 
can be achieved by building a case on emission reduction through systematic measurement of energy saving by an 
accredited ag ency. It will also capture the cost of adaptation. The policy briefs would enable the state to mark higher 
budget allocation for a state wide programme (conceptualized as Bhutal Jal Sangrahan Yojna). The state has already 
started amending the acts for wate r users giving them power for collection of water tax and inclusive representation in 
the governance.  
 
96. The element of GWRS as a concrete adaptation measure is not part of the current practices and would get 
mainstreamed after its adaption benefits are doc umented scientifically. This will enhance scientific learning. Ensuring 
livelihood enhancement support to landless families in the tank command will ensure equity and inclusion.  
 
97. The solar pumping sys tem and additional income there on would create additional demand for such systems and the 
scale would help in reducing the price further. In addition the state has already prepared a draft solar policy and that 
would form part of the ambitious Integrated Renewable Energy Policy to boost  solar pumping (and other solar products) 
devices market in the state.   
 
98. A declining subsidy regime and increasing cost recovery from this adaptation investment is one of the positive macro -
economic outcomes. This project will show through a mixture of po licy interventions and project interventions the 
essence of adaptation (water security and food security), emission reduction (energy saving), saving of subsidy and 
foreign exchange for mainstreaming and replication.  
 
99. The project will provide input to upcoming state water policy especially on issues relating to water pricing and cost 
recovery. It will help in providing right legitimacy of pani panchayat as implementing agency / partners  in the panchayats 
and take benefit of the higher devolution.  It wil l help in providing input to Odisha Ground Water Regulation which is in 
draft stage . 
 
100. In this way the project is expected to address the all relevant barriers technical, institutional, financial and social for 
rapid upscaling.   
                                                             
13 CDM potential of SPV pumps in India Pallav Purohit, Axel Michaelowa, HWWI Research Programme 
International Climate Policy


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 70 
 
 E 
 
Technical Barrier  Large scale training of the departmental engineers and jal sathis (para professionals)  
Financial  Barrier  Tariff setting criteria and guidelines developed by the project will enable transparent 
and predictable tariff policy and feed into state  water policy, ground water legislation, 
PP Act and also renewable energy policy. It has  been established during consultation  
that people are willing to pay higher tariff if the supply is assured in right volume at 
the time they need.  
Institutional  barrier  This can be overcome by developing the skills of jal sathis, barefoot para-
professionals  on pump maintenance . The three level M&E system from satellite  
based, web based  tracking system, tank based recharge monitoring  and quality  
monitoring, concur rent monitoring and project  development objective & component  
tracking and AE independent  assessment will ensure  proper project  governance  risk 
management  and fund management effectiveness. The high level steering  
committee  will cr eate platform  of convergence  as well inter -departm ental 
coordination  
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
101. There are three kinds of learning envisaged in this project:  
 
 Technical learning:  To be achieved by installation, maintenance of recharge shaft as well systematic recording 
of the recharge in the tanks and benefits by the village level jal sathis. This will enhance their conviction for larger 
replication. It will also develop a trained  cadre of par -hydrologists for participatory water management. Certified 
professional in solar panel assembling and pump maintenance will follow a set of maintenance schedule and SOP 
developed through this project and provide last mile linkage to an emergi ng solar market eco -system.  
 
 Monitoring protocol and database for process learning:  The satellite based M&E system of the tanks and 
database, the app -based integration of recharge data and on field concurrent monitoring of the livelihood and other 
social b enefits would serve a major input to scientific literature and dynamic modeling of the ground water. The 
water quality can be correlated with water borne disease burden. The food security can be correlated with the 
ground water recharge. There will be scie nce to policy briefs aimed at mainstreaming the project knowledge to 
region and country scale.  
 
 Participatory learning methods:  The self -management of the water, water sharing, cost recovery, crop water 
budgeting would go a long way in ensuring that water is managed efficiently and right crop choices are made 
including market linkage through collectivization of produces and better  negotiating power 9when aggregated into 
FPOs).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 70 
 
 E 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program.  
102. The project ensures three kinds of enabling framework (a) proactive policy framework  allowing effective use of 
water and its conservation, cost  recovery and self-management  by the trained para -professionals cadres of the pani 
panchayats. The inputs from the project would make both State Water Policy and Odisha Ground Water Regulation 
and Control policy transformative (b) enhancing resilience through better appreciation of the climate stress : 
enhancing ground water recharge through concrete adapt ation structures and forward looking management of water 
resources to reflect climate change imp acts on rainfall  and temperature in the region and enhance water use efficiency  
matching aquifer abstraction rates to match sustainable aquifer yields. Based on the learning from the project future 
tank improvement programmes are expected to integrate thi s concrete adaptation structure in the tank systems to 
improve ground water recharge. (c) Solar  pumping market transformation :  eastern region has much lower 
energization in agriculture, the solar market is nascent and in Odisha only les s than 10% use regular diesel pump sets. 
The project will develop a full -ecosystem so that the government moves to low emission solar powered pump sets  for 
future replacements. It is also possible that the private sector will show interest due to larger vol umes.  
 
103. The project will ensure financial sustainability through gradual cost recovery, reduced public expenditure on water 
provisioning through other costly means, enhanced income from supplemental life-saving  irrigation and possible 
income diversificatio n. Since solar energy is close to achieving grid parity it will also lower the energy cost in future 
and reduce the fuel subsidy on account of diesel.  It will also reduce carbon footprint of the state throug h avoided fossil 
fuel based generation which has  long term cost.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low -emission technologies or  activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, 
and/or improve climate -responsive planning and development.  
 
104. The  National  Water  Policy  2002 and  subsequently  in  the  “ Odisha   State  Water  Policy -2007”  laid  down 
emphasis  on  Participatory  Irrigation  Management  (PIM)  to  be  adopted  as  an  essential  strategy  for  improving 
performance  of  all  irrigation  projects,  management  of  irrigation  systems;  and  partic ularly  in  water  distribution  
and collection of water charges. This has been concretized in the Pani Panchayat Act, 2008 and subsequent rules. 
Where the PPs have been authorized to collect water charges. The evidences of collection has been very little so far .  
This project is expected to build momentum.  
 
105. The project is  in line with the objective  of Pradhan Mantri Kr ishi Sichai Yojna  objective of har  khet ko pani (water to 
every farm field ) and more crop per drop. The integration of solar component is al so in line with low emission 
development strategy that the state is pursuing as enshrined in SAPCC.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 70 
 
 E 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
106. Overall the project will have the following benefits:  
 
(i) Enhanced water security which in turn will raise environmental and social wellbeing and economic productivit y; (ii) 
Lowered disease burden on account of water contamination (avoided livelihood disruption to help in economic wellbeing , 
reduced drudgery for women and enhanced water security for livestock and fishers (iii) Reduced greenhouse gas 
emissions through the avoidance of diesel or elect ric pump sets  in solar pumping system pilot areas as demonstration (iv) 
reduced run -off through improved rainfall capture and diversion capacity, including enhanced ground water recharge (v) 
enhanced knowledge of ground water recharge structure its mainten ance as well as water budgeting and distribution, 
learning modules for livelihood options for the land less to ensure social inclusion (vi) lower overall economic and social 
costs for water security and food security.  
 Economic co -benefits  
- Total number of jobs created:  
In a decade (2001 -11) the proposed districts have lost 0.4 mn jobs in agriculture sector14. Most of the migration 
has been from the SC -ST community and are either marginal workers or agricultural laborers  They account 
for about 1.5 million people. With a focused targeting it is possible to retain at least 1 million of these people 
in the state in the sector with better opportunity in agriculture.  Through this intervention it will be possible to 
stabilize at least 0.25 mn jobs in these districts per year and in four years 1 million jobs would have been 
stabilized in 15 districts.  
 
- Amount of foreign currency savings  
 
The opportunity cost saving will be 3.6  million USD on account of diesel in 20 years  due t o use of solar pumps . 
  
- Amount of government’s budget deficits reduced  
It will also reduce the subsidy on account of diesel to the tune of 1.8 million USD in 20 years that contributes 
to the budget deficit.  
 
 Social co -benefits  
- Improved access to education  
2-3 percent of workers move out of agriculture per year and migrate outside to low value added service 
sector. The same will stay and their children being rooted in village will have continued access to education, 
enhanced economic wellbeing  and will redu ce dropout rate.  
- Improved regulation or cultural preservation  
The social norm on water sharing by users (pani panchayat) and cost recovery (through water tax) and crop 
water budgeting will enhance sustainability and reduce social conflict; special suppor t to landless also would 
ensure inclusion, Tanks are also at the helm of a socio -cultural and economic system of a village and this 
will help in its conservation.  
- Improved health and safety   
The women members who are the primary users of tank water for c ooking are worst affected along with 
children due to water contamination. Shortage of ground water too increases drudgery.  
 
 
 Environmental co -benefits  
- Improved air quality  
This will improve through the avoidance of diesel.   
- Improved soil quality  
                                                             
14 Census of India 2011 .


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 70 
 
 E 
The recharge system will improve the soil health.  
- Improved biodiversity  
The plantation in tank catchment and improved water regime will help in maintaining the bio -diversity.  
 Gender -sensitive development impact  
- Proportion of men and women in jobs creat ed 
The project is trying to stabilize the job in agriculture which is declining at the rate of 2 -3 percent per year. 
50% of the workers are women marginal workers who form mostly the agricultural labor force and their jobs 
will be stabilized. In addition t he capacity building investments in backyard poultry, mushroom and food 
processing for the landless will help the women household.  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for be neficiary country and groups , 
overall income level, etc .). 
 
107.  As per the IPCC 5th Assessment report15 the regional impact of climate change on India shall push the poor to 
margin. There will be decrease in food security, reduced bio -mass availability will affect livestock productivity and 
also may affect energy security due to less water availability thus  impacting irrigation in stressed conditions. Drought 
and flood events16 will be more frequent thus pushing poor to margin and reducing the economic development in the 
region. Diseases burden ( diarrhea  and malaria, etc.) will rise due to drought and flood a nd resultant deterioration in 
water quality.   
 
108. India accounts for 250 million food insecure people. Based on the review of literature, the findings have been as 
follows.  The mean temperature in India is projected to increase by 0.1 –0.3◦C in kharif and 0. 3–0.7◦C during Rabi by 
2010 and by 0.4 –2.0◦C during kharif and to 1.1 –4.5◦C in Rabi by 2070. Similarly, mean rainfall is projected not to 
change by 2010, but to increase by up to 10% during kharif and rabi by 2070. At the same time, there is an increased 
possibility of climate extremes, such as the timing of onset of monsoon, intensities and frequencies of drought and 
ﬂoods.   
 
109. The state of Odisha has been constantly at the receiving end of climate events such as drought, flood and cyclone 
due to high monso on variability.  As a result of this several areas of the state are food insecure17 as shown in the 
figure below : 
                                                             
15 Change, I. C. (2013). The Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth Asse ssment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. New York: Cambridge University Press , 1, 535 -1. 
 
16 Chaturvedi, Rajiv Kumar, et al. "Multi -model climate change projections for India under representative concentration 
pathways." Current Science  103.7 (2012): 791 -802. 
 
17 Food Security Atlas of RURAL ODISHA, UN World Food Programme


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 70 
 
 E 
 
Figure 5 Hunger atlas of Odisha, WFP  
110. The high level steering committee has identified 15 priority districts having high poverty, high proportion of 
indigenous communities and significant climate stress for the implementation of this project.  
 
111. The climate scenario:  As per the State Action Pla n on climate change (SAPCC 2015 -20) under the A2 scenario 
the projected mean annual temperature increase by 2100 is given below:  
 
Figure 6Spatial distribution of temperature rise in end century scenario  (A2 scenario)  
112. According to figure 7, coastal Odisha will remain relatively less warm than the rest of the state, even though it 
clearly breaches the 2°C barrier. Northwestern, western, and southwestern Odisha show the highest rise in 
temperature. This temperature rise is certainly a t an unsustainable level, assuming the current challenges of global


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 70 
 
 E 
warming are not mitigated. This factor will have an increasingly larger impact on ecosystems.   This will put a stress 
on terrestrial as well as ground water system and cause faster deplet ion. Therefore, the project largely focuses on 
the north -west, west and southwest Odisha districts.  
 
 
Figure 7 Spatial distribution of precipitation –end century scenario  (A2 Scenario)  
113. This figure above shows no change to +40 millimeters of excess annual average rainfall by  the end century in 
several parts of coastal and western Odisha. Southern Odisha will have less rainfall ( –35 millimeters to no change).  
The main problem is this rainfall will not be well distributed. While the quantum of rainfall may remain same, this will 
be available for a limited number of days with many dry spells. Thus the ground water conservation to ensure aquifer 
yield at the water stressed scenario in future is a critical resilience factor for th is project.  
 
114. The very fact that the area is food insecure and has high concentration of indigenous population makes them highly 
vulnerable to climate change . The project aims to target about 5. 2 million vulnerable population in 15 districts having 
current and future climate stress. Out of this about 3.8 million are marginal workers and mostly work 2 -3 months in a 
year in agriculture. 1.5 million  are scheduled caste or scheduled tribe communities and most of them are below 
poverty line. They are 12% of the total population of the state. More than 50% of this population are women.  
 
115. The key barriers include access to water, high poverty and stressed livelihood, financial barriers to use alternative 
mode of irrigation and key institutional barrier include heavy dependence on monocrop rice and lack of collectivization 
of produce and poor market access. The water institutions are in nascent stage. A minor  climatic stress arising out 
drought and flood pushes them to margin, hunger and force them for distress migration leading to social unrest.  
 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
 Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population  
 Absence of altern ative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
 Need  for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
 
116. The fiscal deficit for 2014 -15 touched 4.1 percent of the gross domestic product missing the t arget by 0.6 
percentage point. The fiscal weakness was partly from structural factors. Lower per -capita incomes of around $1,700 
limit the government's tax base and raise pressure for subsidies and development spending. Moreover, interest 
payments absorb a lmost a fifth of Indian government revenues, a consequence of high debt, which is estimated at


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 70 
 
 E 
63.8 percent of GDP in fiscal 2016, down from 83.1 percent in fiscal 2005. This situation restricts the government's 
fiscal flexibility. The prolonged recession in Europe and exit of UK from EU will have deep impact on Indian economy 
affecting its effort on investment in irrigation and market infrastructure and may even lower social sector spending.  
 
117. India  accounts  for  2.4%  of  the  world  surface  area,  but   supports  around  17.5%  of  the  world population.  It  
houses  the  largest  proportion  of  global  poor  (30%), around  24%  of  the  global population without  access  to  
electricity  (304  million), about  30%  of  the  global  population relying  on  solid  biomass  for  cooking  and  92  
million  without  access  to  safe drinking  water . India  is  a  developing  country  with  a  per  capita  GDP nominal)  
of  around  USD  1408 per annum. However, this doesn’t reflect the wide disparities among st its people and regions.  
Around 363 million people (30% of the population) live in poverty, about 1.77 million people are housele ss and 4.9% 
of the population ( aged 15years and above) are unemployed.  The per capita  electricity  consumption  stands  low  
at  917  kWh,  which  is  barely  one  third  of  the world’s average consumption.   
 
118. In case of Odisha, on  the macro economic front, revenue  receipts  of  the state  as  a  percentage  of  GSDP  have 
increased  from  15.40  per  cent  in 2002 -03  to  18.65  per  cent  in  2011 -12.  While  the  own  revenue  receipts  of  
the  state  as  a  percentage  of  GSDP  has  increased  from  7.03  per  cent  to  9.21  pe r  cent,  revenue  transfer  
from  Centre  to state which includes state’s share in central taxes and grants -in-aid, as a percentage of  GSDP  
remained  more  or  less  constant. The state has seen buoyancy in it tax collection due the slowdown of the minin g 
activity. Odisha’s tax - GSDP  ratio  remains  much  lower  compared  to  other  major  general  category  states,  
except Bihar,  Jharkhand  and  West  Bengal. Fiscal deficit of the state has remained below two percent of GSDP 
from the year  2004 -05 onwa rds. Odisha would have a fiscal deficit of INR 14,532.39 crore (USD 2.201 billion) during 
2016 -17 fiscal which is 3.79 per cent of the gross state domestic product (GSDP)18. The high rate of fiscal deficit, 
however, violates provisions of Fiscal Responsibil ity and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2005 that allows for fiscal 
deficit of only 3.5 per cent of the GSDP. Year -end debt stock for 2016 -17 is estimated at INR 64991.83 crore (USD 
9.84 billion) which is 16.96 per cent of the GSDP. With this pattern macro -economic fundamentals the problem has 
been its poverty construct that fails in its redistributive impact to build resilience.  
 
119. Odisha is one of India’s poorest states. Although poverty levels fe ll from 57 percent in 2004/05 to about 33 percent 
in 2011/12, the proportion of poor in Odisha remains well above the national average of 22 percent. Odisha, along 
with Madhya Pradesh, has the highest percentage of rural poor in the country (Odisha Economi c Survey, 2013 –14). 
The 2011 –12 poverty estimates for Odisha are based on poverty lines of INR 695 (USD 11) and INR 861 (USD 13)  
per month for rural and urban areas, respectively.  Poverty among the scheduled tribe (ST) and scheduled caste 
(SC) communities  has been falling at a faster rate; however, the ST communities remain poorer than other social 
classes (Odisha Economic Survey Report, 2013 –14).  
 
120. The water institutions ( Pani Panchayats ) are nascent and do not have adequate capacity and even financial 
literacy. They need sufficient capacity building.  Collectivization of produce to better negotiate with market (input 
suppliers and output marketers) has just made a beginning in the region and has a long way to go. The project  cannot  
address  all the structural inequity present  in the state. It will make an attempt through this catalytic fund to enhance 
the adaptive  capacity of the most vulnerable segment (marginal workers, women, SC -ST communities and mostly 
below poverty line) intervening in  the ground water regime (for food and water security) through livelihood 
diversification and integrate solar energy as a low emission solution in the irrigation and agriculture sector.  
 
 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and  capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs 
and NAPs  
121. Section C1 of this document clearly show the various levels of alignment and country, state and community 
ownership of this project. This is described below:  
The alignment and contribution INDC has been given in figure 1 above. In addition:  
                                                             
18 http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india -business/Odisha -projects -fiscal -deficit -of-3-79-in-
2016 -17/articleshow/51462002.cms


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 70 
 
 E 
 
  It confi rms to the components of the National Action P lan on Cl imate Change “ water mission ” objectives: 
(a) comprehensive water data base in public domain and assessment of impact of climate change on water 
resource; (b) promotion of citizen and state action for water  conservation, augmentation and preservation; 
(c) focused attention to over -exploited areas; (d) increasing water use efficiency by 20%, and (e) promotion 
of basin level integrated water resources management.  
 Fully aligns with the key objectives  of the Pra dhan Mantri Krishi Sichai Yojana “har  khet ko pani” and more 
crop per drop.  
 It conforms to the key priorities relating to water use efficiency (KP4)  creation of water harvesting structures 
(KP5),strengthening the pani panchay ats for water management (KP8)  and integrated water management 
(KP9) of the Odisha State Action Plan on Climate Change.  
 Odisha Pani Panchayat act envisions a self-managed  water institutions and creation of a cadre of skilled 
para professionals  for energy and water would create a transf ormational eco -system.  
 The project has been duly vetted by the state level council of climate change at PCN state and subsequently 
the DPR has been approved after taking the stakeholder inputs on 12th of July 2016. It has been duly vetted 
by the multi -disciplinary empowered committee at the Government of India level.  
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
  
122. NABARD is the Accredited Entity (AE)  for the overall project monitoring and implementation of climate change 
projects under the three funding mechanisms, viz. Green Climate Fund (GCF), Adaptation Fund (AF), and National 
Adaptation Fund for Climate Change (NAFCC).  NABARD has been accredited a s AE (Direct Access ) of GCF in  July 
2015 . It has been playing a pivotal role in scrutinizing, prioritizing, and strategizing climate change  projects including 
aspects of finances and reporting aligned with national climate policies.  NABARD in the capacity as AE of Adaptation 
Fund  has generated several feasible proposals on climate change adaptation, six of which, amounting to US $ 9.8 
million, have been sanctioned by the AF. These projects are at various stages of implementation. NABARD as AE 
for implementation of adaptation projects under NAFCC by MoEF&CC, GoI facilitates identification of project 
ideas/concepts from State Action Plan for Climate Change (SAPCC), project formulation, appraisal, sanction, 
disbursement of fund, monitoring and ev aluation and above all capacity building of stakeholders including state 
governments. Sixteen projects with an amount of INR 326.22  crore (49.43  million USD) were sanctioned under 
NAFCC. NABARD, with its head office at Mumbai has pan India presence.  NABARD  has offices of District 
Development Managers (DDMs) in almost all the districts and 31 Regional offices across the country including 
Odisha.  NABARD has trained manpower at Regional Office level for implement ation of Climate Change projects . 
NABARD officials/teams at district and state level would be involved in project guidance, steering, monitoring, 
auditing, co -ordination with State, District officials for resolving any bottlenecks in project implementation . Further 
details  (if any)  may be referre d from NABARD  corporate website https://www.nabard.org/  
 
123.  The capability of the executing entity is outlined under section C.4 para 77,78 and 79  
 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other  relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description  of the steps taken to ensure country ownership , including the engagement with NDAs 
on the funding proposal and the no -objection lette r. 
 
124. The project has been formulated in prior consultation with critical stakeholder. This has been duly approved by 
high level steering committee of the Odisha state. The Project Concept note has been technically appraise d by the 
AE and placed to the Empowered  Committee constituted by NDA which involves all the concerned line Ministries 
which are part of National Action Plan on Climate Change. Empowered Committee meeting held on 17 March 2016 
cleared the proposal and NDA provided its No -objection certificate.  
 
Please also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal 
was developed.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 70 
 
 E 
125. The project formulation has taken into account consultation all the field level primary and secondary stakeholders. 
Series of consultation meetings involving farmers, pani panchayat members  and experts as well as line department 
officials  during the formulation of the project. Apart from informal consultations and feedback 6 structured stakeholder 
consultations were con ducted during the formulation of the meeting.  
 
126. Separate consultation meetings were arranged with vulnerable communities including small and marginal farmers, 
landless laborers . However , meeting attendance as a practice not recorded  caste wise. The stakeholder consultation 
meetings , involving about 50 farmers from the target districts, another 50 people from line departments, academic 
institutions, experts, civil society organizations, bankers and private sector  was also organized during July 2016 .   
The project concept and components were deliberated and indicators were discussed with the participants.  Their 
inputs have been used to refine the activities and components.  The details of stakeholder meeting held are given in 
the Annexure 9 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private 
and other public investment.  
 
127. Water is a public good and basic entitlement and hence the output from this project d oes not envisage capital cost 
recovery from the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries during the project duration. Hence, a detailed financial 
analysis to compute financial returns is not required. However, the Government of Odisha has already made e fforts 
to recover the cost of O&M from Pani Panchayats as envisaged under the act.  The grid availability is low in many 
places and the availability of water combined with solar pumping will help in development of a private water and 
energy market in futur e.  
 
 Estimated cost per t CO2 eq (total investment cost/expected lifetime emission reductions)  
 
With respect to the solar pumping system component: is 194 USD/t CO2  
 
 
 Economic and financial rate of return from the project activity


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 70 
 
 E 
The financial and economic analysis of the project is arrived based on the total project costs and benefits including the components 
supported through co -funding (World Bank and state Govt.) and by GCF. The financial and economic rate of return from the project 
are presented  in the table below:  
 
IRR of the Project Considering Grant Fund  17.07%  
EIRR of the Project Considering Grant Fund  17.75%  
IRR of the Project Considering Debt Fund  15.93%  
EIRR of the Project Considering Debt Fund  16.64%  
 
The effectiveness in terms of economic benefits under the project are clearly established and can be seen from the table abov e. The 
same is presented in the feasibility study report (Annexure 1). 
 
Proposed  expendit ure and proposed financing mode  
 
The project is proposed to be supported as grant funding USD 34.357 million from GCF and the same will be utilized from concr ete 
adaptation measure. The debt funding under the project is not feasible as proposed interventions are mainly innovative in nat ure and 
of public goods nature. The activities does not result in direct cash flow to service the debt.  
 
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co -financing ratio  (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long -term low emission investment.  
 
 Co-financing ratio (total amount of the Fund’s investment as percentage of project)  
 
128. The new project being formulated by DoWR has got clearance from Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) has an 
outlay of 236.36 million USD. The project will have a loan component of 165.45 million USD that will include tank 
improvement (for 600 tanks) basin improvement, climate resilient value chain investment in agriculture and allied 
sectors. Rest will be the share of Government of Odisha. In addition GoO has decided to upscale the tank 
improvement exercise for additional 9400 tanks through convergence fund ing from the state’s own resource. The 
tentative budget for tank improvement in 600 tanks funded by World Bank will be 7. 064 million USD. This is only 
4.25% of the total project.   The GCF support is sought for 34.357 mn USD  of the total project cost of USD 166.297 
million . Co-financing to GCF support ratio  is 4: 1.  The GCF  will invest around 20.66% of the project cost.  
 
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
 
129. The expected financial internal rate of return is 17.07 % for this project, which exceeds 12%, the assumed discount 
rate. Under all test cases including scenario of 25% deficit rain fall every year and increase in cost of capital up to 
15% the Benefit to Cost ratio of the project is remains around  1.  
 
130. GCF cont ribution is being asked mostly for the concrete adaptation intervention which is not in practice as of now 
for recharging the grown water artificially. This intervention facilitates the incremental benefit to beneficiaries with 
availability of additional w ater which can be used for agricultural purpose for higher yield and higher income. The 
present value of incremental benefit due to inter ventions from GCF fund over a 20 -year period after completion of 
project is expected to be $ 180.47  million.  
 
131. The projec t is self -sustainable beyond the intervention period. The benefits can be ripped perpetually with a little 
expense on operation and maintenance of recharge wells by Pani Panchayat after the project period.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 70 
 
 E 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
132. Odisha has experimented with two key livelihood programmes O disha tribal empowerment and livelihood 
programme in empowering tribals and Western Odisha Livelihood programme dealing with watershed and livelihood 
as a key strategy  for reducing poverty and vulnerability. The Odisha community tank management project phase 1 
has already  exposed the state to deal with community, water institutions and address water stress in a decentralized 
mode. An independent assessment conducted by CTRAN has clearly established additional life irrigation providing 
livelihood security  to farmers, successful interventions in fishery and some household enterprises like growing 
mushrooms and poultry providing income to landless and women. The state has b een running a successful national 
adaptation  fund project to rejuvenate a dying stream in Jonk basin.  Some of the best practices and design success 
have been factored in here. These include  (i) groundwater recharge trough a recharge shaft acting as concre te 
adaptation activity different from business as usual tank desilting (ii) redesigned rainwater harvesting  tanks system 
improvement  schemes, interconn ected and structurally improved in a cascade and linked to basins or sub -basins  
(iii) energy efficient  solar pumps to use conserved ground water to provide lifesaving irrigation in kharif and additional 
moisture for rabi crops  (iv) Beyond the technological good practice standard, the project will apply the international 
good practice for the water resource m anagement in the context of anticipated impacts of climate change.  The state 
specific climate stress envisaged for future under A2 scenario has been used to identify vulnerable areas.   
 
 
133. The state is also creating cadre of barefoot para -hydrologists to closely monitor the tanks and water quality. Another 
set of certified village level women entrepreneurs will be available for maintenance of solar panels and batteries.  
These people will se rve as critical link for the last mile and enhance the sustainability of the project and its upscaling.  
 
 
134. The process documentation and inputs to policy to be provided through this project would help in creating  a market 
for water and renewable energy and  cerate and enabling environment for public private partnership in this critical 
areas to build resilience and promote low emission development.  
 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 70 
 
 E 
GCF 
core 
indicators  Solar Project  
(a) Total project  financing  Million US$ 8.460   
(b) Requested  GCF amount  Million US$ 5.07   
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  10 tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 323.69  / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  US$ 194  / tCO 2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators  (d) and (e)  above.  
Particulars  Value  Unit 
Capacity of the solar pump  3 hp 
Total water supply 3 hp solar pump  121,500  lpd 
Water supply by 2.2 kw grid connected pump  5.00 lps 
Hourly water supply  18000  lt/hr 
Average operational hour per day  6.750  hr 
Average power  consumption  2.2 kWh 
Average daily power consumption  14.85  kWh 
Annual days of operation  220 days  
Annual energy savings  3267  kWh 
Annual energy savings  0.0033  MkWh  
No of pumps  1000  No 
Energy saving for 1000 pump set  3.27 MkWh  
CO2 emission  per  kWh electricity generated through 
diesel  0.8 
 tCO2/MWh  
Total CO2  avoided/ annum for 1000 pumps  2614  tCO2e  
Total CO2  avoided for 1000 pumps for entire cycle of 
20 years  ©  52272  tCO2e  
 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
Not Applicable  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, di saggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 70 
 
 E 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above . 
Not applicable  
 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
 
Not applicable  
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 70 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the  detailed economic and financial analysis  (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section  E.6.3). 
Annualized benefit from agricultural activity  
Particulars   Annualized Benefit (Million USD)  
Year -1 Year -2 Year -3 Year -4 Year -5 
 Incremental Benefit due to project     9.36 20.69  21.11  
Year -6 Year -7 Year -8 Year -9 Year -10 
33.12  33.79  34.46  35.15  35.85  
Year -11 Year -12 Year -13 Year -14 Year -15 
36.57  37.30  38.05  38.81  39.58  
Year -16 Year -17 Year -18 Year -19 Year -20 
40.38  41.18  42.01  42.85  43.70  
 
Socio Economic Viability  of the proposal has been worked and the same is presented as part of feasibility report 
(Annexure 1). The Internal Rate of Retur n (IRR)  and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of the project are 
summarized in the table below:  
IRR of the Project Considering Grant Fund  17.07%  
EIRR of the Project Considering Grant Fund  17.75%  
IRR of the Project Considering Debt Fund  15.93%  
EIRR of the Project Considering Debt Fund  16.64%  
 
The analysis was further subjected to two sensitivity parameters viz. rainfall deficit and cost overrun. The project 
returned with positive net worth and benefit cost ratio of more than 1.0. The detailed analysis is presented in the 
feasibility report.  
The pr oject benefits anticipated are mainly on account of following:  
1. Protective irrigation during the lean period of water availability.  
2. Increase in productivity of existing crops  
3. Change in cropping pattern.  
4. Fisheries activities  
5. Increase in cropping intensity  
Detailed assumption for arriving at the benefit from above activities are presented in the feasibility report.  
156.  The expected financial internal rate of return is 21.76% for this project, which exceeds 12%, the assumed 
discount rate. Under all test cases including scenario of 25% deficit rain fall every year and increase in cost of capital 
up to 15% the Benefit to Cost ratio of the project is remains around 1. The project gives an internal rate of return of 
15.17% even with the increase in project co st by 40%.  In case of the full project (GCF+Non -GCF) the expected financial 
internal rate of return is exceeding 12% and BC ratio >1 under all scenarios and the project is viable. It is also viable at 
20% cost over -run. 
F.2. Technical Evaluation


---
*Page 54*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 70 
 
 F 
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  
Technical evaluation  
135. The adaptation measures has been planned based on the assessment of the climate issues to which the 
maximum section of the most economically challenged and vulnerable groups population of the state are exposed 
and susceptible. The interventions are planned with the focus on sectors critical for enhancing and protecting 
livelihoods and reducing the impacts of weather/climate related variability. Since the agriculture sector is the main 
stay of state ’s economy and is most impacted by the climate variability adaption intervention are selected to address 
the exist ing challenge. The technological approaches to specifically tailored for the areas are:    
1. Construction of the ground water recharge structure in renovated and modernized community tank towards 
augmentation of ground water resource   
2. Undertake pilot implem entation of solar pump project to facilitate irrigation   
 
Ground Water Recharge Structure : 
136. The project is designed to tap additional water accumulated in the community pond/tank during the monsoon for 
the purpose of ground water recharging without impacti ng the live hood and dependency of the people on the water 
of these community tank.  The selected district is subjected to erratic rainfall including variation in both the intensity 
and dispersion during the recent past. The intense rainfall has resulted i n frequent flooding across the rural areas 
and also lowered the quantum of ground water recharge. The variation in the rainfall pattern, drought situation 
coupled with anthropogenic stress of unregulated ground water withdrawal is resulting into ground wat er depletion 
across the state. The lower ground water availability has in turn impacted the agricultural yield largely and enhanced 
the drudgery of rural woman required to fetch water during the dry season.  
 
137. To enhance the resilience of the community agai nst the weather induced vulnerability and ensure long term 
sustainability DoWR, Govt. of Odisha has designed innovative means of augmenting the ground water resources. 
This innovation is considered as a technological improvement and enhancement of the curr ent scope of ground 
water recharge and practice in the state with much lower investment.  The concrete adaptation measures are 
designed based on the successful experience of the pilot recharge structure constructed.  The concrete adaptation 
measures includ e construction of a ground water recharge structure to tap additional water available in the tank 
during monsoon. The structures are planned to be constructed in an existing partially / completely derelict 
community/MI tank through retrofit and renovation for higher water accumulation /storage. The recharge structure 
is so designed that it will only be tapping water during the scenario of additional water accumulation in the tank 
over and above 1.5 meter above the tank bed level. The tapping point of the gr ound water recharges structure (of 
1.5 m diameter) is designed to be maintained at a height of 1.5 m above the tank bed19. This will ensure that during 
the pre - monsoon/summer, when level inside the tank falls below 1.5 m there won’t be any transfer of the tank 
water to the ground for recharge ensuring water security for the populace depending upon the tank. The project will 
result in optimal utilization of rain water and will also support the communities in the following aspects outlined 
below. The assessme nts of the benefit are based on the documentation from the pilot.   
 Conservation and harvesting of surplus monsoon runoff in reservoir, which otherwise was going un -utilized by 
being drained to watershed/ basin/river or result in inundation/ flooding.  
 The agricultural yield is benefitted due to the marked rise in the ground water level in the tank catchment area.  
It has also resulted in additional cash crop cultivation.  The ground water augmentation resulting from the 
recharge structure constructed in th e renovated tank is estimated on the basis of total water recharge and the 
ground water level rise. It is estimated that a single unit will result in replenishment/recharge of 13 hectare 
meter of ground water in a year (considering normal average annual ra infall of around 1500 mm). The aforesaid 
quantum of recharge will result in ground water table rise of 4.17 meter within a 500 meter radius of the tank 
and will positively impact an area of 25 hectare area. The proposed activity undertaken across 10000 
community tank is expected to result in recharge of 131040 hectare meter of ground water in a year and benefit 
a total area of 250000 hectare.   
 Improved soil moisture in the tank catchment area benefitting agricultural productivity in non -irrigated zone.  
                                                             
19 The detailed design of the project is presented in the feasibility report


---
*Page 55*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 70 
 
 F 
 Subsurface storage space in the pond has increased and inundation of water during monsoon is avoided. Prior 
to the project scenario the community tanks are mostly left unmanaged without necessary renovation and 
maintenance resulting silting and lowering of the reservoir volume. Moreover silting results in lowering of 
permeability and lower penetration of w ater from the tank for the purpose of recharge. So in case of intense 
rain the tank gets quickly filled and also results in frequent inundation of the surrounding areas. The additional 
monsoon run -off is left unutilized.  
 Results in energy saving due to re duction in suction and delivery head as a result of rise in water levels  
 Besides the direct measurable impacts, the artificial recharge schemes has also generated indirect benefit in 
terms of improvement in fauna and flora, reduced drudgery of woman requir ed to fetch water from the ground 
water sources, etc. Besides, the social and economic status of farmers of benefitted zone will also substantially 
improve due to increase in crop production.  
 There is no major concern over water pollution due to these stru ctures. Firstly, Odisha receives more than 
>1000 mm rainfall even though it is erratic. This is a reasonable  quantity  of rain for subsurface dilution of 
pollutants. The design  also has sieves and concrete homey -comb structure that can reduce heavy pollutio n 
load if any . The social norms for keeping other pollutants off the tank will be maintained by the pani panchayat.  
Complete removal of the pollution is not possible through this structure.  
 The status of the new tanks will be known when the baseline study for the new project is initiated.  As of now 
those tanks are in either partially or completely derelict condition with poor water quality.  
 
138. The renovation and re -modernization of the tank will be supported from the existing plan/non -plan budget of th e 
department (DoWr R, GoI) and the central scheme convergence.  
 
Solar Pump  
139. The state is predominantly an agrarian economy with around 39.68% of geographical area (61.80 ha) under 
agricultural use. Out of the cultivated area of 61.80 lakh ha about 34% is u nder irrigated conditions.  As per the 
study by FAO, it is revealed that the highest yields that can be obtained from irrigation are more than double the 
highest yields that can be obtained from rain fed agriculture. Even low -input irrigation is more produ ctive than high -
input rain−fed agriculture. Such are the advantages of being able to control, quite precisely, water uptake by plant 
roots. Even with the potential of 2.88 million20 SPV pumps set the penetration as per MNRE as on January 2016 is 
nil21. With the objective to promote the solar pump in a state the project has proposed for a pilot of 1000 solar 
irrigation pumps of 3 hp capacity (each) across the 15 project districts.  The project will render the following benefit  
1. The project will allocate fund t o promote and develop application of clean  and renewable energy in agricultural 
activity  
2. Additional area of 1800 ha under to be covered under irrigation  
140. The major barrier to the commercial penetration of the solar pump is the higher initial investment a nd lack of 
access to finance which is beyond the capability of the marginal and small farmer to invest or arrange. The pilot is 
therefore planned to demonstrate the benefit and innovate an incubator approach to develop a tailored support 
model for commerci alization of the technology and expansion of the outreach through the learning of the pilot. This 
pilot will improve the probability of success of the future interventions. The net of financial viability gap for the solar 
irrigation pum p project is  planned from GCF.  
 
141. The proof of concept and the benefit that project is likely to render , is identified through research and assessment 
of the benefit obtained through the pilot.  The appropriateness of the interventions are evaluated and found to be 
justified based on the following ground:  
 Its ability to address the climate related stress from variability in the intensity of the rainfall pattern and its impact 
towards destabilizing the normal course of life because of water inundation and resulting social and health 
related impact.  
                                                             
20 CDM potential of SPV pumps in India Pallav Purohit, Axel Michaelowa, HWWI Research Programme 
International Climate Policy  
21 http://mnre.gov.in/file -manager/UserFiles/progress -report -of-solar -pumps -for-irrigation -implemented.pdf


---
*Page 56*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 70 
 
 F 
 Its ability  to response to the climate related stress in the agriculture sector. The lowering of the ground water 
level also attributed to lower recharge largely owing to the variability and intensity of the rainfall.  This is severely 
impacting the agricultural yiel d because of lower soil moisture availability, lower availability of water for irrigation 
and enhancement of pumping cost.  
 Its ability to replenish ground water resources and restore ecological balance  
 Its ability to create a market and promote non -fossilized means of irrigation    
 
142. The effectiveness so the interventions is mapped based on the following aspect  
 Ability towards convergence of various schemes and investment proposition for a common goal of enhancing 
climate resilience.  
 The benefit the proje ct is likely to render as against the cost. The opportunity cost of the project is quite high.  
 The project is planned to be implemented through community level participation and use of indigenous 
resources  
 The project apart from protecting livelihood will create livelihood opportunity such as operator of solar pump, 
labor force for operation and maintenance of the ground water recharge structure and tanks.  
 Ownership of the community as the community will be directly and immediately benefited from the proje cts 
              
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
143. A Social and Environment Screening Procedure and a detailed ESMP plan have been developed for the project 
(See Annexure 4 ) to assess and address environmental and social risks arising from the project.  
 
Environment  
 
144. The project will involve earth works that will be undertaken during the pre monsoon / dry season to reduce erosion 
and air quality issues. Sediment that is removed from the tanks will be placed back on to agricultural land  by the 
farmers , thereby provided a significant environmental and social benefit by returning previously lost sediment t hat 
is normally of high quality back into the agricultural sector.  Resilient crop management practices and water 
management will ensure no further erosion from agriculture lands.  
 
145. The construction of the recharge shafts would bases on the standard design parameters and without creating 
any environmental damages due to constructional material during construction activity. These activities would 
mainly be taken -up during dry season / pre monsoon season particularly during the low or nil water level situations.   
 
146. The farmers would be sensitized on the integrated pest management (IPM) well as organic and low input 
agricultural practices would be promoted during the project. It may noted  that the overall pesticide consumption in 
the project areas and the state of Odisha is much lower than that of the national average. The project would ensure 
regular ground water sampling in order to obviate the risk related to any ground water contaminat ion. The water 
sampling and monitoring would continue even after project completion through State Government concerned 
departments.  
 
147. In order to ensure sustainable water use through  solar pumping system, water budgeting  and water sharing 
master plan is proposed as one of the project activities. Further, the sola r pumping systems would be inte grated 
with promotion of micro -irrigation so as to improve water use efficiency.  
 
Social :  
 
148. The project would enhance the livelihoo d and ensure sustainable income to vulnerable communities. The ground 
water recharge structures would ensure water security in the changes climatic situations.  
149. Reaching out to and including the most marginalized sections of the populations belonging to diverse socio -
economic backgrounds such as the ST, SC, landless, women, small & marginal farmers, etc. residing under tank 
systems with equitable benefit to them w ould be a big challenge for the project and would be resolved through


---
*Page 57*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 70 
 
 F 
extensive consultation. Jal sathis identified from amongst lead farmer,  Pani Panchayats  (PPs) would play a catalytic 
role.  
150. The involvement of pani panchayat in operation  and maintenance  of the structures  would ensure stakeholders 
engagement and ensure decentralized governance mechanisms in implementation of the project . Further, capacity 
Building: Capacity of stakeholders to manage and execute programs at different level has been provide d for.  
151. The project activities are taken in existing silted ponds and does not contemplate any displacement of livelihoods, 
involuntary resettlement and loss of cultural heritages.  
 
Gender  
152. The gender focus is a key element to  ensure inclusion and closely linked to the core indicator:  The project was 
designed in consultation with women’s organizations and CBOs in the field and through a structured consultation  
Project recognizes that participation of women will have a large be aring on the successful  outcomes. Against this, 
mechanisms to ensure their participation have been  developed in most components  (livelihood planning), solar 
energy management and also some of the off -farm enterprises  apart from bringing  in linkage  to angan wadi set up 
of the Women  and Child  Development Department for health and nutritional security. Separate gender action plan 
is prepared and given in the Annexure 6 
 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
153. The executing entity Department of Water Resources (DoWR), Govt. of Odisha, has been using the 
procurement policy of the World Bank  for OCTMP -I. Procurement of all goods, works and services are 
proposed to be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Pro curement in Investment Project Financing, 
Goods, works, non -consulting and Consulting services, July 2016  for the funding activities supported by 
World Bank .  The details of procurement including the first 18 month of procurement  plan will be finalized 
during the appraisal mission  of the World Bank.  The procurement procedures pertaining to procedures and 
methods to be followed for  procurement is part of the OCTMP Procurement  Manual and are to be used.  
 
154. The state will follow  its own works code for activities supported by Govt. of Odisha under the project 
(structural dimensions of the tank improvement are part of the OPW code) . All agencies, specifically the PPs 
will follow community based purchase procedures.  Both these procedures are permitted as per the new 
guideline of World Bank.  Therefore there is no contradiction in any procurement under any activities as most 
of the conditions are compatible and in conformity with the World Bank procurement guideline. The OCTMP 
phase I project supported by World Bank, in the recent appraisal found no anomaly. Once this project is 
approved it will be in sync with the phase II of the OCTMP (new project) and the procurement plan and 
manual will be prepared during the appra isal stage and get validated by all stakeholders.  Therefore, no delay 
is foreseen. The detailed procurement plan is presented in the Annexure 7. 
 
155. The methods for National Competitive Bidding for the procurement shall be based on the following 
principles:  
 Only the model bidding documents for NCB agreed with the GOI Task Force [and as amended from 
time to time], shall be used for bidding;  
 Invitations to bid shall be advertised in at least one widely circulated national daily newspaper, at 
least 30days prior to the deadline for the submission of bids;  
 Outside a pre -determined margin or “bracket” of prices shall not be used in the project;  
 Rate contracts entered into by Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, will not be acceptable as 
a substitute for NCB  procedures. Such contracts will be acceptable however for any procurement 
under  
 Shopping procedures;  
 Two or three envelop system will not be used.  
·  
156. For the consulting services (a) quality and cost based selection procedure, (b) Single -Source Selection 
(SSS) and (c) selection of individual consultant’s  method will be used.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 70 
 
 F 
157. The project will follow the process used in the OCTMP -phase 1 and good practi ces established by the state 
in several multilateral projects. This is already part of a financial manual. The key objectives are as follows: 
The primary objective of sound financial management is (a) to ensure smooth flow of funds to the different 
levels of executing agencies so that t here are no delays in the implementation of activities, (b) all financial 
transactions are as per rules and procedures and in line with the norms of the project, (c) all such transactions 
are duly accounted for in the prescribed formats and (d) all payment s due to be made to any service providers 
are done in efficient, speedy and transparent manner. Since the implementation arrangement for the project 
is at different levels, it is important that there is a coherence and formality in book keeping, accounting  
policies, procedures, transactions, audit, procurement, , financial report and project monitoring etc. aligned 
with the norms of the World Bank as well the financial rules of the Government. An important objective of this 
document and the Financial Manual  is to guide all the project implementing authorities and participants in 
general and the finance persons in particular, in the financial operational issues in the project. The project 
will aim at producing real time, relevant and reliable financial inform ation that would allow the project 
executives to plan and implement the project, monitor compliance with agreed procedures, and guide the 
project progress towards the set objectives.  
 
158. AE-NABARD will also guide in fiduciary risk management and establish a seamless fund flow both advance 
and utilization basis. NABARD has been working with Department of Water Resources on other projects and 
is fully aware about the treasury system and financial control systems.


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 57 OF 70 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
 
Fiduciary:  Projects sites are generally remote. The 
risks relate to two aspects:  
(a)Management Performance of Pani 
Panchayats(PPs) and  GWRS  
(b)Performance of pumping system and livelihood 
enhancement  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The state has early experience of working and with decentralized implementation framework and the overall risk is to 
be moderate. For (a) PPs would receive training and capacity building on book -keeping, project and financial 
management and regular visits from the PPs institutional support team.  
For (b) the project will provide technical assistance  and supervise the work of the contractors under the supervision of 
the Directorate of Ground Water Survey & Investigation (GWSI ). In addition the project will hire accredited consultants 
with accreditation in energy audit as well as support in agriculture and water who will assist PMU in project G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
159. The technical risks with regard to project implementation is proposed to be mitigated through capacity 
building e.g. use of low input practices, integrated pest management, use of solar pumping systems, 
installation of recharge structure etc. Components with regard to training, awareness and capacity building 
has been incorporated in the project designed and interventions planned.  
 
160. Financial management risks and operational risks are low as the standard o perating procedures are in 
place that include audit system, quality ma nual, and operational manual of Pani Panchayats ( PPs). In 
addition the project would get support of the external agency in related manuals synthetized from pump 
vendors, warranty provisions, etc. AE-NABARD has handled several projects in water and agriculture sector, 
they will provide fund management and com pliance related support. AE is already work ing with D epartment 
of Water Resources (DoWR), Govt. of Odisha under its infrastructure funding i.e. Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund (RIDF) . NABARD would guide in development of necessary transparent and eff ective 
financial management systems for the project. The risk management details are presented under section 
G2.  
 
161. The risks associated with groundwater recharge as well environmental and social risks have been 
identified necessary framework for mitigation  of the same has been presented in the Environmental & Social 
Management Plan (ESMP).  The major issues in terms of sustainable crop and water management practices 
are proposed to be tackled through specific interventions proposed under the project.      
 
162. Project during design has effectively engaged stakeholder’s  consultation and their feedback has been 
incorporated in the proposal. During the implementation decision on beneficiary selection, ensuring of the 
equity of benefits is proposed to be t hrough com munity consultation involving community based 
organizations  such as pani panchayats and village panchayats.  The project would have a grievance 
redressal  mechanism and the mechanism will also include direct feedback to the AE.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 58 OF 70 
 G 
management. AE –NABARD will provide fund management and audit support. Core tank improv ement project is 
covered under the World Bank supervision. This procurement will be independent of that by the DoWR.   
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Environment and Social:  
a) Soil erosion in catchment areas due to 
increased runoff  
b) Support from Local Community  
c) Pollutants in Catchment area mix with ground 
water  
d) Overdraft of ground water  
e) Equity in selection of beneficiary and water use   Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
a) The activities related to desilting would be taken -up in such a way to reduce likely erosion and runoff. 
Promotion of soil and water conservation works in catchment areas would be undertaken  
b) Selection of tanks would be done th rough community consultation and their priorities for taking up these 
activities  
c) The project would promote integrated pest management and nutrient management strategy in the 
catchment areas of the tanks.  
d) One of the major intervention under the proposed pr oject is development of crop water budgeting as 
well as water sharing master plan preparation (component 2 sub -component – 2.3 & 2.3). These 
planning processes would include the sustainable development & management of ground water 
resources.  
e) Beneficiaries for Project intervention i.e. solar pumps would be selected based on the vulnerability, 
resource efficiency and technical norms  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk Category  Level of Impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Technical:  
(a) Practice of GWRS installation  is not a common 
practice and villagers/farmers may be 
apprehensive initially  
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
(b) Solar pane l maintenance and pumping  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measures  
(a) There will be orientation of para workers through live demonstration and they will act as facilitators for others.  
(b) Farmers are familiar with pumping system, the vendor certification programme will include the input to barefoot 
workers, women in particular to be trained in panel maintenance, recycling of batteries etc. by the supplier .   
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Siltation, sedimentation and waterlogging may be a 
challenge based on excess rainfall, terrain and gradient Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 59 OF 70 
 G 
in some of the tanks and may delay the installation of 
recharge shaft  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The tank identification and feasibility study that has inbuilt hydrological investigation would take care of that. The 
department has a plan to train 500 engineers for the purpose for ensuring timely work completion and quality of the 
installation.  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Timely recording of transactions and book keeping 
especially for the women entrepreneurs and farmers  
 
 Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
A massive financial literary input will be part of the capacity building strategy. The business planning exercise of the 
Farmers Producers Organization ( FPOs ) and a simple book keeping training will address this issue.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Functioning of the solar pumps, its performance and 
maintenance  
 
 Technical and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As part of the implementation strategy a vendor certification programme has been planned to train the village level 
women and jal sathis who will ensure proper maintenance as per the standard operating procedure developed in the 
project. Still there is a p ossibility of disruption due to climatic conditions of the eastern region having cloudy weather 
to reduce performance of the pumps and theft of panels and breakage due to children and cattle. This will be 
addressed gradually and building a strong social no rm. However, the cloudy weather of the reason affecting 
performance and its impact cannot be discounted.  
 
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors.  
 
Not applicable  
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 70 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  
under the Results Management F ramework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level22 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable 
development Increased 
climate -resilient 
sustainable development  Overall, the project will contribute to the Fund  level impacts of Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities, and regions and 
Increased resilience of health and wellbeing, and food and water security. Combined with 
government co -financing, GCF resources will  support an integrated approach to 
strengthening the resilience of smallholder farm ers in water stressed districts contributing to 
climate smart water management  integrated with sustainable crop planning . The 
interventio ns will directly benefit 5.19 million  people  in the State of Odisha covering 12% of 
the population of the state. The project would also promote sustainable strategy towards 
energy security involving low emission crop water management.  
The specific paradigm shift objectives of the proje ct are:  
 Augmentation of ground water recharge to improve water table and water quality 
conditions in rural areas (Gram Panchayat) of the state through adoption of recharge 
systems in existing village ponds / tanks.   
 Sustainability of ground water based (domestic / irrigation) Schemes at GP level. 
Revival of defunct community tank used as drinking water sources for reducing 
vulnerability.  
 Use of solar pumps for irrigation as part of low emission climate resilient crop 
planning strategy . 
 Integration of cli mate resilience planning in the grass -root level institutions involving 
community based organizations.  
 Create a knowledge base for enabling policy and regulatory framework for market 
transformation  
This is a unique project that links NAPCC’s Mission on Su stainable Agriculture, Water 
Mission (integrated water resource management component) along with National Solar 
Mission (solar energy deemed generation: appliance component). It also links with State 
Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC) identified Mission s: Water Mission, Agriculture 
Mission and Energy Mission.  The project is also aligned with Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sichai 
Yojana.  The Integration of solar energy is first of its kind in the state and would help in wider 
replication, opening of the private ma rket for solar pumps and large scale adoption of clean 
and non -pollution sources of energy.  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(Move ) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
 *A2 Total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries; 
Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population  Assessment 
reports would 
include  At least 
one third 
of this  
population 
are food  5.19 
million 
(12% of 
total 
populatiAssumed normal 
rainfall for at least 2 
consecutive years.  
                                                             
22 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement 
Frameworks available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 70 
 
 H 
 Project reports: 
annual reports; 
mid -term and 
final evaluation; 
project  
MIS Database  
 insecure 
and are at 
risk due 
hydrologic
al and 
agricultura
l drought  on of 
Odisha 
vulnera
ble 
people 
would 
be 
benefitt
ed  
directly                                       
{2.59 
million 
male 
(49.90
%)    
and                                   
2.60 
million 
female 
(50.10
%)}. 
The 
indirect 
benefici
aries 
would 
be 
about 
10.78 
million . smooth flow of 
convergent funds  
A2.0 Increased resilience 
of health and we ll-being, 
and food and water 
security  A2.2 Number of food -
secure households (in 
areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts)  
 
 Gender 
sensitive 
Household 
Survey  
 
 At least 
one third 
of this 
population 
are food 
insecure 
and are at 
risk due 
hydrologic
al and 
agricultura
l drought  50% of the 
targeted 
households 
to be food 
secure and 
water secure  All the 
targeted 
househ
old to 
be food 
secure 
and 
water 
secure 
from 
agricult
ure and 
drinking 
water 
point of 
view 
(1.03 
million 
househ
olds as 
direct 
bene fici
ary 
househ
olds), 
50% 
women 
benefici
ary Assumed normal 
rainfall for at least 2 
consecutive years.  
smooth flow of 
convergent funds  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission M1.1 Tonnes of carbondi -
oxide equivalent (tCO 2 
eq)  reduced or avoided as 
a result of Fund Funded 
project     Baseline audit 
and concurrent 
audit report  
      0 
No solar 
pump 
installed  
      - 
 2614 
tonnes/
year. 
1000 
solar Channel partner 
linkage and timely 
procurement and 
smooth flow of 
convergent funds


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 70 
 
 H 
energy access and 
power generation   
 for 
irrigation.  pumps 
installed
. 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)   Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
Cross -Cutting  ACrC1 Number of 
technologies and 
innovative technologies 
transferred or licensed to 
promote climate resilience  Gender -
sensitive 
Household 
surveys.  
Recharge well 
and aquifer 
yield monitoring  
Adoption of 
climate resilient 
crops from 
concurrent 
report  
Water quality 
readings.  No ground 
water 
recharge 
shaft is 
used in 
tanks. 
More than 
75% of 
the tanks 
are 
derelict 
and 
insufficient 
to handle 
water 
stress .  Ground 
water 
recharge 
structure in 
5000 tanks .  Ground water 
Recharge 
structures in 
10000  tanks 
covered along 
with the 
remaining 
households . Timely 
procurement, 
execution of 
tanks and 
closure of the 
IBRD loan for the 
OCTMP Phase 
II.  
Smooth flow of 
convergent funds  
MCrC2  Number of 
technologies and 
innovative solutions 
(including gender -friendly 
and solutions) transferred 
or licensed to support low -
emission development  Baseline audit 
and concurrent 
audit report  
 No solar 
pumps for 
irrigation 
installed  At least 300 
pumps ar e 
installed  1000 solar 
pumps are 
installed  Channel partner 
linkage and 
timely 
procurement  
Smooth flow of 
convergent funds  
 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development  A5.1 Number of gender 
friendly policies, 
institutions, coordination 
mechanisms and 
regulatory frameworks 
that improve incentives 
for climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation.  1. Pani 
Panchayat 
Process 
Monitoring 
Report  
2. Annual 
Reports of 
State level 
Steering 
Comm ittee 3. 
Water policy 
briefs.  Climate 
Responsiv
e planning 
process 
currently 
not 
integrated 
in the 
communit
y level 
institutions  
 
      - Community 
level 
institutions 
(including 50 % 
women) -pani 
panchayats 
integrate the 
climate 
resilient/ 
responsive 
planning for 
10,000 tanks.  
Benefits to the 
community 
regarding 
resilient 
planning and 
management 
captured and 
policy 
framework 
suggested for 
integration of Political will and 
community 
support


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 70 
 
 H 
project learning 
in water policy 
framework  
Project/programme 
Components (linked to 
outputs)  Components  that contribute to outcomes  
1. Ground Water Recharge 
System  installed in10000  
tanks as a concrete adaptation 
measure to ensure ground 
water conservation to reduce 
vulnerability in 15 water 
stressed districts of the state  No. of ground water 
recharge structures 
installed  
 Final 
assessment 
report  
Procurement 
Document  
Progress 
Monit oring 
report  
 No tank 
has 
recharge 
shaft now  5000 tanks 
will be fitted 
with 
recharge 
shaft.  10000  tanks 
will be fitted 
with recharge 
shaft  Timely 
installation of 
GWRS.  
2. Increase in  resilience  of 
health and wellbeing 
vulnerable people through food 
security and water security .  No. of  vulnerable people  
With increased climate 
resilience,  
Preparation of crop water 
budgeting plan, water 
sharing plan, livelihood 
improvement plan  HH survey  
Document of 
department of 
Agriculture & 
Cooperation  
NFSA 
impleme ntation 
progress report  
Surveillance 
data More than 
75% of the 
identified 
vulnerable 
people are 
food 
insecure  
 
70% of the 
surveyed 
area 
report 
water 
borne 
disease  At least 
50% (2. 6 
million) of 
the 
vulnerable 
people with 
increased 
climate 
resilience 
with 
additional 
days of 
food  
Out of 
which 1.3 
mn female 
and 1.3 
million male   5.19 
vulnerable 
people get with 
increased 
climate 
resilience 
ensuring food 
security,  
Crop water 
budgeting plan, 
water sharing 
plan and 
livelihood plan 
prepared  Proper tank 
improvemen t 
plan prepared 
and PPs and 
community self 
manage  
3. Solar pumps installed in pilot 
locations for demonstration 
and training to village level 
para professionals for 
operation and maintenance  No. of pumps installed as 
per the standards  
 
Training to village level 
para professionals  Vendor survey  
Progress report  
 No 
installation 
as of now  
 
No 
specific 
training 
related to 
operation 
and 
maintenan
ce as of 
now  At least 500 
pumps are 
installed  1000 pumps 
are installed as 
per standards  
2000 village 
level pa ra 
professionals 
are trained and 
certified.  Successful 
procurement, 
agreement and 
installation  
Training and 
certification  
4. Capacity building plans for 
livelihood support systems to 
community to build resilience  No. of jalsathis and 
village  para professionals 
of PPs trained  
No. of farmers trained  
No. of landless 
households use alternate 
livelihood  Training 
modules  
Training report  
HH survey  
Progress 
Report  
 Only about 
5 % of the 
members 
of 
PPs/PRIs 
have got 
any 
training on 
water 
managem 300000 
farmers and 
150000 
landless 
population to 
be covered 
under training 
on poultry and 
fishery. of 
which 20000 
village para -Successful timely 
delivery of the 
capacity bulling 
input 
Proper 
identification and 
management of 
training of 
trainers


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 70 
 
 H 
ent/liveliho
od professionals 
and 500 
engineers 
trained.  
(50% are 
females)  
5. Quality Monitoring system 
for ground water governance 
established  Preparation of quality 
management database 
and MIS, modelling tool, 
baseline and independent 
assessment , process 
monitoring  Database  
Tank Quality 
Management 
Module  
Progress 
Monitoring 
Report  Primary 
mapping 
has taken 
place, a 
proper 
database 
is missing  Coverage 
of 1st phase 
tanks under 
OCTMP II  The quality 
Management 
system covers 
all 10000 tanks  
including 
quality 
management 
database and 
MIS, modelling 
tol , baseline 
and 
independent 
assessment 
audit report  Timely data 
capture 
connectivity, 
validation of data 
captured by jal 
sathis  
6. Knowledge management 
(institutional and regulatory) 
input provided for water and 
clean energy market 
development  Preparat ion of policy brief 
for ground water 
management, SOP  
 
Science to policy 
documents developed to 
create an enabling 
environment for m arket 
transformation  Policy briefs  
Notifications  
Models and 
Toolkits  
Process 
Monitoring 
Report  No 
knowledge 
capture 
system as 
of now  Integration 
with PP and 
PRI system  
 Policy briefs  
Notifications  
Models and 
Toolkits  
Process 
Monitoring 
Report 
prepared  Timely and 
systematic 
capture of 
lessons; 
proactive 
facilitation for 
institutional 
development and 
policy 
development  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Component 1:     
Activity 1.1. Baseline study for 10,000 tanks are 
conducted and database developed.  Based  on the indicator 
sets (social, 
environmental, 
hydrological, gender 
sensitive), schedules and 
database format to be 
developed   
Activity  1.2. Tank improvement plan and estimate for the 
recharge shaft installation developed  
 TIMP is a pre -Feasibility 
participatory planning 
document. The  tender 
document  to be prepared 
based on TIMP but as per 
the cost norms for award 
(specified in 2.1) 
feasibility report.  
Jalsathi identification   
Activity 1.3 Standard Operating procedure for installation 
and maintenance developed  
 Based on the best 
practices developed 
under OCTMPO Phase I  
SOP approval .  
Activity 1.4 Ground water recharge system installed in 
10000 tanks   Construction contractors 
are mobilized through 
standard procurement 
process


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 70 
 
 H 
Component 2:     
Activity 2.1 Tank water level and other assessments 
completed for all 10000  tanks  Tank ayacut survey and 
baseline water level 
assessment done, 
modelled for normal, 
deficient and excess 
precipitation.  Assessment 
report , work contract and 
execution.   
Activity 2.2 Crop water budgeting based on agro -climatic 
zone prepared  Based on the agro -
climatic condition the 
most efficient crop water 
budget prepared, district 
irrigation plan, 
contingency plan modified 
in modelled scenario.    
Activity   2.3 Water sharing master plan developed  PPs work out the water 
sharing plan in a 
consultative process 
based on the additional 
moisture expectation, 
cost recovery discussed   
Activity   2.4 Livelihood improvement plan prepared  Livelihood improvement 
plan prepared based on 
livelihood analysis, food 
security of all 
stakeholders including the 
landless   
Activity   2.5 Water quality sample drawn from random 
wells  The water quality test is 
to be conducted as per 
the standards specified 
by OSPCB  Ground water div ision will draw 
water sample through jalsathis  
Testing is done at the standard labs  
Component 3:     
Activity   3.1 Identification criteria for 1000 solar pump 
installation developed  Identification criteria 
developed based on tank 
location, solar insolation 
and easy panel access 
for maintenance as well 
as security   
Activity  3.2 Procurement plan and standard supplier 
contract for 1000 solar pumps developed  The standard documents 
are revisited to include 
skill development, 
certification  Identification of women to be skilled  
Activity   3.3 1  1000 solar pump installed  and baseline 
audit completed  
 Solar pump installation 
involving the PPs and 
also the identified para 
professionals  
 The pumps are installed as per the 
phasing  
 
Activity  3.4 2000 village level para -professionals are 
certified in operation and maintenance of 
pumps  Identified para 
professionals (mostly 
women) to be trained and 
certified on maintenance 
of panels, batteries and 
jal sathis on pump 
operation   
Activity  3.5 Energy saving report generated  Post installation audit 
conducted   
Component 4:     
Activity  4.1 Training need assessment for sample 
households in tank command and PPs 
completed  Training need 
assessment of target 
households in tank Training need assessment to have 
clear focus on target groups 
(women, BPL, landless)


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 70 
 
 H 
command and also the 
PPs 
Activity  4.2 Training modules prepared and partners 
identified for both training and demonstration  Training modules on 
climate resilient practices, 
water sharing, P P 
strengthening developed  Consultation with community and 
development of raining module as 
per the need. Interface with WALMI 
and its partners for training delivery 
and line department for demo  
Activity  4.3 Training of 500 engineer 20,000 jal sathis 
compl eted and certified  Departmental training for 
tank improvement, 
recharge shaft integration 
and monitoring and 
identification and training 
of 20,000 jal sathis.  This is a critical input and a 
structured training programme will 
be developed for engineers and 
paraprofessionals  
Activity  4.4 No of training and demonstration organized 
in convergence with relevant departmental 
programmes of the government   
 Training and 
demonstrations to be 
conducted in 
convergence w ith line 
department based on the 
project need   
Activity  4.5 No of landless and women members 
covered under capacity building for off -farm 
initiatives  Training linkage on non -
farm/off farm activities 
and fishery related 
activities to be imparted in 
convergence with fishery 
& ARD, ORMAS, SIRD 
and private sector  As far possible linkages to be 
developed for landless women on 
skill development, SHG and bank 
linkage  
Activity  4.6 No of FPOs are linked  Collectivization of 
produce strengthening of 
FPOs to a ccess and 
equity and grant from 
SFAC and other 
intermediary institutions  Linkages to market and 
strengthening of the FPOs  
 
Component 5:     
Activity  5.1 A geospatial tank quality management 
database and MIS prepared  A satellite based 
monitoring system to be 
integrated with the tank 
database developed by 
the project  A web based MIS and tank 
database to see the change in 
water and crop scenario (both 
satellite based and ground trothed)  
Activity  5.2 Water Quality and dynamic ground water 
modelling tool devel oped  Department will do a 
scientific modeling of 
ground water recharge 
and usage, water quality 
etc. This will enrich the 
climate information  A fully developed model and toolkit 
to be prepared  
Activity  5.3 Baseline and independent assessment 
report based on project objective and 
indicators prepared  Project monitoring report 
to be prepared by service 
provider for PMU on a 
concurrent basis. It will 
also interface with third 
party assessor engaged 
by NIE.   
Activity  5.4 Process monitoring report that estimate s 
adaptation and mitigation benefit prepared  Embedded experts and 
jal sathis to undertake 
process monitoring of 
critical processes 
enshrined in the project 
that leads to adaptation 
and mitigation benefit    
Component 6:     
Activity  6.1 Preparation of policy briefs for Odisha 
ground water management and development Inputs to be provided to 
task force on state water 
policy and other relevant 
polices related to this Consultation and research input to 
feed to task force and steering 
committee


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 70 
 
 H 
 
 
 
 
 regulation, state water policy and relevant 
facilitation  project for market  
transformation   
Activity  6.2 Process documentation and preparation 
standard operating procedure for 
development of solar pumping value chain  Standard operating 
procedure to be 
developed to build a 
vibrant solar power 
ecosystem in the state 
and trained women in 
villages providing last 
mile link.   
The energy department and 
regulator to develop an ambitious 
plan for solar energy integration 
with agriculture for climate 
resilience with mitigation co-benefit . 
Activity  6.3 Science to policy knowledge product 
framework developed  Science to policy frame 
work and knowledge 
products and publications 
developed  Research based peer learning 
materials developed and published 
that aids in creating an enabling 
framework  
Activity  6.4 Process document for convergence with 
other departments are developed  Convergence modalities 
agreed with other 
departments and vetted 
at the steering committee  The steering c ommittee vets the 
convergence mechanism and fund 
flow 
Activity  6.5 Quarterly project newsletter published  Newsletter publication 
with stories from field and 
important milestone  Publication of digital and physical 
newsletter, social media integration  
Activity  6.6 Ten peer learning workshops are conducted 
during the lifecycle of the project : Workshops 
are organized categorize d into inception, 
peer learning.   Workshop managed and learnings 
shared  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how th e interim/mid -term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.  
 
163. Primary responsibility of monitoring rests with EE (Department of Water Resources)  and the PMU established 
under the project. The PMU will be supported by technical support agency / knowledge partner experience d in climate 
change adaptation, resilience building, having substantial experience in agriculture and water issues in the area.  
PMU and knowledge partner generate quarterly progress report compiled from monthly MIS and assist in annual 
work plan budget formulation and approval, support the independent audit and assessment. The standard formats 
will be as in practice in OCTMP I (PD O level monitoring established by World bank) and this project will be guided 
by indicators and outcomes as per performance management framework for tracking based on the input from AE. 
The district level project implementation would be monitored by distri ct steering committee. The last mile monitoring 
will be done by the jal sathis (ensuring participatory monitoring) who will upload the data through smartphones based 
on the parameters.  
  
164. The second level of assessment will be done by Odisha Remote Sensing Application Centre ( ORSAC ) and Ground 
Water Survey & Investigation ( GWS &I) which will be both satellite based aggregation and mobile app based  data 
collection.  
• Directorate of Ground Water Survey and Investigation (GWS&I) will conduct geo-physical tests through out -
sourcing, in the vicinity of tank / pond, to ascertain the lithological parameters which will help in assessing the 
performance of the recharge system.


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 70 
 
 H 
• GWS&I will monitor ground water table and water quality twice a year (May & October) near a ll tank locations 
where the Ground Water Recharge Structures ( GWRS ) have been constructed through out -sourcing. This will 
help in assessing impact of GWRS in the locality.  
• The captured monitoring data is to be entered into a dedicated software / website by  GWS&I for scientific use 
and public information.  
• The impact assessment of the Scheme will be done for three years after its closure, by an agency of repute, 
selected by DoWR.  
• Spatial tools b ased Third Party Monitoring of Water bodies, Recharge Pits and water management  
 
165. Further, recharge to ground water depends on precipitation, surface water bodies like reservoirs, tank etc., 
favorable  lithological landform and structural set up etc. Satellite imagery facilitates better appreciations of recharge 
conditi on by studying all the said parameters in an integrated manner. In this background,  it is proposed to set up an 
outcome based space based monitoring protocol to cater to the following under the aegis of ORSAC, the nodal 
agency of State for implementation o f RS & GIS based activities:  
i. Monitoring of status of water bodies - Using multi temporal satellite images the status of water spread, turbidity 
and spread of aquatic vegetation would be monitored temporarily.  
ii. Irrigated field – Coverage of irrigated field, water inundation, water logging etc would be monitored using High 
resolution satellite data.  
iii. Crop Area/Vegetation Monitoring:   Remote sensing data would be used for assessment of crop acreage, 
condition and vigor using Normalized Difference Vegetation Ind ex (NDVI).  
On pilot basis on selected areas moisture studies using Microwave Radar data/SAR data and integrated land crop 
inventory is proposed to be taken up for outcome based monitoring after commission of construction of recharge 
structures .  
166. AE-NABARD will provide concurrent fund monitoring and operational support in the entire project implementation. 
The same would in the form of financial management, monitoring and evaluation, reporting to GCF as well as to NDA 
as per the requirement s and providing of  technical support in terms adherence to technical, environment and social 
standards, procurement processes, during implementation.  
167. The primary responsibility for day -to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Executing  
Entity i.e. Department of Water Resources and PMU to be set -up under the project.  The PMU (Project Director)  will 
develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project  and inform any delays or difficulties 
during implementation, including the implementation of the Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the 
appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Director w ill also ensure that all project 
staff m aintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.  
 
168. A project inception workshop will be held after necessary project documents and agreements are signed. These 
inception workshops would be held at State  level as well as District level. The inception workshop s would aim  to: a) 
re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project implementation; b) discuss the roles and re sponsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re -assess baselines as 
needed, and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) 
review financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual 
audit; e) plan and schedule Project Review  meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Direc tor 
would compile  and finalize  State and District level inception workshop reports  in two month s after the inception 
workshop  and submit the same to AE -NABARD  for approval.  
 
169. A project implementation report (PIR) will be prepared for each year  (annual report) . The EE, PMU (Project 
Manager), the NABARD Regional Office and NABARD Head Office  will provide objective input s to the annual 
implementation report . The EE / PMU (Project Director) will ensure that the indicators included in the project results 
framework are monitored annually well in advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress 
in the PIR. The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Steering Committ ee and other stakeholders. The NABARD


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 70 
 
 H 
Head Office will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The final project PIR, 
along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding response, will serve as the final proje ct report. Semi -
annual reporting  on quarterly basis as per NABARD’s requirements will be undertaken by PMU – Project Director . 
 
170. Monitoring and Evaluation by AE would be based on the offside and onsite monitoring of the project. The offsite 
monitoring would  be based on the quarterly progress reporting by EE and other impact reports submitted by the EE 
based on GIS technologies and ground water monitoring reports complemented by online ITE platform.   The onsite 
monitoring will include quarterly (and more fre quently  if required) field monitoring by NABARD Regional Office and 
Head Office. District Development Managers (DDMs) of NABARD posted in the project districts would also be 
engaged in the field level monitoring on more frequent basis.  Additional Monitori ng & Evaluation, implementation 
quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be provided by the NABARD Head Office as needed. The project 
target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level 
M&E. AE would also participate in the Project Steering Committees at State Level as well as District level through 
AE’s (NABARD’s) Regional and District Office. NABARD Regional Office will regularly interact with the PMU and 
Project Director as needed,  including through participation in quarterly review meetings planned under the project, 
quarterly and half yearly field visits as well as through annual review missions.  
 
171. AE NABARD  will take-up annual external audit of the project with te rms and reference approved by AE. The 
external audit will review the GCF special/trust account and re lated statements of expenditure under the project. The 
same would additional to regular concurrent auditing followed for fund disbursements as well as audi ting being 
followed by Executing Entity as per the Government norms.  
 
172. Interim Evaluation / Mid-term review:  An independent midterm review will be conducted within two and half 
years of project being effective and shall include  a review on institutional, technical, environmental, social,  gender,  
economic and financial issues, assessment on the performance  of the funded activity against the GCF investment 
criteria and assess, as the case may be, the need for mid -course corrections .  The final report will be  cleared by the 
NABARD Regional Office  and Head Office and will be placed before Project Steering Committee . The outcome of 
the midterm review will be incorporated as recommendations for improving the implementation  during the second 
half of the project’s duration.  
 
173. Final review:  Within three  months of the closing of the project, the EE/ PMU (project Director)  will submit a 
project completion report to NABARD  that includes evaluation of outcome an impact indicato rs and assessment 
based on the  GCF investment  criteria and project result framework. Independent Terminal /Final Evaluation (TE) 
would be initiated by AE within three months of project completion and report would be completed in six  months. The 
final TE report will be cleared by the NABARD Regional Of fice and Head Office , and will be approved by the Project 
Steering Committee .


---
*Page 72*
---

ANNEX ES 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 70 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents. 
List of Annexes 
Annexure 1: Revised Feasibility Report 
Annexure 2: Integrated Financial Model 
Annexure 3: Term Sheet 
Annexure 4: Environmental & Social Management Plan  
Annexure 5: OCTMP I Evaluation Report 
Annexure 6: Gender Analysis Report 
Annexure 6A: Gender & Social Inclusion Action Plan 
Annexure 7: Procurement Policy and Plan 
Annexure 8: Accredited Entity Fee Details 
Annexure 9: Stakeholder Consultation Report of Odisha, India 
Annexure 9 (A): Justification to the Comments on Stakeholder Consultation Report 
Annexure 10: Letter of confirmation from Government of Odisha on co-financing 
Annexure 11: Map indication location of project. 
Annexure 12: NDA No Objection Letter I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility Study  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if applicable )  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (If applicable)  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation /Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I  
☒ Environmental and  Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
(If applicable)  
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☒ Evaluation Report  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 73*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 8 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 74*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 8 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Ground water recharge and Solar Micro Irrigation to ensure food 
security and enhance resilience in vulnerable tribal areas of Odisha  
Accredited entity  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) c ategory  Category B  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2017 -03-01 
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Odia  
Link to disclosure  http://www.nabard.org/content.aspx?id=643  
The ESMP contains an impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the 
requirements of PS1 for a category B project.  
Other link(s)  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2017 -03-01 
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Odia  
Link to disclosure  http://www.nabard.org/content.aspx?id=643  
Other link(s)  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  N/A  
________