=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20170314095510+09'00'
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2013
/ModDate: D:20170314105253+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2013
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum V 
Funding proposal package for FP04 2 GCF/B.16/0 7/Add.05 
14 March 201 7 Meeting of the Board  
4 – 6 April 2017  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem  11(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ Irrigation development and adaptation of irrigated
agriculture to climate change in semi -arid Morocco ” submitted by AFD ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents  are presented as sub mitted by the accredited entity,  and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 5 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the  funding proposal template  
  
  Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
 The total num ber of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 75 
 B 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Irrigation development and adaptation of  irrigated  agriculture 
to climate change in semi -arid Morocco  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Morocco  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Ministry of Environment  
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity : Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries – 
Direction de l’Irrigation et de l’Aménagement de l’Espace 
Agricole ( Directorate of Irrigation and the Development of 
Agricultural Areas ) DIAEA - Office Régional de Mise en 
Valeur  Agricole du Tafilalet  (Regional Office of Agricultural 
Development of Tafilalet ), ORMVAT  
Beneficiary : Kingdom of Morocco   
A.1.7. Project size  category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  Modified  version submitted on january 2017 of initial Funding 
proposal submitted on 07/0 8/2015  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Zacharie MECHALI, Project Task Team  Leader (TTL)  
Laura BUIS, co -TTL 
Organization  Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
Email address  mechaliz@afd.fr  ; buisl@afd.fr   
Telephone number  +33 15344 4149 /4681  / +33  625572915  
Mailing  address  5 rue Roland Barthes 75012 Paris , FRANCE  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appl iances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk  associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)


---
*Page 6*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 75 
 B 
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☒ 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme  Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives  and primary 
measurable benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in 
section C . 
The project  intersects  several national strategies:  the overarching  Plan Maroc vert  (Green Morocco Plan, GMP ), the 
Irrigation Extension Programme  (160 000 ha planned for a total investment amount of 21,5 billion Dirhams)  and the 
agriculture resilience and water preservation strategy . It is aligned with Morocco ’s adaptation strategy for 2020 as 
described in its INDC . 
The project area , the Boudnib  Valley,  is located in the semi -arid Tafilalet  region  (see map in Annex 1 and photos in  
Annex 2 ), in the South -East part of the Kingdom, characterized  by a high vulnerability to the effects of climate change 
(increased temperatures and water scarcity). The local population relies on oasis -based agriculture along the Guir wadi 
(intermittent river) ; it has been severely affected by several years of draugh t as well as by the irregularity of the wadi 
which has caused destruction of fields and houses.  Most of the oasis farmers rely on  agriculture combined with  other 
activities (daily labor) in Moroccan cities and sometimes further (medium or long term migrati on). Recently, a new 
economic dynamic has changed the situation on the ground: investors coming from other areas of the country , bringing 
high financial and technical capabilities, have developed relatively large scale farms for the production of quality d ate 
(madjhool  variety) and olives. These investments take place outside the oasis areas and are permitted by  the 
exploitation of groundwater (pumping).  This economic dynamic, new to the region and largely supported by the State, 
will benefit the local popu lation through job creation (qualified and unqualified labor) as well as the stimulation of a local 
investment dynamic i n similar, smaller scale investments for the production of quality dates, highly valued on local and 
international markets.  
The sustain ability of this dynamic depends on both the long term preservation of the underground water resource s (in 
the context of increased aridity) as well a balanced development between highly profitable agriculture outside of the 
oasis and subsistence agricultur e inside.  
Building on the opportunity created by the construction  of a new dam upstream of the Boudnib Valley, the project’s 
purpose is to secure the benefits and development potential of the current economic dynamic on the date value -chain, 
increasing th e resilience of a highly vulnerable area with regard to climate change. The project is organized in three 
components:  
C1: Connecting to the dam and transfer of surface water to the Boudnib Valley  [4 5,6 MEUR]  
C2: Building  the climate - resilience of oasis communities through a holistic approach [12 ,5 MEUR]  
C3:  Cross -cutting sustainability measures (technical assistance, groundwater preservation, environmental and social 
impacts management) [ 8,3 MEUR ] 
C4: Project Management [2 ,4 MEUR]  
The detailed breakdown of costs is available in the term sheet. The overall cost of the project is 76 MEUR  including 
contingencies  (7,2 MEUR) , financed as follows  (i) AFD will provide a senior concessional loan of 40 MEUR, as well as 1 
MEUR grant ; . (ii) the Kingdom of Morocco will contribute in the amount of 15 MEUR  (iii) the GCF contribution, 20 
MEUR, allows essential component 2 to be integrated in the project, and contribute s to the “soft” component of the


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 75 
 B 
project (C3). As the infrastructure in C1 will have a high adaptation impact  for the oasis -based agriculture (improved 
and regularized access to water) , it is also proposed that the GFC co -finance the transfer of the surface water from the 
dam, in order to reduce the financial burden of this  investment for the State.  
 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  29th September /2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable)   
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/06/2017 
End:  01/06/2022 
Project/programme lifespan  5 years  
 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
Please provide:  
 an integrated financial model in Section I  (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed  GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme  
 
An internal rate of return analysis has been completed and is presented in Annex 10. It shows an  Internal Rate of 
Return  (IRR) of 20% for the 5 000 ha irrigation scheme that will receive water from the dam, thanks to the present 
project. The provision of surface water (as an alternative to groundwater) and appropriate regulations regarding pumping 
in the water table, will allow the private sector investments to reach maturity over a 20 years period without depleting the 
underlying water resources.  
 
 a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, 
and leverage public and/or private finance  
The project’s financing relies on an appropriate mix of:  
- a concessional loan  (40 MEUR)  mainly allowing  to reach the level of investment required to deliver quality 
“adaptation” infrastructures in order to secure the agricultural activity in the Boudnib Valley including the oasis 
and the private larger scale investments  (31 MEUR of 40 MEUR)  
- grant resources   (21 MEUR)   mainly directed to longer term investments in the oasis  aiming at building their 
resilience in the face of climate change and allowing their population to be included in the ongoing economic 
transformation , and at the necessary technical assist ance (4,5 MEUR) to deal with the participatory component 
of the intervention in the oasis as well as the project’s contribution to groundwater management and 
preservation ( 16 MEUR of 21 MEUR)  
 
 a breakdown of cost estimates analysed by sub -component in loca l and foreign currency and a currency 
hedging mechanism:  
 
For example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal exploration project, sub -components 
would include civil engineering works, drilling services, drilling equipment and inspection  test.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 75 
 B 
Breakdown by activities:  
 
Component  Sub-component 
(if applicable)  Total 
Amount  
 Currency of 
disbursement  Total 
Amount  
 Local 
currency  
Component 1:  
Connecting to 
the dam and 
transfer of 
surface water 
to the Boudnib 
Valley)  Sub-component 
1: 
implementation  
and 
management  of 
the irrigation 
infrastructure  
- Adduction 
pipeline,  
- Distribution 
network to oases 
and larger scale 
farms  
 
- PPP Feasibility 
and preparation 
study  
- Tendering 
process for 
selection of the 
PPP contractor  45.6 
 
 
 
 million  euro (€)  501.6 Million 
Dirhams 
(MAD)  
Component 2: 
Building the 
climate - 
resilience of 
oases 
communities 
through a 
holistic 
approach  Sub-component 
2.1: Adaptation 
of hydraulic 
infra structure 
and water 
management 
inside the oases  
Rehabilitation of 
seguias and 
khettaras 
(irrigation 
network)  
Sub-component 
2.2: Mobilization 
of water 
resources from 
intermediary 
basins  
Sub-component 
2.3: Adaptation 
of the oasis -
based 
agricultural and 
social systems 
to climate 
change  
- restauration of 
agricultural land  5,3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3,3 
 
 
 
3,9 
 
 
 
 
 million euro (€)  137,2  Million 
Dirhams 
(MAD)


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 75 
 B 
- promotion of 
new techniques 
(climate -smart 
agriculture)  
- diversification 
and storage of 
agricultural 
produce  
- empowerment of 
women groups 
within the oases  
- social and 
educational 
activities   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Component 3: 
Cross -cutting 
sustainability 
measures  Sub-component 
3.1: Technical 
Assistance  
- Support to the 
implementation 
agency  
- Provision of 
technical advisory 
services to 
farmers  
- Management of 
groundwater 
resources  
Sub-component 
3.2: 
Groundwater 
management 
investments  
Exploratory 
drilling and 
piezometric 
surveillance  
Sub-component 
3.3: 
Environmental 
and Social 
risks 
Management  
Sub-
component 
3.4: 
Knowledge 
building  
 4,5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1,8 
 
 
 
 
1.5 
 
 
 
 
0.5 million euro (€)  91.3,1 Million 
Dirhams 
(MAD)  
Component 4: 
Project 
management    
2.4 million euro (€)  26.4 Million 
Dirhams 
(MAD)


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 75 
 B 
Contingencies    
7,2 million euro (€)  79,2 Million 
Dirhams 
(MAD)  
Total  76 million euro (€)  836 Million 
Dirhams 
(MAD)  
 
Breakdown by expenditure type:  
Component  Sub-Component  Expenditure type  Amount (M EUR)  
component 1:  
Sub - Component 1.1: 
implementation and 
management of the 
irrigation infrastructure  Goods  0 
45,6  Connecting to the dam and 
transfer of surface water to 
the Boudnib  Valley  Works  43,3  
  Staff, services, studies and 
training  2,3 
Component 2:  Sub-component 2.1:  Goods  1 
5,3 Building the climate - 
resilience of oases 
communities through a 
holistic approach  Adaptation of hydraulic 
infrastructure and water 
management inside the 
oases  Works  4 
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  0,3 
  Sub-component 2.2 :  Goods  0,5 
3,3   Mobilization of water 
resources from 
intermediary basins  Works  2,8 
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  0 
  Sub-component 2.3: Goods  0,8 
3,9   Adaptation of the oasis -
based agricultural and 
social systems to climate 
change  Works  1,7 
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  1,4 
Component 3:  Sub-component 3.1:  Goods  0 
4,5 Cross -cutting sustainability 
measures  Technical  - assistance  Works  0 
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  4,5 
  Sub-component 3.2:  Goods  0,6 
1,8   Groundwater management 
investments  Works  0


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 75 
 B 
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  1,2 
  Sub-component 3.3:  Goods  0 
1,5   Environmental  and Social 
risks Management  Works  0 
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  1,5 
  Sub-component 3.4:  Goods    
0,5   Knowledge building  Works    
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  0,5 
Component 4    Goods    
2,4 Project management    Works    
    Staff, services, studies and 
training  2,4 
Contingencies    7,2 
total    76 
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  76 million euro 
(€)  
(b) 
Requested 
GCF amount   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants *  
  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
20 million euro 
(€) 
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million euro 
(€) (  )  years 
(  )  years  
 
 
 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality  that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specif y difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in  section E .


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 75 
 B 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  20 million euro 
(€)  
(c) Co -
financing  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
Loans  
Grant  
Grant  
Options  40 
1 
15 million euro 
(€) 
million euro 
(€) 
million euro 
(€) 
Options  AFD 
AFD 
………………  
……Governm
ent of 
Morocco ……
…… ( 20)  
years  
( 6)  
years  0.8-1,2%  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
 senior Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: AFD 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
B.3. Fee Arrangement  
 
The requested Accredited Entity Fee is  eight per cent (8%) of the total GCF Proceeds.  
. 
B.4. Financial Market Overview (if applicable)  
 In the case of this project, the hydraulic PPP involved is considered as a delegation of a  public service (water 
management) to the private sector particularly in this case where Moroccan government contribut esto 90 % of the 
project cost (including concessional loan and grants): there is therefore no market rate for this type of PPP – it is merely 
a transfer of assets to the pri vate sector to enhance the efficiency of their management  and to ensure the sustainability 
of irrigation water service infrastructures. .  
 
To date, only one hydraulic PPP is operational in Morocco in  the Guerdane area ( East of Agadir) , the costs of which  
can be used as a partial benchmark .  The Guerdane project (90 MEUR) aims  to deliver water from a dam (45  Mm3/y) to 
670 farmers in a 10 000 ha irrigated area.  Unlike the Kaddoussa  PPP, the design, construction and management of 
the entire infrastructure is entrusted to the private operator.  
 
 Total cost/ farm 
(000 EUR)   Infrastructures  
cost/ farm 
(000 EUR)  Total cost/ Ha  
(000 EUR)  infrastructures  
cost/ Ha  (000 
EUR)  
 % State 
contrib ution  
Guerdane  133,4  133,4  8,9 8,9 48% 
Kaddoussa  38 28,3 15,2 11,3 93% 
 
 
The higher  Total cost  and Infrastructures cost  in the Kaddoussa  project  result s from the inclusion of soft  and 
socioeconomic  activities (component 2 and 3  of the present project ) that do not  exist in the Guerdane project.  The 
present project’s choice to invest more in the resilience of the existing forms of agriculture (oases) explains the higher 
cost / ha but, at the same time, it improves its cost/farm, illustrating the inclusi veness of our approach. The cost of 
infrastructure/ha is similar in both cases, demonstrating the present project benchmarks adequately with similar 
investments.  
 Finally, the contribution of Morocco government is substantially higher in Kaddoussa (93 % v s 48% - including 
concessional loan and grant s) which characterizes the specificity of the associated PPP, rather a delegation of a public 
service, than a profitable enterprise. This is explained by (i) the fact that part of the water will be delivered to the


---
*Page 13*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 75 
 B 
entrance of each perimeter of oases without counterpart since it is to compensate historical water rights acquired on the 
water resource of the Guir basin. Water distribution, operation and maintenance of irrigation networks within the oases 
will be  provided by the irrigation associations in each oasis as it did before the project. to the oases and (ii) that the 
private operator will deliver part of the water necessary for the extensions and therefore the profitability of the PPP is 
only marginally a ffected by that of the agribusiness investments downstream. The infrastructure transferred to the 
private sector remains a Public Good , destined to improve the situation of oases agriculture and to alleviate the 
pressure on the deep aquifer.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 75 
 C 
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as t hese requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub -national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.  
 
It is now widely recognized that the Mediterranean region, of which Morocco is part, is a hot spot for climate change, 
one of the regions that will be most affected in the coming years. According to the IPCC, a rise in temperatures of 2 to 
3 ° C is expecte d in the Mediterranean region by 2050 and from 3 to 5 ° C by 2100. Summer precipitation could 
decrease by 35% on the southern shore and 25% on the north shore by the end of the century.  
Morocco is already facing major problems of water stress, desertificat ion, loss of biodiversity and extreme climatic 
events such as floods and droughts  that will be aggravated by climate change.  
Climate change threatens to impact the Moroccan economy and will exacerbate the divide between subsistence /rain 
fed and commercial /irrigated  farms. Since the 1960s, temperatures in Morocco have increased by 0.16°C per decade, 
and future increases are expected to be even higher than the average global temperature increases. Precipitation is 
already decreasing, with a 30 percent drop si nce 1970. The impacts of climate change are difficult to predict, but the 
Government of Morocco (GoM) cannot afford to ignore them. The World Development Report (2010) places 
Morocco among the countries that, at a worldwide level, will suffer the most due to the negative effects of 
climate change on agricultural yield s. Swings in precipitation already have strong repercussions on the Moroccan 
economy. Droughts are extremely costly: the 1994/95 drought caused agricultural GDP to fall by 45 percent and GDP 
to fall by nearly 8 percent. Smallholders are particularly vulnerable to climate change. Commercial farmers have 
technical know -how and financial resources to cope with the new adverse climate conditions, but small farmers have no 
means to buffer them.  
The Green Morocco Plan  (GMP ) is an ambitious government strategy designed to make agriculture a driving force for 
equitable economic growth. Launched in 2008, the GMP  has the goal to double agriculture’s value added within a 
decade. It is based on two Pillars and various transversal actions. Pillar I targets commercial farmers and supports their 
integration into the world economy: the GoM has recently signed various fr ee trade agreements, culminating in the 
recent “Advanced Status” awarded by the European Union. Pillar II is focused on the inclusion of subsistence farmers 
into domestic markets: it aims to overcome the dualistic nature of Moroccan agriculture by creating  the conditions in 
which smallholders in marginal areas can thrive. The transversal actions include a comprehensive overhauling of the 
sector’s structure in terms of cropping patterns, irrigation water saving, land tenure, agricultural taxation, and 
institutional and structural reforms. The originality of this strategy relies on:  
- its articulation on 2 Pillars targeting respectively the already productive and “well off” agribusiness firms  with  a 
mix of  non-concessional tools  and subsidies  (1st Pillar) and s maller scale family farming with a more 
concessional and detailed support system (2nd Pillar);  
- the “aggregation” approach aiming at bridging the two Pillars through technology transfer, contract farming  
(agreements with larger estates for sales and storage  of dates produced by small scale farmers, nucleus -
plasma model) , etc. in order to accelerate the modernization of agriculture and create win -win situations on the 
field;  
- The integration of sustainable development dimension (and a focus on preservation of scared resources)  
- the promotion of agricultural produce at national and international level (marketing);  
Realizing that climate change risks jeopardizing  the impacts of the GMP , the Ministry of Agriculture, with support o f 
World Bank , the GEF and SCCF  (Special Climate change Fund) , has undertaken a project to Integrate Climate change 
adaptation in the GMP .  
For example,  Morocco has decide d to adopt a proactive water saving s program for irrigation,  to create an agricultural 
fund that encourage s the adoption of agricultural practices resilient to climate change, to develop a climate index


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 75 
 C 
agricultural insurance, to experi ment new agricultural practices, etc.  
Moreover, optimization of water resources is a major issue for the country and a nationa l water policy has been adopted 
by government in 2009.  This policy’s main focuses  are (i) demand -side management  with proactive measure’s on 
promotion of water saving technics particularly in irrigated agriculture  through the support of public investments to 
modernize collective irrigation networks and voluntary financial incentives for the adoption of drip irrigation techniques 
at the farm level and water pricing to cover sustainable cost  of water and (ii) supply -side management mainly focused  
on  the mobilization of new water resources and equipment of new irrigated perimeters,.  
The region of Tafilale t, in which the project area is located,  is a main contributor to Morocco’s date production, which is 
a key c ommodity for this Arab country  as we ll as neighboring countries and at sub -regional level . Morocco currently 
produces 90  000 tons per year over 48  000 ha, making it the 8th producer worldwide. Half of this production is 
commercialized on the national market, 30% is consumed on the farm and 2 0% is turned into animal feed. The country 
imports about 30  000 tons every year to reach its national demand of 120 - 150 000 tons  (8 to 15 kg/person/year) : this 
represents around 150 million euros.  
The GMP  aims at reaching a national production of 160  000 tons by 2020 in order to substitute current imports, but also 
to become a net exporter. This target will be reached by the plantation of an additional 17  000 ha of palm -trees. This 
dynamic has already been initiated on the King’s impulse and has resulted  in an increase in the production in 2013 
(100 000 tons1).   
Additionally, this strategy focuses on the production of quality dates, in particular of the Madjhool  variety which have 
been characterized under the protected geographical indication “Dattes Madjhool  du Tafilalet”. These dates can reach 
up to 20 EUR/kg on the local market (against 5 EUR/kg for standard varieties). Annex 3 presents key data regarding 
the date international market.  
Incentives on the date value -chain (subsidies, access to palm tree plants, etc.) has resulted in private sector 
investments in relatively large plantations (100 – 500 ha) in the Tafilalet region, one of the major date production basin 
in the country  (currently 2  000 ha are planted) . These plantations , which should reach a total of 5 000 ha over a period 
of 5 years,  currently rely on the use of underground water (aquifer) for irrigation and the current trend of extension 
(additional 500 ha/year) may lead to unsustainable levels of pumping. This is particularly true in the c ontext of climate 
change, whereby aridity and water demand from cultivated crops will increase (due to higher temperatures). This 
situation (new investments and climate change) has direct bearings with the future of the oases  and its inhabitants: the 
exten sion of new labor -based plantations will create employment and an economic dynamic on the date value -chain 
that could benefit the oasis population ; climate change will increase stress on the oasian cultivated ecosystem and the 
frequency of extreme climati c events, such as strong and localized precipitations resulting in severe flooding from the 
Guir wadi and destruction of cultivated land and housing.  
In this context, the Ministry of Water and Energy has decided to build a  multipurpose dam upstream of the  Boudnib 
Valley where the oases and agribusiness extensions are located, which should produce 30 million m33 / year (4 years 
out of 5). The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries has been charged, within the framework of the current 
project, to ensure the sustainability of the agriculture downstream of the dam, as a response to the constraints 
described above , by building a Public Good infrastructure increasing the resilience of oases agriculture and 
alleviating the pressure on the deep aquifer . 
C.2. Project / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline , key barriers, challenges and /or 
policies) and the  outcomes and the  impact that the project/programme  will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario.  
A detailed description of the baseline is available in the Principal Diagnostic Report presented in Annex 4 .  
Oasis agriculture is the only form of production in the Guir valley of the Tafilalet regi on, performed on the banks of the 
                                                             
1  (http://faostat3.fao.or 1g/browse/Q/QC/E )


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 75 
 C 
river (oued) which provides for the only source of water available for gravity irrigation. In the Guir valley, oasis based 
agriculture is concentrated within 7 schemes distributed along its course , which constitute the Oue d Naam Rural 
Commune . All the households of this commune, beneficiaries of the project, base their livelihood on agriculture in 
relatively small fields inside the oasis (this agriculture brings an estimated income of 2000 EUR/ha/year for holdings 
between 0 ,1 and 0,5 ha); the male population seeks additional income in neighboring cities, mostly in construction 
work.  
Oases are historically linked to the caravan trade economy, as areas for subsistence agriculture for the Bedouins 
involved in national and transnational commerce. They rely on relatively complex hydrological networks and social rules 
for land, trees and water management which are still a reality today  and therefore constitute both an economic and 
cultural heritage locally and for Morocco. Agr iculture in the oasis is based on vertical intensification and the use of crops 
association allowing for a maximization of the use of limited quantities of land: this is also a patrimonial aspect of the 
oases, in terms of cultivated biodiversity. Finally, oases are a form of livelihood and a social environment, of which 
women constitute the primary inhabitants and stakeholders: men are often migrating temporarily or long term to 
generate additional income. Indeed, if this form of agriculture is particularly  adapted to a necessary confinement within 
the boundaries of the irrigable areas along the river, it is also characterized by an extreme fragmentation of the holdings 
(as a result of time and heritage rules)  and, in fact, the oasis (despite its sophisticat ion and cultural importance) is now 
more of a poverty trap than an enabling environment for farmers who wish to improve their livelihood. Further, the last 
ten year’s successive droughts and proliferation of the bayoud  (palm tree lethal disease) – all cons idered a 
consequence of climate change - have led large parts of the local population to migrate towards the main cities 
(or across the Mediterranean) and give up agriculture altogether.  
In this context, a  younger population and returning migrants emerge a s a new category of stakeholders seeking to 
invest in agriculture projects outside of the oases (where land is no longer available),  in the so -called regs and using 
underground water. This extension dynamic, outside but near the oasis, is also a replica of  a larger scale investment 
dynamic further in the valley, where modern estates are being developed.  
New investments have developed in the area opening agricultural fields outside the oasis areas, on the flat stone desert 
plain that extend s on tens of thousands of hectares on both sides of the river (these desert areas are called regs). This 
strategy is part of a broader view to “keep alive” the semi -arid areas of the country, first impacted by the climate 
change.  
These investments resultin g in the creation of date palm tree farms ranging between 100 and 500 ha, are made by 
agribusiness farmers, which come with relatively high levels of capital, a strong support from the State and high 
technical and practical knowledge of precision irrigatio n. These farms are situated in a different ecolog ical context  than 
the oasis agriculture, but nevertheless in the same territory, and rely on underground water (through deep wells).   
Therefore, the main existing systems of the baseline, on which the proje ct intends to act are:  
(a) System 1: Oases schemes ( 800 to 1 000 ha), characterized by complex hydraulic systems constrained by their 
nominal capacity (size and efficiency of the seguias, khettaras), as well as availability of water – free of charge - 
in the w adi; cropping systems, complex as well, are partly modular and adapt to these constraints;  
(b) System 2: Extensions (4  000 ha) / agribusiness farms pumping in the aquifer, which are already in place – not 
funded by the project and not made possible by access to surface water (substitution).  
As it is, system 1 is stressed by irregularity of access and poor hydraulic efficiency; system 2 by costly and non -
sustainable access to groundwater. The project aims at increasing the resilience of these systems, with rega rd to their 
baseline fragilities, and to increase their resilience / ability to cope with predicted additional climatic stress.  
In particular, estimation of demand for oases schemes is based on the nominal capacity of their hydraulic systems (it is 
not fea sible to restructure the schemes – too costly on a financial and social level), rather than on plant demand (ETP): 
for a given efficiency of the system, cropping systems will therefore have to adapt to a higher ETP, as a result of CC. 
Nevertheless, it is e stimated that regularization of the water resource (through piping), as well as rehabilitation of the 
existing schemes will more than compensate the effects of climate change in the medium term (efficiency alone will be


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 75 
 C 
increased by 20%).  
In the case of ex tensions, increased ETP due to CC will affect these systems, by increasing water demand/pressure on 
the aquifer and, at the end line, decreasing yields (which are maximized today). The project seeks to increase the 
resilience of this system by providing an  alternate source of water and governance tools in order to bring it towards its 
equilibrium point.  
Furthermore, the project preparation has demonstrated that the fragilities identified in the baseline will be aggravated by 
climate change and  the project  will act on the existing systems to increase their resilience and ability to cope with the 
future;  
(i) the project’s approach is to act both on the nature of supply (surface water against groundwater) and on the 
demand of existing systems. For both extensions a nd oases, facing the challenges of climate change will 
require evolutions in their cropping systems (with the support of the project), as a response to caped  water 
resources: use of groundwater is regulated by Water Law and will be managed under an aquifer contract 
and enforced by “water police”; use of surface water will depend on availability in the dam, existence of a 
surplus after extraction of the drinkin g water quantities and delivery to oases schemes, and compliance 
with a list of criteria guaranteeing the efficiency of the use of water (namely by substituting it to ground 
water) ;  
(ii) increase in demand due to CC , which will translate in ~80 Mm3/year agains t a possible 50 - 60 Mm3 
available (with the project) show that it will not be possible to mitigate 100% of the impacts of CC; the two 
systems will probably suffer; but, (i) the 10 Mm3 allocation for the oases represents the  full capacity of the 
systems  and its increased efficiency , by the project ’s action  (roughly 15%) , should cover  the anticipated 
increase in ETP ; (ii) yields will decrease in system 2, but less rapidly and, in our initial analysis, in a n 
economically sustainable way over a 20 y period in  the “with project” scenario.  
The construction of the Kaddoussa dam upstream the Guir wadi will allow the production of  30 million cubic meters of 
surface water every year for agricultural purposes . Component 1  of the project aims to build  the irrigation scheme and 
define its management to allow  transfer and delivery of this water (in priority to oases communities and to larger scale 
farmers ) and ensure  quality  water service throughout the year . The surface water provide d by the dam is an o pportunity 
to tackle two issues key to the sustainability of the current economic transformation of the Boudnib Valley: (i) preserve 
oasis -based agriculture and enhance its resilience to climate change (i.e. secure its economic and social existence 
alongsi de more modern of agriculture); (ii) substitute a scarce and patrimonial groundwater resource by surface water 
collected in the dam.   
Component 2 of the project aims at  enhanc ing the resilience of  vulnerable populations  in the oas es through a holistic 
approach which combine s i) modernization of oases hydraulic infrastructure and w ater resources mobilization, ii) agro -
economic development , such as  adaptation of agriculture to CC  activities, promotion of oasis -based product ion or 
vocational  training and  iii) environmental and social development a ctivities that will be elaborate d through  a 
participatory  planning process . This component will revitalize the oasis, allow ing communities to take part of the new 
economic dynamic of the region and benefit from new job  opportunities , which will reduce economic migration, promote 
return of migrants.  
 
Crosscutting  measures will be implemented in c omponent 3 to guarantee the sustainability of the investments by 
contributing to groundwater preservation particularly through  the establishment of an aquifer contract in the area and , to 
provide  technical and economic advisory services to farmers in order to improve irrigation practices and promote 
climate -smart agriculture . This component will also enable farmers who want to in vest outside the oasis to be 
technically supported in the structuring of a profitable project , thereby recreating opportunities for inhabitants of the 
oases.  
 
Note: the Kaddoussa dam is anterior in its design and in terms of implementation schedule to the present project and to 
AFD’s involvement in the area. It is funded by grant resources from an Arab Fund. It is considered a multi -purpose dam, 
since 3  Mm3 will be used for drinking water and the rest for agriculture. Its implementation is not the responsi bility of


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 75 
 C 
the Ministry of Agriculture but that of the Ministry of Water and Energy. For these reasons, it has not been included in 
the scope of the present project, which focuses on the use of the agricultural water to increase the sustainability of the 
agriculture downstream of the dam, in the context of its vulnerability to climate change.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 75 
 C 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
 
The description hereunder will limit itself to component and sub -component levels: details regarding activities and 
expected results are available in Feasibility study /ACTION PLAN  presented in Annex 5. 
Component 1: Connecting to the dam and transfer of surface water to the Boudnib Valley   
Sub-component 1 .1: Delivery of the transfer and irrigation infrastructure s 
A 63  km adduction pipe will be built between the dam and the last oasis along the Guir wadi , as well as  distribution 
pipes to serve:  
 800 to 1  000 ha of existing oasis areas with a regularized  access to  water resource (available most of the year 
rather than only when the wadi is flooded) and free of charge, delivered to the head of the oasis irrigation 
network;  
 4 000 ha of extension areas outside oases including different sized farms (between 5 and 500ha) and including 
both small scale and agrobusiness  developers.  These extensions exist and are currently pumping in the deep 
aquifer.  
The map in Annex 1 describes, as an indication at this stage, the organization  in space of the areas downstream of the 
dam and 2 types of service areas from the adduction pipe: oasis and extensions.  Technical details on the infrastructure 
and its implementation are presente d in the Infrastructure Design Study, in Annex 6. 
The transfer and distribution  pipeline s along the wadi  will have the immediate  effect of protecting the oases from the 
violent floods of the Guir wadi which frequently destroy the  traditional  irrigation inf rastructures and housing of the area's 
population. This infrastructure will provide long term security and resilience in the face of growing  uncertainty and 
violence of climatic  events (overflowing of the wadi) in the future . 
Further, the oasis areas which  traditionally  take water free of charge from the wadi  (only when water is flowing, 10 to 15 
times a year) , using diversion thresholds , will benefit from a quality water service (every day instead of a few times a 
year) amounting in the  volumes necessary to irrigate the crops (10  out of the 30Mm3 of the regulariz ed volume of the 
dam) from the adduction pipe and through the installation of an outlet at the head of the oasis hydraulics network. This 
will allow for regular access to water (year -long, 4 years out of 5), and will constitute a vast improvement  with regard to 
the baseline situation . This water service will be delivered free of charge and will de facto be subsidized  by the State.  
As regards the extension areas (located outside the oases) , the dam's water will be accessed in accordance with 
criteria determined by the Public -Private Partnership framework (see below), which will determine the management 
terms and conditions of the irrigated infrastructure.  
Management of the irrigation infrastructures downstream of the Kaddoussa dam will be entrusted to the private sector 
within the framework of a Public -Private Partnership (PPP).  
The adduction pipe  and irrigation infrastructure are  expected to be built over  2 years, which will allow for structuring the 
PPP in parallel.  At this stage, several options are possible (leasing, BOT, with different levels of financial contribution s 
from the private sector ) and will be looked into within the framework of a “PPP feasibility and design  study ” whose 
international  bidding process  is currently being prepared. This study is planned over 12 months and its cost, EUR  
800,000, is supported by the Moroccan State. AFD’s  no-objection will be requested at each key step of the proc ess.  
Component 2:  Building the climate resilience of oases communities through a holistic approach  
The servicing of the oases located along the wadi  (and tomorrow along the adduction pipe) from the dam's water will 
secure and regulate the access to water of these cultivated areas. This offers opportunities  for improving the efficiency 
of water use and, hence, the agricultural productivity within the o ases. Indeed , the oasis areas are vulnerable in many


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 75 
 C 
ways: economically, due in particular to the deterioration of their irrigation schemes and poor access to training and 
inputs; socially, due to their confinement situation, high levels of periodic short term or longer term migrations. This 
situation hinders the capacity of oasis farmers to take full advantage of the economic development underway in the 
area, and of the opportunities it represents for a more stable local economy. Improving this situation c alls for a holistic 
approach to supporting oases, through a n open and participatory community planning process (with a focus on the 
economic dimension of agriculture production, but opening as well on issues of gender and social development).  
The project's  area includes 7 oases (see map in Annex  1) representing a total area of approximately 1,000  ha and a 
population of 5,000 people. The project will work to improve the resilience of these oases to climate change, to protect 
their economic activity and allow them to plug into the current dynamic context of the date palm industry and conserve 
their social  and ecological heritage . 
Sub-component 2.1: adaptation and modernization of oasis hydraulic infrastructure s 
The irrigation networks in the oases are in  a deteriorated condition (particularly due to the floods in Guir wadi and given 
that these are clay pipes) or do not work properly. The rehabilitation and modernisation of these networks will improve 
the efficiency (+ 15%) of the agricultural systems, thu s contributing to the preservation of the oasis -based economy and 
its hydraulics heritage and biodiversity. These works will include the rehabilitation of the distribution canals within the 
oases (s eguias) and of the draining works of the surface water ( khettaras ), foundations of the oasis -based hydraulics. 
The initial dimensioning of these works was carried out within the framework of the feasibility process and  will be 
completed by detailed technical studies during the project.  
The farmers in the oasis wi ll be supported to organize in Water Users Associations (WUAs), which will serve as 
community representing bodies throughout the participatory process  in addition to their role in managing and 
maintaining the network and delivering water service .  
Sub-component 2.2: Mobilization of water resources from intermediary basins  (aquifer refill)  
Operation of the khettaras  (drainage systems) , a main hydrau lic feature of oasis irrigation,  depends on the state of the 
alluvial water table which, itself, will b e impacted by the building of the dam and the subsequent lim itation of the wadi's 
floods . The project will build infrastructure along the wadi to slow down the flow of intermediate watersheds water 
contributions in order to enhance its underground penetrat ion, as a contribution to the alluvial water  table.   
Reinforcing the flood -protection structures during the project will preserve the investments made within the oases in 
case of violent floods before the finalization  of the dam's works.  
Sub-component 2.3:  Adaptation of the oasis -based agricultural and social systems to climate change  
Improving  resilience in the oases is a process involving both economic and social/gender dimensions. This process will 
take place through a community planning methodology, as a means to empower the oasian communities and promote 
a balanced dialogue with the public administration. Oasis Dev elopment Plans will be drawn -up through a participatory 
approach (performed by ORMVAT with support of the technical assistance  and civil society ) and will define the 
adaptation actions to be taken in a given oasis. These plans will basically contain econom ic and agricultural actions, as 
well as community development/social/gender actions (see below ).  
A preliminary analysis of the needs in the oases conducted during the feasibility process shows that, on the 
economic/agricultural side, the following actions  are likely to come up in the planning process:  
- Adaptation of agriculture to CC through the rehabilitation of palm groves and agro -ecological intensification 
(e.g.: rejuvenation of the palm groves, crop rotation, plant breeding, organic fertilization  techn iques ); 
- Rejuvenation of the palm groves to introduce the Madjhool  variety and thus allow the oasis populations to 
benefit from the current economic dynamic;  
- Promotion of oasis -based farm produce and by -products (quality and certification: cumin, henna, dat es, olive 
oil, storage);  
- Protection of the oasis ecosystems and the fight against desertification (planting of hedges protecting against


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 75 
 C 
silting) and their opening up.  
Analysis of the social situation in the oasis communities, with a special focus on gender, has been done within the 
feasibility /action plan  and E&S risk assessment processes. The detailed results of this analysis are presented in the  
corresponding  documents.  
Inclusion of women in the project activities should be done relies on a participatory & community driven process 
allowing the agents  to make decisions in terms of their own values and goals ; particularly when it comes to water 
management.  
This process of  empowerment (during which stakeholders become agents of change ) cannot be skipped, nor is it 
relevant to design activities based solely on the wellbeing of one particular agent (in this case women), as their 
individual wellbeing (physical, emotional) is g enerally only one of the goals pursued by agents2 involved in more 
complex social networks. In any case, it is not in the AE’s power or role to make decisions as to new sets of 
rules/behavioral schemes for women or to presuppose  how women should assume new  roles in their communities, with 
regard to water, livestock, palm tree groves management… It is also the AE’s responsibility, vis -a-vis the integrity of the 
process mentioned above (by which decisions and ideas are community -generated), to avoid predefini ng how gender 
issues will be dealt with in this project, before the stakeholders/agents have had sufficient time and space to express 
themselves.  
The time and resources necessary to bring about meaningful participation of the different agents of a communi ty, 
particularly the women in the context of Morocco, is not compatible with the format of project preparation: it is, in and of 
itself, a full project activity to assess gender issues, in the context of the society in which they take place, and design 
appropriate and sensible actions.  
Annex 7 provides more details in the projected gender -related activities.  
Regarding economic development, the project aim s at improving  employability ( answering  demand in agribusinesses 
large estates ) and diversification of revenue through vocational training and technical support to project initiators. This 
action will particularly target women from the oasis communities.  
This sub -component will work to include in the planning process (also used to identify the hydraulic and  agricultural 
activities) the possibility of identifying and  financing social development  and employability  activities , to the extent of the 
project’s capacity (at this stage, tentatively, such activities would not exceed 15% of the total cost of the oasis  
development plan). These activities will include cultural and social development aspects as well as favoring the 
conditions for decent employment of women (technical training, capacity building on labor rights, etc.) in particular in the 
large estates.  
Component 3: Crosscutting sustainability measures  
This component includes specific and crosscutting measur es to guarantee maximal performance of the project and 
sustainability of the investments which will be made.  These measures have three specific objectives:  
(i) Support the Executing Agency  in reaching the highest standards of performance with regard to 
infrastructure delivery, as well as community development and participatory approaches;  
(ii) Contribute to groundwater preservation, namely with the establi shment of an Aquifer Contract  
(management rules formalized between users and the State as the regulating body) for the Boudnib 
groundwater;  
                                                             
2 For the purposes of the capability approach, agency primarily refers to a person's role as a member of society, with 
the ability to participate in economic, social, and political actions. Therefore, agency is crucial in assessing one's 
capabilities and an y economic, social, or political barriers to one's achieving substantive freedoms. Concern for 
agency stresses that participation, public debate, democratic practice, and empowerment, should be fostered 
alongside well -being.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 75 
 C 
(iii) Implementation of the E nvironmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  – see documents in Annex 8. 
Sub-component 3.1: Support to the Executing Agency  
This sub -component is essentially a n International Technical Assistance package directed at supporting the Executing 
Agency (ORMVAT) in the implementation of the project, providing expertise and manpower for the following m issions:  
(a) Follow -up and monitoring of the infrastructure contracts and implementation of works;  
(b) Community development in the oases, participatory planning methods, social development approaches, 
adaptation of agriculture to climate change;  
(c) Provision of tech nical and economic advisory services to farmers (small, medium and larger scale), future water 
users of the irrigation scheme, in order to enhance the quality (technical, financial, environmental) of the 
investment projects  and to improve irrigation practi ces and promote climate -smart agriculture ; 
(d) Aquifer management and models ; 
(e) General monitoring and evaluation, including of the ESMP.  
The technical assistance will be recruited through an international bidding process and will be carried out through the 
duration of the project. Detailed profiles required through this TA are presented in the project’s Feasibility/ Action Plan in 
Annex 5. 
Sub-component 3.2: Contribute to groundwater preservation and to the establishment of an Aquifer Contract in 
the area  
All forms of agriculture present in this semi -arid region, and particularly outside the oases, rely or will rely on a 
combined management of two resources (surface and groundwater),  the availability of which will vary during a given 
year and inter -annually. Pe riods of scarcity and  of relative abundance , heterogeneity of users and needs call for 
regulat ion tools necessary to ensure the sustainability of the exploitation  of these resources .  
More generally , groundwater , as a common and pooled resource,  is subject to the "tragedy of the commons", which 
leads to overexploitation, potentially non -reversible . Such a scenario, apart from the patrimonial  loss ( for future 
generation s) it causes, also endangers the private and public investments made in the area. Aquifer contracts are one 
way of setting -up rules and regulations, constraints, inclusion and exclusion criteria for the use of water, from a bottom -
up perspective: i.e. extracting each individual water user pumping on the aquifer from the prisoner’s dilem ma in which 
he is trapped, by making information on the situation of the aquifer available and organizing a debate and a decision 
making process with regard to the future of the resource under exploitation  (for more on this, see E. OSTROM; 
http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/elinor -ostroms -8-principles -managing -commmons ).  
Aquifer contracts are part of Morocco’s Water Law and are currently implement ed in a nu mber of irrigation schemes in 
the country. This project will build on this experience to apply this approach to the Boudnib aquifer and irrigation 
scheme. Apart from an important participatory process and dialogue amongst the water users, to which the proj ect will 
contribute, an important aspect of an Aquifer Contract is an increased knowledge of the situation of the underground 
resource. Therefore, t his sub -component will include an important modelling dimension based on new investments for 
deep measuring,  as well as engineering of a n aquifer model.  
The Ministry of Energy, Mines, Water and the Environment and the Agence de Bassin Hydraulique of  Guir-Ziz - Rhesis  
have the lead on the overall process of the Aquifer Contract ; the project will  allow the Minist ry of agriculture and the 
ORMVAT to contribute effectively to this process.   
Sub-component 3.3: Environmental and Social risks Management The project will finance ESIA supplements , 
based on IFC's safeguard policy , during inception phase. The rationale for a two -step implementation of the ESIA is 
presented in the term sheet as follows:  
Implementation of this project involves several dimensions: infrastructural, institutional and social – environmental. 
Putting them jointly in motion requires to fine tune the  sequence in which the preparation and inception take place. In


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 75 
 C 
particular, the fact that the irrigation scheme will be managed under a PPP delays the availability of important 
information as, of course, to the management of the infrastructure but, as well  to its final design. The rules and criteria 
of entry of water users in the scheme will be partly determined with the private sector; who is “in” and who is “out” will 
determine where the pipes run. This has several consequences and among them, the fact th at the ESIA process can 
only be completed once there is more clarity as to the PPP framework. Nevertheless, it would not be possible to wait for 
the PPP design to launch the tendering for the works on the primary irrigation network: this type of sequencing  would 
generate massive delays that would, in fact, discourage the private sector; further, the tendering process for works can 
only take place once the financing for the project, as a whole, is secured (as per Moroccan legislation).  
Therefore, it is typi cal for this type of operation to adopt a programmatic approach by going as far as possible during 
preparation phase – far enough to decide on financing - and to plan an inception phase, the results of which can be 
considered as conditions prior to first di sbursements.  
It is the AE’s proposal to operate in this manner for this project, defining a 6 to 12 months inception phase  (following the 
signing of the financial agreements with AFD and the GCF) , during which, namely, the PPP design will take place, the 
ESIA completed and the ESMP updated (see under for more details on disbursement conditions).  
The project will also finance the implementation of the ESMP, elaborated according to AFD and GCF guid elines. This 
will cover  the costs of (i) a dedicated team linked to the Project Implementation Unit  (Cf.C.7); (ii) mitigation measures of 
negative impacts  and monitoring of their results , (iii) the due diligence system; (iv) the compiling and treatment of 
grievances, as well as the information generated by the consultation and dialogue processes.  
The full Log Frame for the project is presented in Annex 9. 
Sub-component 3.4 : Knowledge building  
The processes of inclusion of vulnerable populations and preservation of underground water resources through 
adequate infrastructure and adequate institutional tools, which the project aims to support, need to be monitored and 
studied during the duration o f the project. This will be done through traditional monitoring and evaluation tools (mid -term 
and end -line), but also calls for a more in -depth analytical capacity, mobilizing research tools in hydrology, sociology 
and institutional aspects.  
AFD has set up and funded the Scientific and Technical Committee on Agricultural Water (STCAW, www.comite -
costea .fr) which brings together the French expertise (mostly research institutes and irrigation operators in France) in 
the field, in order to promote cross -cutting dialogue between institutions and generate analytical and  capitalization work 
on AFD -funded projects in the field of irrigation.  
It is proposed to use this analytical vehicle and the research capacities it al lows to mobilize, by making this project a 
study case of the STCAW: research teams from public entities such as CIRAD and IRSTEA will provide analytical work 
on the establishment of the Aquifer Contract and the hydrological situation of the aquifer. This w ork will be cofinanced 
between the funds of the present project and that of the STCAW (0,1 - 0,2 MEUR).  
Component 4: Project management  
Represents the costs of management incurred by ORMVAT et DIAEA throughout the life of the project.  
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  
Describe project/programme sponsor’s operating experience in the host country or other developing countries.  
 
The Directorate of Irrigation and the Development of Agricultural Areas  (DIAEA ) of the Ministry of Agriculture is 
responsible for the project coordination and is AFD’s  main counterpart  at central level.  
This Directorate , created in 2009, aims to implement the policy of the Ministry of Agriculture in the field of hydro -
agricultural development. The DIAEA is in charge of the hydro -agricultural resources management (planning and 
monitoring), the promotion of water irrigation, the promotion and the regulation of public -private partnerships (PPP),


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 75 
 C 
irrigation schemes, land and pasture.  
At local level, the implementation of the project will be transferred to the ORMVAT, which will also rely on strong 
partnerships with other institutions ( in particular the ABH ) for some of the activities of the project.  
The ORMVAT, created in 1966, is a public organization financially independent and under the supervision of the 
ministry of agriculture. The ORMVAT is responsible for agricultural development in the Tafilalet Region through the 
organization of farmer’s voca tional training, the promotion of efficient irrigation systems and the realization of land 
consolidation works.  The ORMVAT has n otably overseen the rehabilitation of irrigation systems in many oases in the 
region (delegated to specialized companies through  public tender  or in partnership with beneficiaries ) and implemented 
economic and social development activities (diversification projects income, crafts, woman capacity building and 
training) in partnership with rural communities, farmers organizations, NG O’s and youth promoters.  
The River Basin Agency Guir-Ziz-Rhéris  (which overlooks water management in the project area) , created in 2009, is a 
public institution under the supervision of the ministry of energy, mines, water and environment.  Its main tasks are the 
assessment, planning and management of water resources, the monitoring of water resources (quality and quantity), 
the collect of financial charges and the maintenance and operation of hydraulic structures.  
Describe financial status and how the proj ect/programme sponsor will support the project/programme in terms of equity, 
management, operations, production and marketing.  
 
Not applicable  
 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  
Morocco produces approximately 90,000 tons of dates a year over 48,000  ha, making it the 8th largest date producer in 
the world. National production is mainly intended for the domestic market (50%), for self -consumption (30%)  and for 
cattle feeding (20%). To respond to domestic demand, the Kingdom imports 30,000 tons of dates a year from Tunisia or 
Algeria (approximately EUR  90 million  in value).  
The Green Morocco Plan has set the objective of increasing date production to 160 ,000 tons by 2020 so that national 
production can replace imports but also to export abroad at least 10,000 tons/year by 2030. These objectives will be 
reached through  the planting  of 17,000 hectares of date palms. To this end, the State has signed a contract with the 
Fédération Interprofessionnelle Marocaine des Dattes  (FIMADATTES - Moroccan Inter -professional Date Federation) 
for a term of 10 years. The impact of these national polic ies is already being felt (national production exceeded 100,000 
tons in 20133). 
Apart from seeking higher production quantities , Morocco is  also seeking a position of strength on the Madjhool  date 
market which benefits from the best prices  on the national market (up to EUR  20/kg in retail) and international market 
(up to USD  12/kg): as a large part of the irrigated area downstream of the dam are planted in Madjhool  dates, the 
project will contribute  to a sustainable  increase in production of this quality da te (around 40  000 additional tons /y).  
Provide the key competitors with market shares and customer base (if applicable).  
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any).  
The government is involved in subsidizing the extension investments (first pillar of the GMP), at a rate of approximately 
50%.  
 
 
 
 
                                                             
3  (http://faostat3.fao.or 3g/browse/Q/QC/E )


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 75 
 C 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  
Provide  details of government licenses  or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue.  
Permits will be needed to secure access to land for small and larger scale investors for the establishment of their 
plantations. These permits will be issued following a bidding proces s managed by the Agriculture Development Agency 
(ADA)  and the Ministry of Interior .  
Permits for drilling and maximum debit for deep wells are delivered by the ORMVAT and the r egional Hydraulic Basin 
Agency.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations.  
 
There will be no taxes applied on the grants. On the loan, taxes (20%) will be supported by the Government.  
Fluctuation of exchange rate impacting negatively the cost of the goods to be purchased in local currency will be 
covered by contingen cies and, if insufficient, by the GoM.  
Provide details on insurance policie s related to project/programme.  
The state is its own insurer for the infrastructure.  
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail the governance  structure  of the project/programme, including but not limited to the  
organization  structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, 
executing entities and so on.   
Project management is performed by the Mi nistry of Agriculture and Marine Fisheries (MAPM) and its Directorate of 
Irrigation and the Development of Agricultural Areas (DIAEA). This project management is delegated to the  Office 
régional de mise en valeur Agricole du Tafilalet  (ORMVAT), which will ensure the overall coordination of the 
programme , supported by strong technical assistance recruited within the framework of the programme.  
The main project implementation partners will by the DRPE at central level, the Agence de Bassin  at local level, the 
Office National de Conseil Agricole and the Agence Nationale pour le Développement des Zones Oasiennes et de 
l’Arganier, the local authorities (in particular, the Municipalities) . 
The financial management and procurement will be centra lized with the Executing Entity. ORMVA -TF has a long history 
of implementing similar projects in the area , including donor -funded. AFD’s mandate is to rely on national agencies for 
project implementation and, if necessary, build their capacity through TA: t his strongly links to the sustainability of the 
project after completion. Such a support will be provided mainly for implementation of C2 and C3. AFD will be part of 
the discussion with the Ministry of Agriculture and ORMVA -TF for the establishment of the PMU and its staffing.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 75 
 C 
 
Steering committee  
The steering committee oversees the activities of the project as a whole ( Action Plan and ESMP). It is in charge of 
approving the annual work plans and their budgets, the progress reports as well as the reports on the results achieved, 
both in terms of the work and the activities and the environmental and social actions. It will also e nsure the Project is in 
line with the sectoral policies and government programs . It will meet at least twice a year, and each time that it is 
deemed necessary by its chairman. This committee can be created by ministerial decree.  
The Steering Committee, cha ired by the Secretary General of the Ministry of Agriculture and Maritime Fisheries, is 
composed of different stakeholders, including:  
 
 The Ministry of Agriculture, Directorate of Irrigation and the Development of Agricultural Areas  (DIAEA) as Contract 
Owner of the Project;  
 Ministry  of Agriculture, Directorate of Strategy and Statistics (DSS);  
 Ministry of Agriculture, Finance Directorate (DF);  
 Ministry of Economy and Finance, Directorate of Budget  (DB); 
 Ministry of the Interior, Dire ctorate of Rural Affairs  (DAR);  
Delegated minister in charge of water resources  (DMW)  
Regional Coordination Committee (CRC)  
The CRC is the coordinating body of all the activities of the Project (Action Plan and ESMP). It controls and approves 
the tasks performed by the PMU and it s technical assistance team, namely: the provisional versions of the annual work 
plans and their budgets, the progress reports and reports on the results achieved, before presentation to the Steering 
Committee. It will meet  four time s a year, and each time that it is deemed necessary by its chairman.  
The Regional Coordination Committee, chaired by the Regional Director of Agriculture, is composed of different 
stakeholders, including:  
 The Regional Office of Agricultural Development of t he Tafilalet region, through its Director and the Coordinator of


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 75 
 C 
the PMU;  
 Regional D irectorate  of Agriculture (DRA);  
 Guir Rheris Ziz River Basin Agency (ABH -GRZ);  
 Province of Errachidia, Directorate of Rural Affairs (DAR);  
 Regional Council of the Tafilalet ; 
 Rural town of Naâm Wadi;  
 Urban town of Boudnib.  
 
Project Management Unit (PMU)  
The management and the local supervision of the project are the responsibility of the Project Management Unit (PMU). 
This unit is attached to the Director of the ORMVA -TF, which is responsible for the management of the project at the 
local level. This Unit  is the central body for the implementation of the project. Training in project management will be 
provided for by the technical assistance  which is part of the PMU.  The Project Management Unit will be in charge of 
implementing all the activities of the Pr oject and of processing all the monitoring data. It will also coordinate all the 
fiduciary activities, the procurement and contracts, quality control, and will establish agreements with all the structures 
involved in implementing the components, sub -compon ents and measures of the ESMP.  
An operational manual will be developed by the PMU, with support from the TA and will be submitted to AFD’s 
approval.  
Among its duties, the PMU must integrate the environmental and social management of the project as a main, full-time 
duty and therefore assign the human, material and financial resources that it needs to enable it to fulfil its duties.  
The PMU will be composed of staff assigned by the DRA and the ORMVA -TF, namely:  
 a Coordinator of the Project and head of the PM U; 
 A procurement and financial management  officer ; 
 An engineer responsible for the envi ronmental and social management in particular the plan for the acquisition of 
land to establish the pipeline  (component 1 ) and the drilling of boreholes to monitor the a quifer (component 3);  
 A rural engineer in charge of monitoring the construction work.  
 
Partners  
The approach of the project consists of promoting partnership s in the implementation of planned actions which do not 
fall within the specific remit of the ORMVA -TF:  
- The local communities , in particular, the municipality of Oued Naâm, constitute a key partner for 
implementing the activities related to the adaptation of the oases to climate change. They are an essential 
partner for implementing activities related to protecting the environment, improving the quality of life of the 
inhabitants of the oases, and even social development.  
- The local authorities  play an impor tant role in the implementation of any project in their territory. They enable 
establishing a direct link with the people. They support the citizens in knowing their rights and obligations in 
accordance with Article 27 of the New Moroccan constitution givi ng the right of access to information to all 
citizens. They therefore play a central role in the implementation of the project and in establishing  dialogue and 
commu nication with the stakeholders . 
- Other public partners : National Agency for Development of O ases and Argan tree Areas ( ANDZOA , 
integrated projects  in the oases) , National Office for Agricultural Advisory ( ONCA , advisory services to farmers,  
vocational training), National Agency for Promotion of Employment ( ANAPEC , training, support of project 
promoters),  National Institute for Human Development  (INDH , income generating activities, 
social/cultural/environmental activities),  
Project promoters  
For the actions under sub -component 2.3, the project will involve professi onal pa rtners or partner associations  for co -
implementation : 
- WUA  and agricultural cooperatives : The WUA  will namely be responsible for water management inside the 
oases and will be the point of contact with the water service management company for any issues relating to 
management of the irrigation. The agricultural co operatives may support projects related  to agricultural 
production, to enhancing the value of the products, to the services upstream and downstream, or to any other


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 75 
 C 
income -generating activities ; 
- Associations : These associations are potential partners for all the activities planned by the projec t. These 
associations have several assets, including that of being able to raise and manage financial resources to invest 
in community development actions;   
- Social, cultural and environmental associations : The local social, cultural and environmental devel opment 
associations have demonstrated their capacity to implement projects in the sectors of education, health, the 
environment, and culture.  These associations will be mobilized through a “call for project” approach, managed 
by ANDZOA.  
 
 
 
 
 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with k ey contractual agreements.  
The delivery of the water distribution infrastructure ( including a 63 km  pipeline from the dam to the scheme) will take 
place under several  contract s recruited through an international tendering process. All of these contracts and related 
bidding documents will receive prior non objection from AFD and t he supervision of works will be performed by the 
Office Régional de Mise en Valeur Agricole  du Tafila let (ORMVATF) .  
 
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction.  If


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 75 
 C 
applicable, provide the credit analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural mitigants to 
cover  the counterparty risks.  
The irrigation scheme, after construction, will be managed by a private entity under a Public -Private Partnership  (PPP)  
framework. The Government of Morocco will finance the feasibility study of the PPP, which will detail the technical, 
institutional and financial arrangements to be fitted into the final contract between the State and the private partner.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 75 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme  Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme  implementation  timetable  in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table  format 
below  is used, please refer to the act ivities as numbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed.  
Results  Activities  Years of implementation  
2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  
1.1.1  The main conduit and the 
oasis connections are made  1.1.1.1.  Recruitment of technical assistance              
1.1.1.2.  Execution studies              
1.1.1.3.  Expropriation              
1.1.1.4.  Execution of works              
1.1.2  The terms of connection 
and management are 
defined  1.1.2.1.  Validation of reference terms for the structuring 
study              
1.1.2.2.  Structuring study and project devolution              
1.1.3  Users are connected to the 
network  1.1.3.1.  Operator selection              
1.1.3.2.  Subscription              
1.1.3.3.  Works execution              
2.1.1.1.  The séguias are resized 
and rehabilitated  2.1.1.1.1  Workshop for the prioritization and validation of 
work to perform              
2.1.1.1.2  Topographic and specific surveys              
2.1.1.1.3  Execution of works              
2.1.1.2.  The conveyance capacity of 
the khettaras is improved  2.1.1.2.1  Workshop for the validation of works to perform              
2.1.1.2.2  Conducting studies              
2.1.1.2.3  Execution of works


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 75 
 C 
Results  Activities  Years of implementation  
2.1.2.1.  New séguias are concreted    Pm             
2.1.2.2.  The plots that were no 
longer served are levelled  2.1.2.2.1  Workshop for the prioritization and validation of 
work to perform              
2.1.2.2.2  Conducting studies              
2.1.2.2.3  Execution of works              
2.1.2.3.  Oasis banks are protected  2.1.2.3.1  Prioritization and validation of work to perform              
2.1.2.3.2  Conducting studies              
2.1.2.3.3  Execution of works              
2.1.3.1.  Users are informed and 
initiated  2.1.3.1.1  Study trips             
2.1.3.1.2  Classroom training              
2.1.3.1.3  Legal documentation              
2.1.3.2.  The AUEA are created and 
the intervetion programmes 
are validated  2.1.3.2.1  Preparation of AG              
2.1.3.2.2  Convening and holding AG              
2.1.3.3.  The officers of AUEA and 
their agents are set up  2.1.3.3.1  Member Training              
2.1.3.3.2  Staff training              
2.1.3.4.  AUEA financing plans and 
action plans are approved  2.1.3.4.1   Development of action plans              
2.1.3.4.2  Preparation of financing plans              
2.2.1.1.  Maintenance works 
agreements are validated 
by users  2.2.1.1.1  organization of workshops              
2.2.1.1.2  Validation of agreements by AUEA


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 75 
 C 
Results  Activities  Years of implementation  
2.2.1.2.  The rehabilitated facilities 
are functional  2.2.1.2.1  Studies              
2.2.1.2.2  Works              
2.2.2.1.  Maintenance agreements 
are validated by users  2.2.2.1.1  Feasibility studies              
2.2.2.1.2  Organization of workshops              
2.2.2.1.3  Validation of agreements              
2.2.2.2.  Two new works of 
mobilization intermediate 
basins waters are installed  2.2.2.2.1  Studies              
2.2.2.2.2  Installations              
2.3.1.1.  Building a shared vision  of 
the area and its issues is 
initiated  2.3.1.1.1  Workshop of foresight              
2.3.1.1.2  Presentation and communication to stakeholders 
of the results of the workshop              
2.3.2.1.  Seven oases development 
plan is established  2.3.2.1.1  Study of thorough elaboration of possible actions              
2.3.2.1.2  Collaborative definition workshops of action 
programme per oasis              
2.3.2.1.3  Support project formulation for agriculture              
2.3.2.1.4  Consolidation and validation of oasis development 
plan             
2.3.2.1.  The seven oases 
development plan is 
executed  2.3.2.1.1  Execution Program              
2.3.2.1.2  Execution & Financing              
2.3.3.1.  An action program is 
developed  2.3.3.1.1  Pre-identification workshop              
2.3.3.1.2  Additional studies


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 75 
 C 
Results  Activities  Years of implementation  
2.3.3.1.3  Drafting and validation of action programmes              
2.3.3.2.  The action program is 
executed  2.3.3.2.1  Validation and signing of partnerships.              
2.3.3.2.2  Launch tenders              
2.3.3.2.3  Execution & Financing              
2.3.4.1.  Young project leaders skills 
are strengthened  2.3.4.1.1  Identifying potential training modules              
2.3.4.1.2  Development, validation and programming of 
modules              
2.3.4.1.3  Signing partnership agreements and trainers 
contracts              
2.3.4.1.4  Execution and financing              
2.3.4.2.  The personal and social 
development of women is 
encouraged  2.3.4.2.1  Identifying needs              
2.3.4.2.2  Defining personal development actions and social 
priorities              
2.3.4.2.3  Programming and validation              
2.3.4.2.4  Execution & Financing              
2.3.4.3.  Basic services necessary to 
female employment are 
strengthened  2.3.4.3.1  Identifying needs              
2.3.4.3.2  Develop a potential program of actions for 
strengthening basic services              
2.3.4.3.3  Signing partnerships and recruitment              
2.3.4.3.4  Execution and financing              
3.1.1.1.  The Project Management 3.1.1.1.1  Definition of the main tasks


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 75 
 C 
Results  Activities  Years of implementation  
Unit (PMU) is reinforced to 
monitor hydro -agricultural 
developments  3.1.1.1.2  Identification and recruitment of profiles  
            
3.1.1.2.  The Project Management 
Unit (PMU) is reinforced to 
ensure activities for 
adjustment to climate 
change  3.1.1.2.1  Definition of the main tasks              
3.1.1.2.2  Identification and recruitment of profiles  
            
3.1.1.3.  The Project Management 
Unit (PMU) is reinforced to 
ensure the implementation 
of the E&S Management 
Plan 3.1.1.3.1  Definition of the main tasks              
3.1.1.3.2  Identification and recruitment of profiles  
            
3.1.2.1.  Agricultural project owners 
are informed and their 
needs determined  3.1.2.1.1  Information campaign              
3.1.2.1.2  Installation of an information desk              
3.1.2.2.  The operators of the date 
value chain have access to 
training and individual 
counselling  3.1.2.2.1  School in the fields              
3.1.2.2.2  Personalised counselling  
            
3.1.2.3.  The operators of the 
vegetable sector have 
access to personal training 
and counselling      
            
3.2.1.1.  The heterogeneity of the 
Senonian is established  3.2.1.1.1  Conducting drilling              
3.2.1.1.2   Logging record for each drilling              
3.2.1.2.  A spatial distribution map of 3.2.1.2.1  Execution of a pumping test campaign


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 75 
 C 
Results  Activities  Years of implementation  
the transmissivity of the 
Senonian is made available  3.2.1.2.2  Preparation of the spatial distribution map of the 
transmissivity of the Senonian              
3.2.1.3.  The numerical model is 
suitable as a support tool to 
decision -making  3.2.1.3.1  In-depth analysis of the relevance of the tool              
3.2.1.3.2  Selecting an appropriate numerical model for the 
project              
3.2.2.1.  The site is provided with a 
regular piezometric 
monitoring system  3.2.2.1.1  Optimized operation of pumping testing 
equipment              
3.2.2.1.2  Strengthening the network with additional 
piezometers              
3.2.2.2.  The piezometric monitoring 
system is modernized  3.2.2.2.1  Piezometers of complete stations of automatic 
acquisition              
3.2.2.2.2  User training and maintenance costs              
3.2.3.1.  The information system of 
River Basin Agency (ABH) 
Guir-Ghris -Ziz allows 
regular monitoring of water 
table in the project area  3.2.3.1.1  Formatting monitoring data              
3.2.3.1.2  Post online with public access and dissemination 
of information to provincial, regional and local 
institutions              
3.2.3.2.  Updating the PDAIRE of 
Guir-Ghris -Ziz takes into 
account the options of ''joint 
management'' of surface 
water and groundwater in 
the plain of Boudnib and the 
valley of Guir  3.2.3.2.1  Contribution to updating the PDAIRE              
3.2.3.2.2  International seminar on joint management in arid 
areas              
3.2.3.2.3  Tripartite agreement  
            
3.2.3.3.  Contribution to the process 
of preparing the water table 3.2.3.3.1  Support for the preparation of the water table 
contract


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 75 
 C 
Results  Activities  Years of implementation  
contract launched by 
ABHGRZ  3.2.3.3.2  Reinforcement of stakeholders skills involved in 
the water table of contract              
3.3.1.1.  The different components 
for the implementation  of 
the E&S Management Plan 
are funded  3.3.1.1.1   Implementation of the "E&S Management Plan 
Cell"             
3.3.1.1.2  Setting up the diligence mechanism              
3.3.1.1.3  Commissioning measures to mitigate impact              
3.3.1.1.4  Grievances mechanism              
3.3.1.1.5  Programme for monitoring and updating the E&S 
Management Plan              
3.3.1.1.6  Process of dialogue with stakeholders  
              
3.4 Knowledge building 
(including mid -term 
evaluation)    
      
4 Project Management


---
*Page 37*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 75 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme.  
The current trends in the project area will lead to a relatively pessimistic scenario, whereby patrimonial (i.e. necessary 
for future generations) underground water resources may be depleted due to an unsustainable agribusiness 
investment scheme and oases remain as marginal and disappearing socioeconomic and ecological systems. The 
trends leading to this scenario (described in C.1 and C.2) are accentuated and accelerated by climate change due to:  
- The high level of climatic vulnerability of oases, because they are dependent on irregular access to surface 
water. Increased aridity and plant demand for water and higher levels of irregularity of the wadi’s spates, due 
to climate change, will have cumula tive negative impacts on agriculture productivity and overall ability of the 
oasis system to sustain demographic growth and human development;  
 
- The acceleration of the mobilization of underground water resources, because of increasing  plant demand in 
the context of climate change.  
The adaptation rationale of the project builds on the future availability of surface water, upon completion and filling of 
the dam, in order to:  
- Target the most climate vulnerable by securing regular access to water for agriculture (compare to baseline of 
increased scarcity and irregularity of access) and promoting development through more efficient and adapted 
water infrastructure, as well as socioeconomic activities aiming at increasing the attractivity of these oases;  
 
- Put into place the appropriate institutional and legal frameworks, by which these additional and renewable 
resources (surface water) directly alleviate the pressure on the underground aquifer, thereby reversing the 
overexploitation trend :


---
*Page 38*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 75 
 
 
 D 
Reaching these outcomes will require a mix of :  
 Relatively classical , but costly,  solutions involving the transfer and delivery of surface water to oases and 
agricultural extensions, thereby protecting the oases from flooding and destruction in the con text of climate 
change, as well as improving  regular access to water for agriculture and alleviating the pressure of agriculture 
on underground resources;  
 Targeted solutions for the oases, considered most vulnerable to climate change, through the delivery  of a 
holistic development package ; as well as  specific actions  for underground resource preservation, in the 
context of climate change, through appropriate institutional arrangements (“ Aquifer Contracts ”, capacity 
building of the River Basin Agency) and investments ( resource control and monitoring equipment).  
The GCF’s involvement will mainly allow develop ment  and fund ing of  the targeted solutions towards oases and 
improved water management.   
Initial assessment of vulnerabilities in the oasis communitie s (see Diagnostic report) shows several areas on which the 
project may have an impact: protection against floods; improved access to employment; overall resilience of the 
communities through social and economic empowerment. These aspects will be dealt with  through a community 
driven process that will plan and implement solutions identified at the local level with the population.  
Regarding the involvement of the project with the agricultural extensions, the proposed solutions intend to act on the 
baseline s cenario (4  000 hectares , privately invested,  coming  into production  in the coming years with no alternate 
water resources and proper institutional framework for management of scarcity) by increasing the sustainability of an 
economic dynamic downstream of t he dam, and thereby securing its positive impacts at micro  (employment)  and 
macro  (import/export of dates)  level. In practical terms the project will allow the hydrological (bring the pumping levels 
to 25 Mm3/year, renewability threshold of the aquifer) – economic (completion of the investment projects and long 
term impacts) – human (inclusion of the oases) system to find its balance.  
The combination of these approaches in a single project is novel in the context of Morocco and is considered 
characteristic of a new generation of adaptation projects using the “water” entry point, combining “adaptation 
infrastructure” + “inclusiveness measures” + “improved water management”. It is proposed that the GCF also 
contribute to the financing of the transfer infrastru cture, which is considered an adaptation infrastructure, namely 
because it will result in the protection of the oases against flooding.  
  
D.2. Exit Strategy   
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability  will be ensured  in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support  from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long -term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. 
 
The project’s sustainability relies on two dimensions:  
- Its total inclusion in a long term public policy, the Green Morocco Plan . Most of the activities planned within the 
project are in line with this policy’s implementation rules and will therefore be pursued after project closure. 
For the innovative dimension of the project (a holistic approach to irrigation development), it will contribute to a 
change process already in place within the Ministry of Agriculture;  
 
- The establishment of a PPP with a long term contractual framework (20 years) w ill guarantee the 
management of the irrigation scheme after project closure.  
 
The nature of the PPP in the context of this irrigation scheme is particular: it relies on the assessment that private 
sector involvement will increase efficiency in the management of water and associated infrastructures and, thereby,


---
*Page 39*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 75 
 
 
 D 
decrease associated c osts for the State and the farmers; rather than on internal high levels of profitability to be 
expected by the private sector. The PPP is rather a delegation of a public service to the private sector, to which will be 
attached a number of conditions regard ing tariff and eligibility to water, that shall guarantee inclusiveness and 
sustainability of water use. These conditions may lower profitability levels.  
 
In particular, the oasis population has a  free right of access to the water of the Guir for the grav ity irrigation of the 
oases. This pre -existing right (Royal Decree) cannot be canceled and the oases population will have priority access to 
the first 10 million m3, corresponding to the full capacity of the oasian systems . The water users in the oases wil l be 
organized in water users associations, in order to act as counterparts of the private operator of the scheme. Operation 
and maintenance costs will be covered by the public budget, as they are now, through the ORMVAT.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 75 
 
 F 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of 
the proposed project/programme  against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme  to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub -criteria and 
assessment factors in th e Fund’s investment framework .  
Impact po tential  
Contribution to increased resilience of:  
 
- Most vulnerable people and communities  through  i) the promotion of an inclusive development and 
climate smart agriculture: providing an enabling environment for both highly technological and capitalistic 
investments as well as smaller scale modernized investments by local farmers prac ticing tr aditional 
agriculture and ii) the revitalization of oasis through the development of economic, social and environmental 
activities ; 
- Health and well -being, and food and water security by  taking into account the environmental and social 
dimensions (including  gender issues) of development and by securing the water supply throughout the year 
in oases ; 
- Infrastructure and built environment  through the develop ment of adequate and innovative “water 
technologies” to maximize the mobilization and the efficient use of  the resource (transfer of surface water 
resources , precision irrigation scheme) and through the renovation of oases traditional irrigation schemes ; 
- Ecosystem and ecosystem services by implementing  adequate and innovative water institutions providing 
rules and regulations for the management of scarce water resources (both underground and surface), by 
contributing to the establishment of an aquifer contract.  
 
The programme’s approach is integrated  as “water ” intersects issues of agriculture performance in the context of 
climate change, and associated well -being issues, design and implementation of adapted infrastructure, as well as 
the preservation of oases ecosystems. These cross -cutting impacts will concern a set of direct beneficiaries: 5 000 
people living in the oases; as well as a part of the larger population of the Boudnib valley (extension farmers, 
agricultural inputs provider, date traders, etc.) estimated at 10 000 people.  
The main impact ind icators and the rationale for their elaboration is presented in the table below:  
 
Indicators  Value  Unit Assumptions  
Number of family farms 
supported by the project  1 300 Farms  It is considered that all 
families/farms living in the 7 oases, 
as well as existing oases -
extensions will be impacted by the 
project  (1 000 households) , either 
through improved water service 
(C1) or community development 
actions (C2)  + 200 new extensions 
of local farmers + 100 
agribusiness extension farms.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 75 
 
 F 
 
Population benefiting  
directly from improved 
access to water 
services for agriculture.  5 500  
  People  This is the population involved in 
family farming in the oases (1  000 
(ref. above) x 5 = 5 000) + the 
families of the extension farmers  
(500) involved in small scale 
extensions  
Population empowered 
by the project (capacity 
building, improved 
employability, improved 
psychosocial situation, 
ability to design and 
implement an 
investment project)  2 000 
  People  
  Focus groups organized during the 
feasibility process have allowed to 
identify, at this stage:  
- 140 women willing to invest 
in a value chain project 
(transformation of agricultural 
goods for sale),  
- 560 other women having a 
less clear idea of the way 
they could benefit from the 
project but that will be 
supported in expressing their 
needs;  
- 200 young promotors, willing 
to invest in small scale palm 
tree (date) extensions, on the 
model of the agribusine ss 
schemes;  
- 875 men expressing 
needs in terms of 
agricultural training.  
 
Total agricultural area 
impacted by the project  5 000 Hectares  Oasis (1  000) + extensions (4  000) 
Indirect beneficiaries  10 000  People  100% of Boudnib  population 
benefiting from increased trade 
and economic activity due to the 
dynamic on the date value -chain.  
Other indicators / 
indirect impacts:     
Quantities of 
groundwater saved due 
to substitution by 
surface water.  20 
  106 m3/year  
  Starting when the dam is full 
(2020)  
Amount of foreign 
currency savings 
through reduced import 
of dates nationally 400 000  000 USD  Value of dates securely produced 
during the time of project (40  000 
T)


---
*Page 42*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 75 
 
 F 
produced  
 
Employment generated 
by the economic 
dynamic in the Boudnib 
area 7 500 
  Equivalent full time positions  
  Surveys amongst the large and 
smaller scale farms, implemented 
during feasibility, show that:  
2 full time jobs/ha are created over 
3000 ha of large scale farms = 
6000 jobs  
1 full time job/ha over 1000 ha of 
small scale extensions = 1000 jobs  
+ 0,5 full time employment/ha for 
the oasis  : 500  
 
 
See B.4 for benchmarking with similar projects.  
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme  avoids lock -in of long -lived, high emission or 
climate -vulnerable infrastructure.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 75 
 
 F 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual   
Lifetime   
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population (adaptation only)  Total  5 500 direct beneficiaries  
10 000 indirect beneficiaries  
 
Percentage 
(%) 100 (Boudnib municipality population ) 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Examples include:  
 Expected increase in the number of households with access to low -emission energy  
 Expected increase in the number of small, medium and large low -emission power suppliers, and 
installed effective capacity  
 Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision -making  
 Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced expos ure to climate risks  
 Others  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
Household surveys and focus groups in oases; public consultations; data collected at Ministry and ORMVAT level; 
bibliography.  See Action Plan in Annex 5.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 75 
 
 F 
E.2. Paradigm Shift P otential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication  (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate -resilient development pathways through a 
theory of change for s caling up and replication (e.g. in terms of multiples of initial impact of the proposed 
project/programme).  
 
Increased water scarcity in semi -arid rural areas of the Southern Mediterranean, as a consequence of climate 
change, threatens economic life in these territories and, more specifically, the promotion of a balanced and 
sustainable agriculture development. I n the medium term these effects of climate change will either result in the 
disappearing of agriculture all together and of the associated livelihoods; or will generate polarized and conflict 
prone territories where only those with access to large amounts of capital will be in a position to mobilize 
scarcer resources (for example by deep well pumping), while the others remain impoverished .  
In Morocco, agriculture in semi -arid areas is relatively well represented by the latter model where large estates, 
highly capitalistic, coexist with very small sca le agriculture performed in oase s, along the rivers  (wadis) . Combining 
the issues of climate change, and its effects on water resources, with those related to the social and economic  
stability of remote rural ar eas (and/or of the peripheries of large cities receiving incoming from these areas), this 
bipolar model appears weak in terms of sustainability.  
The project intends to test a new model for development downstream of a water storage infrastructure based on an 
integrated approach and its three pillars:  
- Transfer surface water and build  an efficient irrigation water distribution infrastructure to insure “more crop for 
the drop”;  
- Ensur e an inclusive access to surface and underground water making sure that the lo cal communities benefit 
both from the public investment and from the technological transfer allowed by the presence of agro 
business investors;  
- Promote climate -smart agriculture within the oases and extensions (improving water efficiency of cropping 
system s, introducing drought resistant varieties, increasing added value per unit of land and per drop, 
promoting crop rotation and diversity);  
- Creating and securing self -regulating institutions, in which users take responsibility for the management of a 
common -pool resource, in this case water.  
This is a shift towards a more holistic approach to improving the adaptation of agriculture and rural territories to 
climate change, through irrigation development ; it breaks from a more classical approach focusing on infrastru cture .  
This approach and the tools it will develop  will constitute a “package” th at could be easily replicable in other irrigation 
schemes of the country.  In particular, this holistic approach t o water management for agriculture in an environment 
of increased scarcity may also reveal as an important tool to conflict prevention and stabilization of poor rural areas.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 75 
 
 F 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Describe how the project/ programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions.  
Linking water technologies, inclusiveness and water institutions is a novel approach that will generate knowledge and 
learning related to t he development paradigm in semi -arid areas of Morocco. In particular, research teams will be 
involved in the analysis and evaluation of the processes generated by the project, in the field of water institutions. 
Further, the project aims at developing adeq uate tools aimed at increasing the knowledge and the monitoring 
capacity of the situation of water resources underground. In particular, hydrological models will be developed for the 
deep water table of Boudnib.  
As example, the project should provide insi ght to public and private stakeholders on:  
- The use of Aquifer Contracts for self -regulatory institutions dedicated to scarce water management;  
- The feasibility of promoting technology transfers in irrigation between ex -smallholders and agribusiness “top 
notch” investors;  
- The appropriate technical and financial tools to promote smaller scale  climate -smart  investment s around an 
agribusiness nucleus  
A knowledge/capitalization component is included in the project in order to document how the more holistic app roach 
tested through this project is replicable, and eventually up -scaled in larger areas  (see above, description of sub -
component 3.4).  
 
The PMV provides an effective strategic framework for coordinating the activities of different financing institutions  in 
the area of agricultural irrigation improvements. As noted above, the investment needs are huge and the support and 
engagement of multiple financing institutions is needed. The GCF is already beginning to play an important role in 
the implementation of  the PMV and a number of Accredited Entities (AEs) are preparing major irrigation projects 
under the umbrella of the PMV, which is ensuring that these are designed and implemented in a coordinated fashion 
and with strong national ownership. For example, th is currently includes:  
 
• Morocco’s national Agricultural Development Agency (ADA), which is responsible for monitoring the 
implementation of the national agricultural strategy, linking with private or social investors, and promoting and 
managing the imple mentation of the aggregated model, providing linkages between the different partners. ADA has 
recently been accredited as an national AE of the GCF and is expecting to receive GCF Board approval in October 
2016 for a project ADA’s project supporting the de velopment of argan orchards in degraded environments in the 
Souss Massa Draa river basin, which will include irrigation improvements in the project area.  
 
• Agence Française de Development’s (AFD) proposed project in the Guir river basin which focuses on w ater 
distribution from the Kaddoussa dam and adapting oasis -based agriculture to the impacts of climate change by 
supporting the adjustment to the use of new water sources and associated technical support.  
 
• EBRD’s proposed Saïss  Water Conservation project (this project) in the Sebou -Saïss river basin which 
focuses on water resource conservation through a transformative water transfer system together with institutional 
and governance improvements to facilitate private investment i n modern irrigation technologies and community 
involvement in water resource management.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 75 
 
 F 
The effective coordinating function of the PMV is demonstrated by the way in which the above EBRD and AFD 
project proposals have been set up to cover different river basins, under the overall oversight and leadership of 
MAMF. Each of these projects is bein g implemented in a different river basin, under the guidance of MAMF and 
under the framework of the PMV. This is in line with best international practices in water resources management 
(e.g. the EU Water Framework Directive) which require water resources t o be managed and governed at the river 
basin level under an over -arching national framework. There will therefore be no overlap between the three projects 
in terms of physical works, water resources used (e.g. rivers, aquifers) or institutional partners (e .g. specific river 
basin authorities and PIUs/OPDs). AFD will ensure that ADA and EBRD are invited to future consultation events, and 
information sharing on the level of specialized CSO teams is ongoing and will be deepened.  
 
In addition, AFD  has held dis cussions with ADA and EBRD on how to align further the implementation of the three 
projects, including by ensuring that lessons learned and knowledge generated will be shared with the MAMF to 
ensure that the MAMF can more easily replicate activities, and b enefit from these. Project missions will be carried out 
jointly wherever possible and with the participation of MAMF. Where full joint missions are not possible, one 
representative each of the other agencies will be involved.  
 
Assessment factor : Contributi on to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning processes, or 
institutions  
 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development.  
The perspective of presenting this project to the GCF has made possible a much more ambitious approach to 
irrigation development in semi -arid / oasis ar eas. From an infrastructure based approach, the preparation phase and 
alignment on GCF’s investment criteria has allowed to move to a more holistic approach. This is a reflection of the 
public sector’s understanding of the broader role it has to play in increasing the resilience of semi -arid territories, 
prone to be strongly impacted by climate change. This role goes beyond the delivery of adaptation infrastructure ( for 
water transfer and irrigation development), and includes socioeconomic development of local communities, including 
reduction of gender inequality, as well as groundwater preservation.  
 
Describe how the pr oposal contributes to innovation,  market development and transformation. Examples include:  
 Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a  region  
 Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for p rojects/programme  
 
Furthermore, the Public -Private Partnership for the management of the irrigation scheme will reflect this holistic 
approach. The sourcing of the related expertise, through international tendering, will result in technological transfers 
towards the public s ector, as well as the local private sector likely to be involved in the PPP.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 75 
 
 F 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national  / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, 
and/or improve climate -responsive planning and development.  
The project’s contribution to the management of the aquifer (namely by the promotion of an Aquifer Contract ) will put 
into perspective the existing regulations and policies in the water sector. In particular, the country’s groundwater 
pricing regulations w ill be challenged in order to induce substitution of this resource by surface water. Moreover, the 
technical assistance to be provided on these issues (aquifer contracts, groundwater p reservation) will provide 
knowhow on these matters and produce useful em pirical data to improve policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 E.3. Sustainable Development P otential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Describe environmental, social and economic co -benefits listed above, including the gend er-sensitive development 
impact. Examples include:  
 Economic co -benefits  
Total number of jobs created: 7 500 through the creation of new small scale plantations and daily works in 
larger indu strial farms  
Amount of foreign currency savings :400 000  000 USD through reduced import of dates nationally 
produced  
 
The project will have economic co -benefits at two levels:  
- Through the preservation of existing forms of agriculture and self -employment in the oases , thanks 
to an improved access to water  and rehabilitation of the irrigation network inside the oases: 5 500 
people ; 
- By securing irrigated agriculture and new extensions outside the oases (4  000 ha) directed to the 
production of 40  000 T of dat es/year, creating USD 400  000 000 worth of produce. These 
extensions will furthermore generate the equivalent of 6 000 full time qualified and non -qualified 
jobs.  
 
 Social co -benefits:  
Oases communities are a unique social feature of pre -Saharan Morocco. The project’s component 2, 
funded by the GCF, will directly improve the livelihood of the population in the oases, not only on a purely 
economic level, but also in social aspects. The Oa sis Development Plans will include a social development 
component that will improve the living conditions of 5 500  people.  
 
 Environmental co -benefits  
They include: (i) preservation of oases biodiversity (1 000 ha of oasis preserved) ; (ii) preservation of 
groundwater resources (20  000 000 cubic meters/year).  
 
 Gender -sensitive development impact  
1 000 women will benefit from sub -component s 2.3.4.2. and 2.3.4.3. of the project. Please refer to Annex 7, 
which details the project’s approach to gender .


---
*Page 48*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 75 
 
 F 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for be neficiary country and 
groups ). 
Vulnerability to climate change  
Morocco, with a land area of    710 850 square kilometers, is  
located  in north Africa  between the Atlantic Ocean (to the 
west) and the Mediterranean Sea to the northeast, and is 
bordered to the south by Algeria and to the southeast by  
Mauritania . Morocco sits between two climatic zones: 
temperate in the north and tr opical in the south. To the west, 
the anticyclone of the Azores and the Saharan depression 
form great spatial as well as temporal climate variations. 
Rainfall in the north can be as high as 2 meters per year, 
while in the desert south, average annual rainf all is 25 mm 
per year. The country has four major geographic regions: the 
coastal planes; the hills to the north that are parallel to the 
Mediterranean Sea; the hills to the center that include the 
Middle Atlas, High Atlas and Anti -Atlas; and the desert hi lls. 
The latest 2050 climatic projections in Morocco indicate a 
progressive increase in aridity due to scarcer rainfall ( - 15 to 
20%) and the increase in average temperatures (+ 4 to 
+6 °C) which will generate an increase in evapotranspiration 
of more than  8%.  
Vulnerability of Morocco economy and population linked with  the vulnerability of agriculture sector  
The projections also indicate reduced agricultural yields and crop failures from longer drought periods. This means 
that surface water resources will  become less available, while the agricultural crops’ needs will increase, thus 
increasing the pressure on underground water.  
Climate change poses a significant threat to Morocco’s water and environmental resources, which are already under 
extensive press ure from population explosion, industrial growth, tourism development activities and agricultural 
extension. Agriculture’s value added to GDP has undergone significant fluctuations due to weather conditions from 
28% in 1960 to 14% in 2007 and 16% in 2009.  
The study on the impacts of climate change on Moroccan agriculture conducted by FAO, the National Institute for 
Agricultural Research and the National Directorate of Meteorology in 2009 expected a decrease in productivity of the 
main crops in semi -arid are as by lower yields ( -15% for wheat in 2050, 10% for barley), extension of crops on 
marginal lands and decrease in consumption of fertilizers. This study also shows that the area of distribution of some 
demanding species in water (corn, sunflower, beans, ol ives) or of species affected by rising temperatures (fruit tree 
species needing cold) could move. The reduction in the availability of surface water and aquifer recharge could 
also affect the performance of irrigated agriculture . Finally, note that these a re the areas most suitable for 
agriculture today (North and Central West) that will experience the most significant falls in crop yields.  
Agriculture is important to the country’s economy and food security; it is practiced on 67% of the total area land, 
employs about 41% of the population and, in 2009, contributed 16% to the total GDP. Agriculture consumes over


---
*Page 49*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 75 
 
 F 
83% of harvested water, but water scarcity and irregularity are major hindrances to its development  
Thus, climate significantly influences the Moro ccan economy4. The World Development report 2010 classified 
Morocco among the countries that will suffer the most due to the negative impacts of climate change on 
yields. As illustration, the 1994/95 drought caused agricultural GDP to fall by 45% and GDP t o fall by 8%.  
Smallholders are particularly vulnerable to climate change.  Morocco has a large rural population, with over 40 % 
of a total population of 33,848,282 living in rural areas (  HCP Morocco 2014 .), which is highly dependent on natural 
resources (agriculture, animal husbandry and biomass energy) and, thus, very vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change.  
Vulnerability assessment at local level:  
The Project area is composed of the rural municipal ity of Oued Naâm and the urban municipality of Boudnib and 
characterized by a fall in the rural population by 0,7% per annum between 2004 and 2014, while the urban 
population continues to slightly increase at a rate of 1.4% per annum. Oued Naâm consists of  7 oasis schemes 
distributed along the Guir course.  
Change in the population of Boudnib and Oued Nâam between 2004 and 2014  
Urban Municipality (MU), Rural 
Municipality (CR)  2004  2014  AAGR  
Total  Households  Total  Households  
BOUDNIB (MU)  9,867  1,828  11,373  2,350  1.4 
OUED NAAM (CR)  5,709  1,000  5,340  1,044  -0.7 
 
The whole area is characterized by a very low employment rate (Oued Naâm : 35,6%, Boudnib  : 28,8%), especially 
for women (ON: 24,4%, B : 5,6%) and a high illiteracy rate (ON: 45,3% and 40,3% for women, B: 31,6% and 40,3% 
for women).  
                                                             
4 
http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportalb/home.cfm?page=country_p rofile&CCode=MAR&ThisTab=Dash
board


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 75 
 
 F 
Population structure for the Oued Naam 
commune  
Group of age  % of the population  
0-4 y 13,5  
5-9 y 10,1  
10-14 y 9,3 
15-19 y  8 
20-24 y  7,2 
25-29 y  6,5 
30-34 y  6,9 
35-39 y  6,7 
40-44 y  5,7 
45-49 y  5,1 
50-54 y  4,8 
55-59 y  3,8 
60-64 y  3,2 
65-69 y  2,8 
70-74 y  2,6 
75 y and more  3,8 
 
.   
 
Population structure according to age and sex  
 Male  Female  
Less than 6 y 51,48  48,34  
From 6 to 14 y 50,27  49,69  
From 15 to 59 y 44,27  55,65  
60 y and more  42,12  57,69  
 
Literacy  rate by sex  : 
 
 
  Masculin  Féminin  
Taux 
d'analphabétisme  30.7  49.9  
 
Agriculture is the main economic activity in the region (70% and even close to 100% in oases) and the major 
source of income. In this regard, the project area is experiencing a general transformation dynamic following the 
concentration of agricultural investments (in recently created modern palm tree groves) . 
Oases suffer fr om agricultural decline, due to economic and social opportunities offered elsewhere and factors 
blocking development in these areas such as the degradation of local farming and non -farming infrastructures.  
Agriculture in oases is adapted to a necessary co nfinement within the boundaries of the irrigable areas along the 
river and consists at plot level of a three layer vertical stratification: cereal and alfalfa; fruit trees; date palm -trees. It 
is characterized by a high level of complexity of property and usage rights (of water, land, trees) and by an extreme 
fragmentation of the holdings (as a result of time and heritage rules). Holdings rarely exceed 0,5 ha/farmer. This 
system allows a balance between subsistence production and commercialized goods (some fruits but mainly 
dates), though competitiveness and monetary income of these farms are very low (estimated income of


---
*Page 51*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 75 
 
 F 
2000  EUR/ha/year for holdings between 0,1 and 0,5 ha, and negative gross profit margin). Nevertheless oases 
fulfill other vital functions for the population of the region: residence, preservation of the landscape, biological 
diversity and vivacity of the territory. They also play a support role to the extension outside the oases: use of cut -
offs from the palms of the oasis for new plantation s, mobilization of know -how, etc. Finally, oases (despite their 
sophistication and cultural importance) are nowadays more of a poverty trap than an enabling environment for 
farmers that wish to improve their livelihood.  
Small extensions (2 to 10 ha on aver age) have been developing outside the oases over a couple of decades, which 
are undertaken by local farmers mobilizing both the know -how gained and developed in oasis -based agriculture as 
well as innovations from the large businesses (where they often work  as paid labor). This development is due to the 
combined effects of the exceptional flood of 2008, modernization constraints inside the traditional oases and 
measures favoring modern investment through the Green Morocco Plan.  
However, this dynamic is ofte n restricted by smallholders’ lack of capital, socio -technical network and access to 
technologies. Income of such projects is consequently low (about 5000 EUR/ha/year with a tree density of 80) and 
profitability often negative.  
Large farms integrated in th e date value chain have more recently started developing, promoted by agribusiness 
farmers from other parts of Morocco, relying on capital -intensive investments (with strong support from the State), 
advanced technologies, high technical and practical knowl edge and standard and strong business models 
(monoculture, Madjhoul, etc.).  
This model is characterized by high income and returns (estimated income of up to 30 000 EUR/ha/year with a tree 
density of 150 and gross profit margin of 4700 EUR/ha).  
The divide  between these two classes of farmers threatens the social balance at local level and is potentially a 
source of future conflicts and overall territorial vulnerability.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/ programme addresses the following needs:  
 Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population  
As mentioned previously, the project will secure self -employment (family farming) in oases ( 5 000 people ) through an 
improved access to water for production and will contribute to the creation of 7 500 new jobs locally, by increasing 
the sustainability of the economic dynamic underway in the Boudnib Plain. Furthermore, the project will contribute to 
the country’s economic strategy regar ding the date value chain and to an increase in date production estimated at 
40 000 tons / year  (mostly high quality Madjhool ). This should bring Morocco close to being the first Madjhool  date 
producer in the world.  
 Absence of altern ative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
As mentioned above, Morocco will be strongly hit by the impacts of climate change on aridity and, as a result, 
decrease in the area suitable for rain fed agriculture. Facing and anticipating this issue requires extremely high levels 
of investments in irrigation, water transfer infrastructure, desalinization plants, etc. for which  financial support from 
donors is paramount to sustain the rhythm of “adaptation” investments needed to be ready by 2050, when the full 
impacts of climate change will be felt. This project is an example of such donor support to this line of investments.  
 Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
The institutions involved in this project ( MAPM/DIAEA, ORMVAT, ADA, ABH) have strong capacities in general.  
Nevertheless, the complexity of the holistic approach to irrigation promoted by this project calls for a strong technical 
assistance, especially for the implementation of Component 2 and 3. Though Morocco has background and 
knowledge on the establishment of aquifer contracts, international expertise brought on this topic through the TA will 
be useful.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 75 
 
 F 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate -
resilient development, and the degree to  which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
Morocco has been suffering from Climate change, namely in the agriculture sector, for several decades and has 
been elaborating and implementing national plans and strategies to fight against global warming in various sectors 
for more than a decade.  
As far as Agriculture is concerned, the various strategies are now embedded at the country level in the National Plan 
to fight Against Global Warming (2009) & the INDC, and at the sector level in the Plan Maroc Vert, as cross -
programmes to support the two main socio -economic pillars (see FP). The implementation of such measures and 
programmes is supported by the State through  (i) investment in infrastructures and equipment, (ii) subsidies to 
farmers, cooperatives and producers’ organisations and agro -businesses to encourage irrigation investments and 
adaptation techniques (Agriculture Development Funds) and (iii) provision of soft support, knowledge transfer, etc to 
farmers, especially the most vulnerable.  
The project will strongly contribute to the national climate strategies and objectives, mainly in terms of adaptation but 
also in terms of mitigation, as described below:  
 Irrigation of new lands in semi -arid areas thanks to the Kaddoussa dam, to enable the development of a high 
added -value crop is planned by the national Irrigation Extension Programme. This programme aims at increasing 
irrigated agriculture surfaces all ove r the country (+ 160  000 ha by 2020), while improving water distribution’s 
efficiency, value of water, crop yield, and farmers’ income.  
 Provision of surface water, combined management of water resources, and mobilization of water from 
intermediary basins will contribute to the preservation of underground water resources, as stated in the National 
Water Strategy adopted in 2009 and in the INDC, in a zone where agro business investors are already 
increasingly making use of the latter.  
 Use of modern irrigatio n techniques and corresponding advisory services which will be provided to the project’s 
beneficiaries will help them use water more effectively, as targeted in the National Water Saving Programme for 
Irrigation.  
 Plantation of palm trees in arid areas   is a component of the National Action Plan Against Desertification, which 
targets 2,9 M new trees by 2030 (cost amounting to 3,23  M MAD), to improve both soil structure and composition 
& water retention capacities and stock carbon (contribution to the mitiga tion component).  
 
Oases are identified as vulnerable zones to be preserved in the INDC and the GMP through the implementation of 
specific agricultural, social, economic and environmental measures, which the project takes into account:  
 The canalization of t he wadi will protect them from floods which can be devastating for villages & infrastructures, 
gardens and local heritage, as well as from droughts since regular water service  will be ensured.  
 Introduction of new species and new  agricultural  techniques, re habilitation of trees, diversification of crops, etc., 
will improve oases resilience to climate change, biodiversity, inhabitants’ income and life conditions. It will thus 
reduce rural exodus and help preserve valuable ancestral practices.  
 Plantation of he dges will stop land erosion.  
 
The project will as well contribute to meet the objectives of the two main GMP  pillars.


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 75 
 
 F 
Within the 1st pillar of the GMP , sub -programmes concerning the 20 main value -chains in Morocco were actually 
elaborated targeting struct uration, enhancement, competitiveness improvement and fair distribution of added -value. 
And as stated in FP C1, dates are one of the 20 products to be promoted. The Dates Programme aims at reaching a 
national production of 160  000 tons by 2020 in order to substitute current imports, but also to become a net exporter. 
This target will be reached by the plantation of an additional 17  000 ha of palm -trees. Additionally, this strategy 
focuses on the production of quality dates, in particular of the Madjhool var iety which have been characterized under 
the protected geographical indication “Dattes Madjhool du Tafilalet”.  
Eventually, the project will provide soft support (technical as well as farm management and financial & banking 
advice) to project -holders willi ng to develop agricultural, namely palm -trees, activities in the area. This will help agro -
businesses but also small and medium promoters design and implement sustainable farming projects, resilient to 
climate change and efficiently natural resources.  
 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track re cord of the accredited entity and  executing entities  with respect to the 
activities that  they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/ programme.  
The AFD Group operates  in Morocco since 1992, and at this date, the country is the largest recipient of AFD’s 
funding (€ 2 .5 billion exposure in 2014)  worldwide .  
AFD operates and supports national strategies in various sectors (education, agriculture, energy, water sanitation, 
transport, etc.), with a focus  on: 
- Enhancing human capital through inclusive education ; 
- Supporting the modernizatio n of SMEs;  
- Development of rural  territories ; 
- Management of natural resources in the context of climate change ; 
- Promoting renewable energy and energy efficiency . 
 
In the rural development sector, AFD is currently funding the 2nd pillar of the Green Morocco Plan ( 50 MEUR) – 
Morocc o’s overarching strategy for agriculture development. In this context , there has been extensive field and 
analytical work by AFD and the Agency for Agriculture Development (in charge of implementing the GMP ) directed to 
better supporting a more business oriented family agriculture in the more environmentally and economically 
vulnerable areas of the country.  
AFD also supports:  
 
- The National Program of Rural Roads to open up isolated areas and facilitate mark et access to producers ; 
- The Crédit Agricole du Maroc  (main agricultural bank)   to enable farmers without bank guarantees to access 
credit ; 
- A sub -component of the  GMP  focus ing on the adaptation of agriculture to climate change through i) the 
mapping   of climate evolution and agriculture, ii) agricultural experimentation and iii) the creation of a climate 
index agricultural insurance  
 
AFD has been supporting irrigation development in the country for more than 20 years, mainly in the Moyen Sebou 
valley, with a  total amount of financing of EUR 154  M. Two projects implemented by the Office Régional de Mise en 
Valeur Agricole du Gharb (ORMVAG) in the 1990s aimed at rehabilitating  existing equipments and exten ding the 
irrigation network , focusing on the improvement  of the ORMVAG and the water -users management capacities and 
thus the technical performances of the waterservice. The project , currently under implementation in the Moyen 
Sebou region, has contributed to the elaboration of a unique approach of involvement of water users (farmers) in the 
management of the irrigation scheme (distribution of water and infrastructure maintenance). AFD’s extensive 
experience in the field of irrigated agriculture all over the w orld and, in particular in the MENA region – includin g 
Morocco will be of high value for the implementation of this project. In particular, AFD’s knowledge and experience 
on irrigated infrastructure delivery (building on France’s know -how in the field), partici patory water management


---
*Page 54*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 75 
 
 F 
(development of water us ers associations, aquifer contracts ) and family farming development will be directly injected 
in this project.  
 
E.5.3. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Please specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal 
was developed.  
16 different consultations were organized during the preparation phase of the project with the oases population: 7 
targeted men, 7 women, 1 youth and 1 the  herders of the area. Detail ed outputs of these consultations are 
presented in the feasibility study/Action Plan in Annex 5 and have been used as the basis for the design of 
component 2, as well as the impacts assessment study.  
Consultations included:  
- Diagnosis of the population’s initial economic and social situation : types of crops cultivated (almonds, dates, 
olives, cereals, vegetables…), water use, irrigation system, activity schedule during the year, role of 
men/women.  
- Expected impacts of the dam project in the communities and answers to the questions  
- Ideas of projects to improve living conditions in the oases and promote the cultural heritage  
As Delegate Contractor of the project, ORMVAT’s remit is to ensure implementation of the process of disclo sure of 
information and communications towards the other project stakeholders, the first level of which are the local 
authorities and the communities concerned. They will make the Stakeholders engagement plan (SEP) their own and 
implement it.  
 
E.6. Effici ency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public  investment.  
The proposed financing structure is a mix of senior loans and grants that will allow tackling both short and medium 
term objectives related to resilient economic development, as well as longer term sustainable resource management.  
The resources provided in the form of loans will help deliver high efficiency irrigation infrastructure directed to the 
development of more resilient forms of agriculture by stabilizing and securing access to water, as well as promoting 
an inclusive environmen t for investment in the palm tree value chain , by the private sector . The loans will follow 
AFD’s rating system.  
The grants will help the executing entities tackle the complexity of a holisitic  approach to irrigation (technical 
assistance) as well as financially absorb the costly and longer term component s of the overall investment 
(groundwater management, preservation of oases).  In particular, absence of these additional resources and business 
as usual would have maintained the baseline situation, characterized on the one hand by high vulnerability of oases 
to water scarcity and lack of economic opportunities and on the other by unregulated use of underground water 
resources. Costs to improve  this situation add -up to those of the transfer infrastructure and become difficultly 
incurable by the State: it is clear from discussions between AFD and the GoM that without additional grant resources, 
the holistic approach proposed by the present project w ould not have been possible.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 75 
 
 F 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriat e 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 ( core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
As mentioned above, the project proposes a holistic approach to irrigation development as a tool for agriculture 
adaptation to climate change. It recognizes the insufficiencies of a “hard” approach of infrastructure delivery, in that it 
will either produce low efficiency resource mobilization or polar ized and non -inclusive development patterns. In 
comparison with suc h a benchmark, the project will not only facilitate efficient high technology irrigation extension 
investments, it will also guarantee the inclusivity of these investments (territorial resilience) and design appropriate 
tools for the management of a scarce  resource.  
Costs of Kaddoussa project are comparable to other irrigation projects’ costs in Morocco. For example, s ee B.4 for a 
benchmark with the Guerdane project.  
AFD is also supporting a similar project (transfer of water from a dam to a 6,400  ha area located 30km away from the 
dam and concerning 2,200 farms) in the Moyen Sebou region, close to Fes, and this project’s total cost per 
beneficiary is in the range of EUR  4,000. The total cost per farm is comparable (EUR 460 compared to EUR 420 in 
Kaddoussa project) and the total cost by ha is even 30% higher.  
Eventually, the costs differences are mainly linked to the specific actions targeting oases’ environmental and socio -
economic resilience to climate change and combined management of water resources, inc luded in Kaddoussa 
project. Investments in remote areas such as the Boudnib valley may also increase in vestment costs.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co -financing ratio  (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long -term low emission investment.  
Total amount of co -financing = 76 MEUR  
Fund’s investment = 20 MEUR  
Co-financing ratio = 3 ,8 
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected e conomic and financial rate of return  with and without the Fund’s support, base d on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
 
The economic analysis conducted shows that without the  intervention of the  project and the Fund’s support  (no-
project situation, see Annex 10), the overall system (oases + agribusiness extensions) reaches a breaking point (due 
to resource overexploitation) before full return on investments: internal rate of return in this scenario is negative. With 
the Fund’s support, targeting the oases and supportin g improved groundwater management, the system sustains its 
economic performance until full return on investments and reaches internal rat e of return up to 20% overall ( 5 000 
ha). 
 
Please describe  financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
Long run viability of the irrigation scheme (management & maintenance)  developed through this project  is secured 
by a Public – Private Partnership that will be set up in the course of the project . 
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit s trategy  in case of private sector operations  (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.).


---
*Page 56*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 75 
 
 F 
NOT APPLICABLE  
 
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
The agribusiness  estates  developing in the area  are bringing state of the art drip irrigation equipment and systems . 
Linked to groundwater manag ement tools and to an incl usive approach to irrigated agriculture, the system developed 
through this project is representative of a large part of Morocco’s future agriculture.  
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total project  financing  US$____ ___  
(b) Requested  GCF amount  US$____ ___  
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  ____ ___ tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$____ ___ / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  US$____ ___ / tCO 2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators  (d) and (e)  above.  
Not applicable  
 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme  and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
Not applicable  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit


---
*Page 57*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 75 
 
 F 
generated as a result of the project/programme)  
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 75 
 
 F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the  detailed economic and financial analysis  (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section  E.6.3). 
The financing plan of the project has evolved during the preparation phase due to the increase of the scope of the 
project and debt management issues , impacting the economic and financial analysis. An up -to-date version of the 
economic model is now available Annex 10.  
From discussions between AFD and the Government  of Morocco, it appears that without additional GCF grant 
resources, the holistic approa ch proposed by the present project would not have been possible.  Project preparation 
was initiated in February  2015, solely on the basis of a 40 MEUR AFD loan and 1 MEUR small grant. The initi al 
design of the project, as mentioned elsewhere in the FP was based on the transfer infrastructure between the dam 
and the Boudnib Plain, crossing through the oases. At identification and throughout the feasibility process, it became 
clear to AFD and the Ministry of Agriculture that additional components of action we re needed to make this project 
sustainable: (i) stronger support to oasis development and resilience (economic and climatic); (ii) stronger emphasis 
on the management of groundwater resources, namely by the establishment of an aquifer contract (and related  
information systems). Inclusion of these components in the project received technical approval by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and we initiated discussions with the GCF for additional funding in the form of a 20 MEUR concessional 
loan.  
In view of debt man agement issues, the Government couldn’t accept this financing plan despite their essential 
character  to the sustainability of the project .  
The technical preparation of the project was halted between October 2015 and February 2016, during which 
discussions took place between AFD and the Moroccan Government on ways to resume the process. The only way 
to continue the project preparation was to s hift the contents of the GCF funding proposal from loan to grants, in the 
same amount. Submission of the corresponding FP and inception of discussions with the GCF on this basis has 
allowed the overall project preparation to be finalized (and the project t o be submitted to AFD’s Board).  It is worth 
noting that, at this stage, it is the Moroccan Government’s request that the signing of the AFD loan agreement take 
place only when the GCF funding agreement is granted.  
 
Based on the  above  analysis, please pro vide economic and financial justification  (both qualitative and quantitative)  for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed  in section B.2 . 
 
The actual proposed financing structure is a mix of senior loans and grants that will allow tackling both short and 
medium term objectives related to resilient economic development, as well as longer term sustainable resource 
management. The project will be implemented in particularly deprived areas that need strengthen ing in terms of, 
dialogue and consultation, and long -term management of their water resources.  
The grant nature of the GCF contribution to this project is consistent with the following guidelines:  
(i) Grant elements should be tailored to incremental cost or the risk premium required to make the 
investment viable, or to cover specific activities such as technical assistance ; 
 
As mentioned above, GFC funding are tailored to the incremental costs related to implementation of components 2 
and 3. These components,  key to the overall sustainability and adaptation impact of the project, would not exist, if not 
for GCF’s financial contribution in the form of grants.  
 
(ii) Seeking the right level of concessionality, so as not to displace investments that would 
otherwise ha ve occurred, including for private sector investment;  
Private sector investment inside the oases schemes are very low, namely due to the small scale of the holdings 
(between 0, 1 and 0, 5 ha) and oases agriculture systems brings an estimated income of 2000  EUR/ha/year. Levels 
of income of the population are low and oases have a public good dimension which falls into national strategies for 
preservation of these cultivated ecosystems and associated populations. The Government of Morocco seeks grant


---
*Page 59*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 75 
 
 F 
resources  to fund these strategies and associated projects in the oases: for example the Adaptation of Oasis to 
Climate Change Project, 10 MUSD for 8 oases (2015 -20), funded by the Adaptation Fund.  
 
With regard to the overall infrastructure financing plan, the dam  upstream is financed through a grant from an Arab 
Fund. In this context, GCF funds will add concessionality to an overall costly investment for the State, which has both 
a short term (allowing current forms of agriculture to be resilient to increased arid ity due to climate change) and long 
term return component (preservation of the aquifer for future investments/generations). The GCF’s concessional input 
in the financing scheme for component 1 (5 MEUR) is related to the longer term and adaptation component  of this 
investment.  
(iii) Levels of indebtedness capacity of the recipient should be taken into account so as not to 
encourage excessive indebtedness ; 
Global public debt is considered sustainable according to the IMF (80% of the GDP) but is nevertheless on an 
increasing trend. The global economic crisis having interrupted the State’s de -leveraging trajectory, initiated in 2009 
and reinforcing the Treasury’s debt which has increased to 64% in 2009. The  current policy is characterized by a 
more strict management of public debt to get back in line with the 2009 strategy.  
 
 
(iv) Structure terms on a case ‐by‐case basis to address specific barriers;  
The grants resources will be dedicated to the part of the project that have a low and long -term profitability for which 
the costs cannot be supported by the current stakeholders: soft investments (technical assistant, training, etc.) and 
financial support (small scale producers) to carry out the innovative socio -economic development in this area, as well 
as the structuring of a  PPP for the management and maintenance of the irrigation network.  
(v) Leveraging of other financing, including public and private financing, seeking to maximize 
leverage in the case of private financing ; 
As mentioned above, the GCF funds have a retroactive le verage effect on AFD funds, making possible a more 
holistic and sustainable project, acceptable to our Board.  
 
(vi) Promote long ‐term financial sustainability  
At the end of the project, the government of Morocco will finance the water management and revitaliza tion of oases 
activities that will be implemented through GCF fund. Government of Morocco and private investors (by paying fees 
for water) will finance the infrastructure scheme maintenance.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 75 
 
 F 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  
The irrigation techniques promoted through this project are state of the art  in terms of efficiency (comparable to Israeli 
or Californian systems5): they are particularly adapted to the se mi-arid situation of the project area and will play a key 
role in the sustainability of the project as long as the regulatory aspects to be deve loped in Component 4 are in place.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the projec t/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accord ance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and 
Action Plan.  
Main outcomes of the ESIA and ESMP:  
Due diligence process:  
ESIA has been conducted by independent consultants and experts (environmental, social and procedures experts) 
selected through an international call for tender. ESIA has been done thanks to the following procedures, according to 
the Terms of Reference of the study, IFC Performance standards which are applied by GCF, and best due diligence 
practices:  
- Reviewing existing information:  
ESIA is based o n deep analysis of environmental and social area and project information. Regarding the project 
information, ESIA is based on the information gathered in the diagnosis reports ( Annex 4) and the infrastructure 
design study ( Annex 6). Regarding the project area information, ESIA is based on official documents about the 
population and local agriculture (Official Popula tion census, official agricultural reports) and IUCN species status. It is 
also based on research documents about local flora and fauna and palm trees and oases agriculture. All sources and 
bibliography can be found in ESIA report.  
- Site visits and stakeholders and communities meetings:  
ESIA experts have implemented several site visits during the process of the assessment. T hey have checked onsite 
fauna and flora, and met all stakeholders and communities. All reports of these meetings and focus groups can be 
found in the ESIA Annex es, as well as the interview method.  
- IFC requirements scanning and applicability for the project : 
An entire review of IFC Performance Standards has been done to identify their applicability in the context of the 
project (section 4.2 of the ESIA).  
ESIA summary and key environmental and social issues and impacts:  
The ESIA has studied the initial state of environmental and social components of the project, the impacts (positive 
and negative) specific to PDIAAI -CC, interactions with the dam and the cumulative impacts with the dam. Impacts 
                                                             
5 See : http://www.haaretz.com/israel -news/business/.premium -1.709082


---
*Page 61*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 75 
 
 F 
have been analyzed for each step of the project realization: “Works” and “Operating” phase.  
Concerning the initial state of environmental components, the section of Guir wadi interested by the study is part of 
the South Atlas domain. Constituted by the basins of Errachidia and of Bou dnib (GCIM, 2015), it is divided into two 
relief sectors . The uneven part in the North, to ksar Tazougart, looks over the Boudnib plain in the axis of which the 
Guir water source curves to take a West -East direction. This plain has a morphology of regs, ou tcropping of flat rocks 
covered in gravel and stones and, in the bed of the watercourse, sand -limestone sediments (Ramsar, 2015). The 
sector is dominated by the following plant species: Hammada scoparia, Salsola vermiculata. The Boudnib plain is 
dominated by the following species: Hammada scoparia, Zyziphus lotus and Anabasis aphylla.  
 Only some parts of the wadi show wetlands that shelter diversified flora and fauna. These places are found where 
the underground wadi water comes to the surface (Saheli oases ) or when a dam has been built (e.g. Tizougarine, 
Ghaba…). Thanks to the presence of water, tall grasses such as Phragmites and woody flora (tamarisk and laurel), 
wetlands attract many terrestrial insects, aquatic or semi -aquatic (many species of insects h ave been observed: 
damselflies, dragonflies, truxales, etc.) and are a place of drinking and hunting for bats and other mammals (a 
Rüppell's fox was found dead in a wetland). The presence of turtles in the wetlands seems important since numerous 
specimens of Pond Turtle (mauremys leprosa) have been observed. It is also proven that the resurgences of the 
water source help with the feeding of aquatic invertebrates (underground crustaceans, amphipods, aquatic 
oligochaetes, etc.) first link in the wadi's food c hain. The biodiversity of stygobites (underground species) is rich in the 
Tafilalet. In the study area numerous species have been observed in a well in Tazougart (Boughrous, 2007). Grey 
herons and egrets feed from the crustaceans in the wadi, these birds a re species indicating potential resurgences. 
Unlike hepertofauna and insects, the presence of avifauna is however relatively low. The wadi is not a habit rich in 
fish. 
Outside wetlands, fauna is rare, potential IUCN red list endangered species present in t he region have not been seen 
for several decades (e.g. striped hyena, hyaena hyaena, cape hare, lepus capensis). Only the golden jackal can be 
seen, but is classified as “minor concern”.  
Concerning the social components of the initial state, the analysis a llowed to identify: (i) cultural heritage through, for 
instance, historical fortified villages, the “ksours”, irrigation water management and infrastructures (“khettaras”), (ii) 
different forms of land ownership between private land in the oases and collec tive land on the plain area (rented or 
not), (ii) several key social groups, such as women, young men, nomadic and semi -nomadic breeders. Focus groups 
sessions with these key social groups have permitted to understand livelihood conditions of the people, t heir 
understanding of the project and their expectations regarding to the project components and their impacts.   
Also, a deep analysis of the institutional framework of the project is given, from supervising ministries to local 
administrations ORMVATfs.  
The PDIAAI -CC is a unique project. It includes in its definition through several subcomponents and specific objectives 
of the Action Plan, measures that enable mitigation of negative impacts and enhancement of positive impacts of the 
irrigation scheme downst ream dam Kaddoussa identified in the ESIA.  
In that respect, the ESIA did not identify any major negative impacts due to the Project that could not be mitigated or 
compensated. The main impacts are associated with the accumulation of impacts between the Pro ject and the 
Kaddoussa dam because a section intersecting the surface water intakes of Guir Wadi will be created.  
Also, the project will lead to many benefits for operators of traditional oases securing water supply and through the 
implementation of the A ction Plan.  
Key impacts of the Project, which are concentrated in the operating phase, taking into account the synergy effects 
between the components of the Project is given in the table below.


---
*Page 62*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 75 
 
 F 
 
Impacts during operation phase  Significance of the impact and  probability  
Impacts on hydrological continuity: creation of a 
shorted section  Importance of cumulative  impact between the Kaddoussa 
dam and Saheli: major  
Probability of occurrence of the cumulative  impact: strong  
Impacts on volumes mobilized annually: increase and 
securisation  Importance of the cumulative  positive impact: major  
Probability of occurrence of the cumulative  impact: strong  
Hydrogeology impact: reducing the recharge of the 
alluvial aquifer  Importance of the impact ( interaction ): medium  
Probability of occurrence of the impact ( interaction ): 
strong  
Hydrogeology impact: release of pressure on the 
Senonian aquifer,  Importance of the positive impact ( interaction ): medium  
Probability of occurrence of the im pact ( interaction ): 
medium  
Impacts on wetlands and the wadi ecosystem: 
Wetlands shrinking, impact on wildlife  Cumulative  impact significance: medium  
Probability of occurrence of the cumulative  impact: strong  
Impacts on gender (vulnerable population): disruption 
of domestic activities related to the river, possibilities 
of implementation of activities based on the demands 
of women  Importance of the impact (interaction)  (fears of women): 
medium  
Probability of impact occurrence (interaction): these are 
fears (and expectations) and therefore the probability is 
medium.  
Importance of the positive impact ( interaction ) 
(expectations of women): medium  
Probability of impact occurrence (interaction): these are 
expectations and therefore the probability is medium.  
Impacts on the uses of the Guir wadi and associated 
economic activities (traditional and semi nomadic 
oases): Securing the supply of agricultural water of 
oases downstream of the Kaddoussa dam  Significance of positive impact: medium  
Probability of  occurrence of the impact: medium  
Impacts on the uses of the Guir wadi and associated 
economic activities (traditional and semi nomadic 
oases): Reduction of the purifying role of Wadi Guir  Cumulative  impact significance: medium  
Probability of occurrence of the cumulative  impact: strong  
Impacts on the uses of the Guir wadi and associated 
economic activities (traditional and semi nomadic 
oases): Reduction of Wadi inputs profitable to 
nomadic and semi -nomadic farmers  Cumulative  impact significance: medium  
Probability of occurrence of the cumulative  impact on 
semi -nomads: strong


---
*Page 63*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 75 
 
 F 
Changing the water management at the Wadi Guir 
oases  Cumulative  impact significance: medium  
Probability of occurrence of the cumulative  impact: strong  
Supp ort of oasis farmers to change management of 
irrigation water in traditional oases  Significance of positive impact: medium  
Probability of occurrence of the impact: strong  
 
Temporary cut of agricultural water supply in the 
traditional oases  Importance of the impact (interaction): major  
Probability of occurrence of the impact (interaction): 
strong  
Impacts on traditional water infrastructure: Reduction 
of the supply of the khettaras by the alluvial aquifer  Cumulative  impact significance: medium  
Probability of occurrence of the  cumulated  impact: 
medium  
Impacts on traditional water infrastructure: Improving 
agricultural production in the oases, khettaras supply  Extent of the positive impact: major  
Probability of occurrence of the impact: strong  
Impacts on economic activities outside the traditional 
oasis: Securing the supply of agricultural water  Extent of the positive impact: major  
Probability of occurrence of the impact: strong  
Following this table, some key E&S issues are to be addressed to allow minimi zing impacts and optimizing the 
implementation of the project and resilience of the beneficiaries to climate change. These issues can be considered 
as risk factors for the success of the project (see section G.2).  
First issue is to ensure that oasian peopl e are well trained to manage their new surface water (Water users 
association). Second issue is that the distribution network needs to be built according to the communities’ demand, 
especially coming from women (see action plan section 2.3 for more details ). A high level participation of the 
beneficiaries will be undertaken to implement these inclusive local investment projects. Third issue is the 
implementation of water storage infrastructures (section 2.2 of the Action Plan) along the intermediate basin d own 
Kaddoussa dam for environmental protection (wetlands saving) and optimize water savings.  
Finally, if  an aquifer contract  is not established and signed by all stakeholders, the long term sustainability of water 
withdrawals (both surface and underground) is threatened . But the project can only be a support, through its technical 
assistance, to the public authority in charge t o implement this contract, which is the water basin authority.  
See Annex 8 for full E&S impacts study and ESMP.  
Environmental and social risk category of the proposed project following the GCF ESS definition : B 
ESMP summary  
The ESMP has been elaborated following IFC standards, ensuring a feasible implementation of its mitigation and 
enhancement measures and their monitoring, a precise estimation of their costs and transparent and regular intern 
and extern communication procedures. In that respect, the ES MP is organized as the following:  
- The description of the actions implemented and to be implemented within the framework of the ESMP;  
- The description of the roles and responsibilities for implementation of the future measures;


---
*Page 64*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 75 
 
 F 
- The mitigation/improvement mea sures for the works phase to be included as Environmental and Social 
Clauses in the call for tender documentation for the construction firm(s) (Project Manager) then in their 
binding contract with ORMVAT;  
- The mitigation/improvement measures for the operati on phase to be implemented by ORMVAT and partners;  
- A Summary of the impacts and associated measures, with the roles and responsibilities of project 
stakeholders, the costs and the period of execution;  
- The Stakeholders Engagement Plan  (SEP). The SEP is a do cument that presents the commitments of 
dialogue towards the communities affected and other project stakeholders. It ensures proper dissemination of 
information and an effective, relevant consultation of these stakeholders to involve them in the decisions that 
concern them. It follows, in particular, the requirements and recommendations of stakeholder engagement, 
through paragraphs 25 - 36 of Performance Standard No. 1 of the IFC.  
The ESMP provides as well all forms that will allow the implementation team t o run mitigation measures, identify new 
potential impacts and update the project data base (e.g form for handling grievances, composition of the grievance 
register, Identification sheet of the potential impacts of the activities and micro projects of the P DIAAI -CC…).  
The project is shaped in a way that the implementation program (Action Plan), already foresees activities that allows 
negative impacts mitigation. The following table permits to identify which impacts are mitigated through the Action 
Plan and w hich are mitigated through the ESMP:  
 NEGATIVE  POSITIVE  
Impact 
importance  Major - Major +  
Medium - Medium +  
Weak - Weak +  
Negligible  Negligible  
 
See Annex 8 for full E&S impacts study and ESMP .  
International waters:  
The Guir  basin is a cross -border basin shared between Morocco and Algeria. For that matter, the Guir basin may be 
subject to the Convention on non -navigational uses of international watercourses, adopted by the Assembly General 
of the United Nations on 21 May 1997  in New York, and which came into force on 17 August 2014. This convention 
offers States neighbouring cross -border watercourses tools to cooperate and manage such water sources with an 
integral approach, and defines a reference framework of the negotiation  of local agreements. This agreement is 
based on two main principles as follows:  
•  "equitable and reasonable use" of water resources (Article 5) and,  
•  "obligation not to cause significant harm" to other States of the stream. (Article 7).  
The status of this international convention is as follows:  
 Adoption by the UN General Assembly on 21 May 1997 in New York  
 Morocco acceded to the convention in April 13, 2011  
 Setting Force of the convention in August 17, 2014.  
 Algeria has not acceded to the Convention.  
In the context of the Guir basin and at the stage of the detailed design and impact studies, the downstream impacts of 
the construction of the Kaddoussa dam and of the development of the irrigated area downstream were evaluated as 
non- significant ( with controlled basin area of 7% with regard to the whole river basin and it is over 200 km upstream 
of the Moroccan -Algerian border: only exceptional spates cross the border) and, therefore, the notification procedure 
has not been considered as a requirement of the Convention (with reference to article 7, paragraph 2). Furthermore, it


---
*Page 65*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 75 
 
 F 
has to be noted that to date, the Guir basin does not yet have an international treaty laying out the procedures for 
consultation and negotiation between the neighbouring states as to the issue of managing the water resources of the 
Guir basin.  
 
Gender action plan:  
Analysis of the social situation in the oasis communities, with a special focus on gender, has been done within the 
feasibility/action plan and E&S risk assessment process es.  
Inclusion of women in the project activities  will be done during the beginning of the project, at it relies on  a 
participatory & community driven process allowing the agents  to make decisions in terms of their own values and 
goals ; particularly when it comes to water management.  
These issues are complex and need time for a meaningful dialogue to take place between agents.  
The process of empowerment (during which stakeholders become agents of change) cannot be skipped, nor is it 
relevant to put forward standard activities or activities based solely on the wellbeing of one particular agent (in this 
case women) - as their individual wellbeing (physical, emotional) is generally only one of the goals pursued by 
agents 6 involved in more complex social networks.  
In any case, it is very important that all agents/stakeholders have had sufficient time and space to express 
themselves to allow decisions and ideas to be community -generated. The objectives is that all these agents be part of  
the decisions as to new sets of rules/behavioral schemes for women or to presuppose how women should assume 
new roles in their communities, with regard to water, livestoc k, palm tree groves management, etc.  
A gender specialist will be recruited in the techni cal assistance team and will  be completely dedicated to this issue 
from the beginning of the project implementation.   
Annex 7 provides more details in the projected gender -related activities.  
  
                                                             
6 For the purposes of the capability approach, agency primarily refers to a person's role as a member of society, with the 
ability to participate in economic, social, and political actions. Therefore, agency is crucial in assessing one's capabiliti es and 
any economic, social, or political barriers to one's achieving substanti ve freedoms. Concern for agency stresses that 
participation, public debate, democratic practice, and empowerment, should be fostered alongside well -being.


---
*Page 66*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 75 
 
 F 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.  
The project will be disbursed through successive installments, which will be executed by the operating agencies 
(DIAEA and  ORMVAT) The execution of the funds will follow Moroccan public bidding  procedures  that are very 
similar to AFD procedures (adjustments are made on very rare occasions).  
Nevertheless, in legal terms, the loan agreement states that AFD’s bidding procedures prevail over national ones . It is 
the Borrower’s responsibility to take necessary measures to be compliant with AFD’s bidding procedures. The 
following is an excerpt from  our standard loan agreement:  
 
Clause 11.5 - Procurement  
In relation to the procurement, award and performance of contracts entered into in connection with the 
implementation of the Project, the Borrower shall comply with, and implement, the provisions of the Procurement 
Guidelines. The Borrower guarantees that the Implementing Agency will comply with and implement the Procurement 
Guidelines.  
The Borrower shall take all actions and steps necessary for the effective implementation of the Procurement 
Guidelines . 
 
Projects funded by AFD (loans) in Morocco are submitted to the Ministry of Finance’s auditing capacity (Inspection 
Générale des Finances), as are all other public funds in the kingdom. AFD confirms that the IGF’s audit reports are of 
high qual ity (verifying compliance with both national and AFD procedures) and often offer a critical view point on the 
projects’ implementation. Using the IGF is both a way to recognize Morocco’s sovereignty in scru tinizing the use of 
public money, as well as giving more force to the recommendations of these reports, which are formally transmitted 
by the Ministry of Finance to the line ministries.  
The project  financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, disbursement methods and 
auditing  are detailed in the financing agreement that is being finalized after the Board’s approval. It is consistent with 
the AFD internal procedures that have been approved at the AFD’s accreditation from the GCF.  
AFD will perform at least one (probably two the  first years) supervision mission per year, which will include technical 
and financial performance review.


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 65 OF 75 
 G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical  and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of r isk Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Availability of surface water lower than expected (the dam is 
not filled to its anticipated level)  
 
 
 Other  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified  risk will be mitigated or managed.  Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?   
There is little that can be done to directly mitigate this risk. Nevertheless, technical and social measures will be taken 
to mitigate its effects:  
- Aquifer refill systems using intermediary watersheds will be put into place under component 2  (refill of the 
intermediate alluvial aquifers provides additional shallow water resources for the oases) , enhancing the 
resilience of the oases with regard to the availability of water from the dam  ; 
- Organization at local level (WUAs and aquifer contract) will allow exceptional measures to be taken in order 
to maximize wate r saving (capping of quantities).  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Low participation of the local communities in the inclusive 
development pathway or poor quality of investment  projects  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G .2. 
The project  is designed to mitigate risks arising from climate change, on the performance and sustainability of 
agriculture in the project area, in particular: preventing overexploitation of groundwater, ensuring inclusiveness of the 
economic dynamic, preservation of  oasis based livelihoods.  
Nevertheless, residual  risks remain directly related to the implementation of the project:  
- The ability of the aquifer contract, of self -regulatory entities (water users association) and of the regulating 
State to “solve” the prisoners’ dilemma , related to the underground water table is uncertain a priori , as any 
participatory process.  
 A strong TA package will be mobilized to secure this process .  
- The smallholders’ capacity to perform highly efficient irrigation systems.  
 ORMVAT  and the TA will provide assistance and councelling to the farmers wishing to invest in the 
date-palm tree production.  
- Water availability in the dam is lower than expected.


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 66 OF 75 
 G 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
This risk will be mitigated by the delivery of effective  extension services, through the tech nical assistance.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Difficulties in establishing effective aquifer contracts, self -
regulatory procedures  and regulations by the State  
 
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
Strong technical assistance will provided on this matter.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
 
 
 Select  Select  Select  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
 
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 75 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . A full logical framework is provided in Annex 9. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level7 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development  The project intends to increase the resilience to climate change of a highly vulnerable area  
through a new model of development of irrigation perimeter downstream of a water storage 
infrastructure. This model is based on an integrated approach with three pillars:  
- Transfer surface water and build an efficient irrigation water distribution scheme t o 
insure “more crop for the drop”;  
- Ensure an inclusive access to surface and underground water making sure that the 
local communities benefit both from the public investment and from the 
technological transfer allowed by the presence of agro business inves tors – 
promote climate -smart agriculture;  
- Create and secure self -regulating institutions, in which users take responsibility for 
the management of a common -pool resource, in this case water.  
Promoting a paradigm shift in the use of water, especially in irr igation, these three pillars 
will secure and boost the development of a great agriculture area based on date 
production.  
This approach and the tools it will develop, if proven successful will constitute a “package” 
that could be easily replicable in other irrigation schemes of the country.  In particular, this 
holistic approach to water management for agriculture in an environment of increased 
scarcity may also reveal as an important tool to conflict prevention and stabilization of poor 
rural areas.  
Finally , this project will intend to demonstrate that the nexus “Water technologies – Water 
for all – Water institutions”  is a winning strategy and one that could be replicated for 
the adaptation of agriculture to climate change in arid areas of the Mediterranean .  
 
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 1.2 Number of males 
and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate   
Census  
 0 2000  5 500 All oasis farmers 
and families will 
benefit from 
improved access 
to agricultural 
                                                             
7 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measureme nt Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/document s/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 75 
 
 H 
regions  resilient livelihood 
options    
 water and from 
economic and 
social 
development 
promoted through 
component 2.  
A2.0 Increased 
resilience of health and 
well-being, and food and 
water security   
2.3 Number of males 
and females with 
year-round access 
to reliable and safe 
water supply despite 
climate shocks and 
stresses  Census  
 0  5 500 
(40% 
women)  All oasis farmers 
and families will 
benefit from 
improved access 
to agricultural 
water and from 
economic and 
social 
development 
promoted 
through 
component 2.  
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change   
3.1 Number and 
value of physical 
assets made more 
resilient to climate 
variability and 
change, considering 
human benefits 
(reported where 
applicable)  
 
 
 
 Real cost of 
the 
infrastructur
e 0  A 
secured 
delivery 
system 
of water 
from the 
dam = 
EUR 
40 000 
000  
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services  4.1 Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and 
change  
  0 500 ha  1 000 
ha Component 2 is 
effective.


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 75 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)   Final  
Project/ programme 
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  Water resources 
(surface and 
underground) are 
monitored and 
controlled at Project 
area level. The 
information is spread 
to local inhabitants.  Mid-term 
and final 
evaluations  
The Water 
Resources 
Integrated 
Developmen
t Master 
Plan 
(PDAIRE in 
French) is 
updated with 
new rules of 
“conjunctive 
use” of 
underground 
and surface 
water in 
Boudnib 
plain and 
Guir valley.  
The Aquifer 
Contract 
exists.  
Annual 
reports of 
the 
company 
distributing 
the water 
from the 
dam.  
Information 
regarding 
IWRM is 
available for 
literate and 
illiterate at 
the water 
basin Ancient 
version 
of 
PDAIRE  
Nascent 
aquifer 
contract  New 
version of 
PDAIRE  
Establish
ed 
aquifer 
contract  New 
version of 
PDAIRE  
Functioni
ng 
aquifer 
contract  Aquifer contract 
and PDAIRE are 
key regulatory 
instrument for an 
appropriate 
response to 
climate change 
variability.  
Aquifer contract 
needs to be  
elaborated with 
and signed by 
water users 
associations to 
ensure its 
application.  
New version of 
PDAIRE needs to 
be elaborated 
under participative 
approach including 
all users and 
institutional 
organizations 
(WUA, ORMVAT, 
ABH, Local 
Authorities, 
ONEE…).  
Those two last 
points cannot be 
controlled by the 
project.


---
*Page 72*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 75 
 
 H 
authority 
office 
(Errachidia) 
and at the 
Local 
Authorities 
office in 
Boudnib.  
 
 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  Proposed 7.1: Use 
by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public -sector 
services of Fund 
supported tools, 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to respond 
to climate change 
and variability (see 
section 2.3.2 to 2.3.4 
of the action plan)  Reports 
from pre -
identification 
workshop.  
Reports 
from 
trainings of 
new farming 
techniques.  
Action Plan 
for each 
oases.  
New public 
infrastructur
es 
Higher crop 
production 
yields in the 
oases  Current 
situation 
of 
trainings 
in the 
oases  
No 
action 
plan per 
oases  
Lack of 
public 
infrastru
cture  
Low 
yields  New 
farming 
trainings 
realized  
Action 
Plans 
elaborate
d 
New 
public 
infrastruc
ture 
Better 
yields  New 
farming 
trainings 
realized  
Action 
Plans 
implemen
ted 
New 
public 
infrastruct
ure 
Better 
yields  The success of 
these measures 
relies on the 
willingness of the 
farmers and 
inhabitants of the 
oases and 
cooperation of 
local authorities, 
which s eem to be 
promising 
regarding to 
survey results of 
feasibility study.  
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development  Use of IWRM 
information (aquifer 
and hydrological 
situations and uses) 
in decision -making, 
by regional and local 
institutions for 
development 
projects.  The Water 
Resources 
Integrated 
Developmen
t Master 
Plan 
(PDAIRE in 
French) is 
updated with 
new rules of 
“conjunctive 
use” of 
underground 
and surface 
water in 
Boudnib Ancient 
version 
of 
PDAIRE  
Nascent 
aquifer 
contract  
No 
tripartite 
agreem
ent New 
version of 
PDAIRE  
Establish
ed 
aquifer 
contract  
A 
tripartite 
agreeme
nt is 
signed 
and 
functional  New 
version of 
PDAIRE  
Functioni
ng 
aquifer 
contract  
A 
tripartite 
agreeme
nt is 
signed 
and 
functional  In the project area, 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development is 
directly related to 
water resources 
availability, 
especially for 
surface water.  
Control of the 
aquife r in respect 
with the aquifer 
contract is 
fundamental. The 
project cannot 
control it, since it


---
*Page 73*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 75 
 
 H 
plain and 
Guir valley.  
A tripartite 
agreement 
between the 
water basin 
authority, 
ORMVAT 
and the 
company 
running the 
surface 
water 
network is 
signed (see 
Action plan 
section 
3.2.3.2.3)  
The Aquifer 
Contract 
exists.  
Water 
managemen
t related to 
developmen
t project of 
any k ind is 
elaborated 
regarding to 
PDAIRE and 
Aquifer 
contract 
rules.  
 
 
 is the water basin 
authority 
prerogative.  
       
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1.  Efficient irrigation 
infrastructure delivered  Use of surface water 
from Kaddoussa 
dam by farmers of 
any kind  Water pipes 
for irrigation 
from 
Kaddoussa 
dam to each 2 000 
ha of 
unsustai
nable 
irrigated  5 000 ha 
of 
efficiently 
irrigated 
agriculturThis output 
success relies on 
several aspects 
that the project 
cannot control:


---
*Page 74*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 75 
 
 H 
oases and 
extensions 
farm are 
built agricultu
re from  
Guir 
wadi 
and 
undergr
ound 
water  e from 
Kaddous
sa dam 
and 
undergro
und water  - the effective 
implementation of 
the aquifer 
contract  
-the 
implementation of 
the PPP for 
managing and 
selling water from 
the dam  
-the extension 
farmers 
subscription to 
water purchase 
contracts with the 
private partner.  
2.  Adaptation of oasis 
agriculture to climate 
change  For more detailed 
information of 
indicators and 
means of verification 
for this important 
project output, see 
Annex 5 - Action 
plan Section 2.2 and 
2.3 and its own 
appendix 9 -Logical 
framework 
indicators.  
Adaptation of oases 
irrigation 
infrastructure and its 
management  
Adaptation of oases 
farming systems  
Protection and 
enhancement of 
land ownership  
Existence of WUA in 
every oases  
Water mobilization 
from the 
intermediate basin  
Efficient 
management of 
constant surface New 
concrete 
seguias and 
repaired 
seguias 
(Work 
reports from 
ORMVAT).  
Crops 
irrigation 
during 
summer 
(M&E 
reports from 
Technical 
Assistance).  
Use of more 
efficient 
irrigation 
and crop 
techniques 
within the 
oases (M&E 
reports from 
Technical 
Assistance).  
Increased 
cultivated 
area (M&E 
reports from 1 000 
ha of 
oases 
under 
flood 
irrigation 
manage
ment 
with 
inefficie
ncy.  1 000 ha 
of oasis 
agricultur
e 
adapted 
to climate 
change  The success of 
this output relies 
on the success of 
WUA trainings 
related to water 
management. 
Indeed, oasian 
farmers will have 
to shift from 
individual and 
historical water 
rights to a 
continued public 
water distribution 
based on crop 
fields water needs.


---
*Page 75*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 75 
 
 H 
water within the 
oases  
Better environmen t 
and living conditions  
Reduced gender 
inequalities and 
improved 
employability  Technical 
Assistance).  
Reports of 
WUA 
meetings  
Reports of 
workshop 
with the 
Technical 
Assistance 
of the 
project and 
ORMVAT  
Action 
programs/pl
ans of the 
oases  
 
3.  Underground water 
regulatory systems in 
place  The heterogeneity of 
the Senonian is  
Established  
A spatial distribution 
map of the  
transmissivity of the 
Senonian is made  
available  
The numerical 
model suitable as a  
support tool to 
decision -making is  
chosen  
Piezometers 
installed and used  
Piezometers 
equipped with 
stations of automatic 
data acquisition and  
transmission  
 Data 
processing 
report of log 
records by  
Hydrogeolo
gist 
Results 
interpretatio
n report 
including  
the spatial 
distribution 
map of  
transmissivit
y 
Expert 
report on 
the analysis 
of the  
relevance 
and 
opportunity 
assessment  
 
 
Reports of 
installations Unsuffici
ent and 
unequip
ped 
piezome
ter 
network  
Hydroge
ological 
characte
ristics of 
aquifers
unknow
n  Global 
and 
equipped 
piezomet
er 
network 
installed  
Precise 
knowledg
e of 
hydrogeol
ogical 
characteri
stics of 
aquifer   
This output relies 
on the effective 
cooperation of the 
water basin 
authority which is 
a partner of the 
project.


---
*Page 76*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 75 
 
 H 
by the water 
basin 
authority  
 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Component 1:  
Connecting to the dam 
and transfer of surface 
water to the Boudnib 
Valley  Surface water service for 5 000 ha 
irrigation scheme downstream    
Sub-component 1: 
implementation and 
management of the 
irrigation infrastructures  
 
 
  - Adduction pipe, 63 
km 
- Distribution network 
to oases and larger 
scale farms  
- Feasibility and 
preparation study  
- Tendering process 
for selection of 
contractors   
Component 2: Building 
the climate - resilience of 
oases communities 
through a holistic 
approach     
Sub-component 2.1: 
Rehabilitation of the 
irrigation networks in the 
oases  
Sub-component 2.2: 
mobilization of water 
resources from intermediary 
basins  
Sub-component 2.3: 
Adaptation of the oasis -
based agricultural and 
social systems to climate 
change  
  Rehabilitation of 
seguias and khettaras 
(irrigation network)  
- restaurat ion of 
agricultural land  
- promotion of new 
techniques (climate -
smart agriculture)  
- diversification and 
storage of agricultural 
produce  
- empowerment of 
women groups within 
the oases  
- social and 
educational activities   
Component 3: Cross -
cutting sustainability 
measures     
Sub-component 3.1: 
Technical Assistance  
Sub-component 3.2: 
Groundwater management  - Support to the 
implementation agency  
- Provision of technical 
advisory services to


---
*Page 77*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 75 
 
 H 
 
  investments  
Sub-component 3.3: 
Implementation of the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Plan  
 
Sub-component 3.4: 
Knowledge building  
 farmers  
- Management of 
groundwater resources  
- Exploratory drilling 
and piezometric 
surveillance  
 
Mid-term evaluation  
Analytical work


---
*Page 78*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 75 
 
 H 
 
 H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Please specify institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting. Please indicate how 
you will organize mid -term and final evaluations.  
 
Mid-term evaluation (at least one)  and annual reports will be elaborated by the Implementing Agency during the 
lifespan of the project, i.e. between the signing of the financial agreements and the Technical Closing Date (when the 
project has been fully executed on the ground and all resour ces have been justified).  
Mid-term evaluation and annual reports  will highlight any concerns or risks that require the attention of AE and the 
GCF. In addition, the evaluations /reports  should recommend corrective actions in order to ensure that the climate  
results are delivered as expected.  
A final evaluation  will be implemented 6 months after project closure and will examine the overall performance o f the 
project  against the investment criteria and other evaluation criteria that will be defined in the evaluation guidelines.  
The objective of the final evaluations is to learn lessons and apply those lessons in order to upscale and replicate 
successful projects.  
 
The mid -term evaluation will be financed through the project. The end line evaluation will be financed through AFD’s 
own resources.  
Supervision missions headed by a Senior Program Manager will take place twice a year for the firs t two years, then 
once a y ear. Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key out comes of the project/programme.  
Independent project evaluations will take stock of not only whether and how the project implementation has performed 
against the agreed outcomes and investment criteria, but also whether and how it has caused unintended impacts and 
other co -benefits.  
Project-/programme -level evaluation reports will be submitted by AEs to the Secretariat.  
Evaluations will be guided by the following principles:  
(a) Independence and impartiality;  
(b) Transparency . 
(c) Participation of all the relevant stakeholders (first an d foremost local/disadvantaged communities, women and 
indigenous people);  
(d) Adherence to ethical standards within the evaluation with respect for the beliefs, culture and customs of the 
beneficiaries; and  
(e) Credibility.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 75 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
 I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility Study  = Action Plan (Annex 5) + Infrastructure Design Study  (Annex 6) 
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (AFD: provided; GoM: to be 
provided soon) ☒ Term Sheet  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  
☒ Evaluation Report  of the baseline pro ject =  Diagnostic Study ( Annex 4) 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  (Annex 1 -3) 
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation  
☒ Project/programme confirmation (see the template in Annex I to the Accreditation Master Agreement)


---
*Page 80*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 5 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 81*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 5


---
*Page 82*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 5 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Irrigation development and adaptation of irrigated agriculture to 
climate change in semi -arid Morocco  
Accredited entity  AFD  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) c ategory  Category B  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  2017 -02-10 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and French  
Link to disclosure  http://www.afd.fr/home/projets_afd/changement_climatique/afd -fonds -
vert  (French)  
http://www.afd.fr/lang/en/home/projets_afd/changement_climatique/afd -
fonds -vert  (English)  
Other link(s)  (English)  http://www.agriculture.gov.ma/pages/focus/projet -developpement -irrigation -et-
adaptation -agriculture -irriguee -aux-changements -climatiques -barrage -kaddous sa 
(at the Moroccan Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, date 2016 -07-29) 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  2017 -02-10 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and French  
Link to disclosure  http://www.afd.fr/home/projets_afd/changement_climatique/afd -fonds -
vert  (French)  
http://www.afd.fr/lang/en/home/projets_afd/changement_climatique/afd -
fonds -vert  (English)  
Other link(s)  http://www.agriculture.gov.ma/pages/focus/projet -developpement -irrigation -et-
adaptation -agriculture -irriguee -aux-changements -climatiques -barrage -kaddoussa  
(at the Moroccan Ministry of Agriculture and Fisherie s, date 2016 -07-29) 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  n/a 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  n/a 
________