=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20161117162815+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
/ModDate: D:20161124165755+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP03 4 GCF/B.15/13 /Add.07 
24 November 2016  Meeting of the Board  
13 - 15 December  2016  
Apia, Samoa  
Provisional agenda i tem  16(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ Building Resilient Communities and Ecosystems through
Restoration of Wetlands and Associated Catchments in Uganda ” submitted by UNDP ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents  are presented as submitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.07  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
F unding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 Section D  
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 Section E  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 Section G  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the  funding proposal template     
• Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total num ber of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 55 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project/ Programme  Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Building Resilient Communities , Wetland Ecosystems 
and Associated Catchments in Uganda   
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     UGANDA  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  
Mrs. Joyce Kaman yire Ruhweeza 
Principal Economist  
Department of Development Assistance and Regional  
Cooperation  
Tel. +256- 414-707175 
Email -joyce.ruhweeza@finance.go.ug  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme  (UNDP)  
A.1.5 .a.Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity: Ministries of Water and Environment, 
Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Uganda National 
Meteorology Authority  
 
Other beneficiaries  
 National Forest Authority  
 National Environment Management Authority  
 Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Settlements  
 Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives  
 Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities  
 Local Governments  
 Water Resources Department  
 Hydropower generating companies  
 Non- Governmental Organisations  
 Uganda Wildlife Authority  
 Uganda Tourism Board 
 
# (total) of beneficiaries (people) : 800,000 people  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)   ☐  Micro (≤10)  
  ☐      Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / adaptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation ☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross -cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission  
          Date of Resubmission 
           30/07/2015;  11/11/2016 
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position Benjamin Larroquette 
Organization UNDP  
Email address  Benjamin.larroquette@undp.org   
Telephone number  +251912503308 
Mailing  address  UNDP  
Regional Hub Addis Ababa 
119 RDC road, Olimpia round about, Africa Avenue,  
Kirkos  Sub City; Kebele 01, House No. 119 
P.O.Box 60130 
Addis Ababa,  ETHIOPIA


---
*Page 6*
---

P
ROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 55 A 
A.1.1 1. Results areas (mark all that apply)
Reduced emissions from:  
☐Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐Low emission transport  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
Increased resilience of:  
☒Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☒
A.2.  Project / Programme  Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/ programme , including the objectives  and primary measurable 
benefits ( see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
1. T
he impact of climate change, coupled with other human and environmental stressors, is increasing degradation of
wetlands and their associated ecosystem services in Uganda. This  is negatively affecting the livelihoods of the people 
living in and around the wetlands – around 4,000,000 people. In fact, over 80% of the people living adjacent to wetland 
areas in Uganda directly use wetland resources for their household food security needs.1 Given that wetlands are highly 
vulnerable to changes in the quantity and quality of their water supply (Erwin, 2009, Jin et al., 2009), climate change will 
most likely substantially alter ecologically important attributes of wetlands and will exacerbate the impacts from human activity. On the other hand, the loss of wetlands could exacerbate the impact of climate change in as they provide fundamental services that contribute to mitigation of such impacts. (Details on the impacts of climate change on wetland 
ecosystems in our project area can be found in the feasibility study). This project seeks to support the Government of 
Uganda to take climate change issues  (increased climate variability, and extreme weather events such as drought, floods, 
high temperature, violent storms)  into account in the management of critical wetlands. The project activities have been 
identified to specifically respond to and take into account the specific climate- related impacts and vulnerabilities of these 
wetland ecosystems  outlined in the feasibility study. The barriers  that prevent Uganda from achieving the preferred long 
term solution (a more resilient wetland ecosystem and associated livelihoods)  need to be overcome are 1) the limited 
technical knowledge on the agro- ecolo gical and hydrological systems of the wetlands; 2) insufficient extension services 
for resilient agriculture and livelihoods, and 3) inadequate climate information and early warning systems. This project 
will restore wetlands and their eco- system services , based on wise- use principles and guidelines as outlined by the 
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands,  with sustainable land management practices and reforestation, will support resilient 
agricultural practices and alternative livelihoods  for communities living in these areas  to reduce the pressures on the 
wetlands, and finally will strengthen the climate information and early warning systems to support these communities  to 
make climate- resilient decisions .  
1 Kakuru, Willy, Nelson Turyahabwe, and Johnny Mugisha, Total Economic Value of Wetlands Products and Services in Uganda, The Scientific World 
Journal, Volume 2013 (2013).


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 55 
 
 
 A 
 
2. While the results and impacts of this initiative are expected to eventually spread countrywide, the project will target two 
regions and selected districts.  The area targeted is South Western Uganda (6 districts of Kabale, Kisoro, Kanungu, 
Rukungiri, Greater Bushenyi and Ntungamo) and Eastern Uganda ( 10 districts of Pallisa, Kibuku, Bukedea, Namutumba, 
Butaleja, Budaka, Tororo, Kaliro Ngora and Mbale) with a total population of 3,946,366 people and land area of 13,000 
Km2. At least 8 00,000 people in and around the wetlands will directly benefit from this investment. This initiative will 
improve the lives of some of the most vulnerable people in Uganda, dependent on subsistence agriculture and wetlands for their livelihoods. Improved sustainable management of the wetlands, increas
ed skills for employability and 
entrepreneurship capacity to start new businesses, and accurate and reliable climate information will have a 
transformational impact on people’s lives in the targeted areas. Available public financing is limiting Uganda’s ability to 
implement adaptation measures to restore critical ecosystem services for resilient livelihoods in the country. 
Consequently, the Government of Uganda, as a Low Income Economy, and a Least Developed Country, seeks maximum 
concessionality from the G CF (100% grant resources) to undertake the proposed adaptatio n investments. The cost -
benefit  analysis  for the project  has shown positive returns on the investments . The project is aligned with Government 
strategies such as the N ational Adaptation Programme of Action , the National Cli mate Change Policy . Thorough 
consultations with a wide array of stakeholders have defined the design of this project and the NDA has issued a letter 
of no objection.   
 
 
A.3. Project/ Programme  Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  Date:  10/03/2016  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  TBD [date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GCF]  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: March,  2017  
End: March 2025  
Project/ programme lifespan  8 years


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 55 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
3. The proposed project  is a grant -based response  to scale-up the restoration of critical wetlands in Uganda, a low -income 
country . A grant -based project makes sense in this case for a number of reasons. First and foremost,  the proposed 
interventions are public goods and leaving it to the market will result in under provision. Because of the public good nature 
of the interventions, benefits will be shared, where exclusivity is not possible. There are significant social benefits to be 
realized as the project target s vulnerable comm unities , among the poorest  in Uganda  relative to the national  average . 
Second, i mplementation of solutions that have long been recognized as necessary  for improved wetlands management, 
especially in the context of addressing climate change risks, is constrained due to limited resources (bot h financial and 
human) among relevant national, sub -national and local level actors . Other significant political and institutional barriers 
also exist (details are outlined in Section C.2) . High upfront costs  present  themselves as a constraint to attracting private 
investment  to many of the required solutions . The potential for private sector engagement is nascent in the country.  Third, 
as much as the interventions are necessary, they do not  present any revenue generation or cost -recovery opportunities .  
 
4. Consequently, public finance, in particular in the form of grants , is necessary.  Without this grant support, the market  
will not result  in any finance that can meaningfully lead to the requisite chan ges.  That said,  the use of grant financing for 
various barrier removal activities as this proposed project  seeks to do,  is likely to generate new opportunities for revenue 
generation, especially in the context of  rural livelihood opportunities. While such revenue generating opportunities are not 
conducive for servicing a loan (an alternative (albeit unviable) way of financing the interventions —especially in the context 
of Uganda’s current debt servicing responsibi lities), these revenues  can be directed towards improved stewardship of the 
wetlands  at the local level . The co- finance for this project has been revised according to the GCF guidance, the new 
figure stands at 2M USD for UNDP, which is new and additional and will contribute towards advancing the objectives and 
outputs of this project. The Govt of Uganda co- financing is also new and additional and would not have existed without 
this project.  
 
5. The limited public financing available is hindering Uganda ’s ability to implement adaptation measures to restore critical 
ecosystem services for resilient  livelihoods in the country . The Government of Uganda ( GoU), as a Low Income Economy 
(as per World Bank definitions), and a Least Developed Country  (as per UN definitions) , with a current debt burden of 7 
billion USD , seeks maximum concessionality from the GCF ( 100% grant resources ) to undertake the proposed adaptation 
investments.  
 
6. The project  targets highly vulnerable populations, more than half of whom  are women, living in disaster prone and food 
insecure districts dependent on climate sensitive and marginal livelihoods.  Through this project , Uganda  would be able 
to achieve the following key inter -related results : 
• Restor e critical wetlands to improve ecosystem services such as ground water recharge, flood control, fishing 
and agriculture for enhanced livelihoods to the most vulnerable subsistence farming communities.  
• Diversify livelihoods and agriculture to make it more resilient to climate shocks, by  enhancing the skill set of 
beneficiaries for employability and adaptation.  
• Empower communities in sensitive wetland areas in risk reduction and preparedness to climate- related disasters . 
This will be done through participatory and decentralized early warning systems and capacity development for 
implementing disaster risk reduction measures . 
 
7. The GoU  seeks UNDP’s support as the accredited entity to access the grant resources,  as direct access mechanisms 
are not established in the country.  While Uganda is working on developing direct access capacity, including through 
support from UNDP, it will not be  in a position to make use of this option for some years to come.  
 
• a breakdown of cost estimates analysed by sub- component in local and foreign currency and a currency 
hedging mechanism:  
 
 
Component  Sub- component (if 
applicable)  GCF 
Amount  Co-financing  
Amount  Total  
Amount  Currency of 
disbursement  Total 
Amount  Local currency  
(in billion UGX) * 
Component 1: 
Restored and 
sustainably 
managed 
wetlands for Sub-component 
1: Restoration 
and management 
of wetland 
hydrology and 
associated forests  10.619  UNDP – 0.1 
Govt – 12.5 
23.219  million USD 
($) 78.55 UGX


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 55 
 
 B 
resilient 
livelihoods  Sub-component 
2: Improved 
agricultural 
practices and 
alternative 
livelihood options 
in the wetland 
catchment  8.674  UNDP – 1 
 
Govt – 5 
14.674 million USD 
($) 49.642  UGX  
Sub-component 
3: Strengthening 
access to climate 
and early warning 
information to 
farmers and other 
target 
communities  3.732  UNDP – 0.9 
 
Govt – 
0.622  5.254  million USD 
($) 17.774  UGX  
Project 
Management  1.115   
1.115 million USD 
($) 3.772  UGX  
Total2 24.140 * 20.122  44.262   149.738   
              *UN Exchange Rate used  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  44.262  million USD 
($)  
(b) 
Requested 
GCF amount   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants  * 
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
24.140  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) (  )  years  
(  )  years  
 
  
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
  
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/ programme ’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  24.140  million USD 
($)  
(c) Co -
financing  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
                                                             
2 The budget total includes monitoring and evaluation costs. PMC cost is reflected separately for the GCF fund but as a lump sum for the co- financers in 
the FP. The Term Sheet (Annex V) has PMC cost per component for all the co- financers and as a lump sum for the PMC. AE is not included in the 
project cost est imates.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 55 
 
 B 
 
Grant  
Grant  
Options  
Options  2.000 
18.122 
……………  million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
Options  
Options   
UNDP  
Government 
of Uganda  
……………  
……………  (  )  
years  
(  )  
years  
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) %  IRR 
 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: Ministry of Water and Environment  (MWE)  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment  in section I  issued by the co -financing institution.  
B.3. Fee Arrangement  
8. A fee of 9 % (in line with the B11 decision)  is applied to cover quality assurance and oversight services performed by 
UNDP over all phases of the project cycle as follows: (i) oversight of proposal development; (ii) appraisal (pre and final) 
and oversight of project start -up; (iii) supervision and oversight of project implementation; and (iv) overs ight of  project 
closure.  The 9% fee is included in the GCF contribution.  This fee pays for UNDP’s General Management Support (GMS) 
which encompasses oversight, quality assurance and management functions o f UNDP Headquarters and Country Office 
units.  In relation to the project, it would contribute to financing UNDP’s project cycle management services which are: (i) 
project preparation oversight; (ii) project implementation oversight and supervision, includ ing financial management; and 
(iii) project completion and evaluation oversight.  It would also contribute to project -related corporate costs incurred in 
reporting, portfolio management, and knowledge- management.  UNDP is required by its Executive Board to recover these 
costs to cover the services and management functions of the organization, and they cannot be broken down into activity -
specific functions.  
B.4. Financial M arket Overview (if applicable)  
9. The proposed project is a public sector project . While it is intended to support and increase livelihoods of project  
beneficiaries, the project  will not in and of itself generate revenues for purpose of cost -recovery  to service a loan.  Uganda 
is also only seeking  100% concessional finance (i.e. a grant) from the GCF. As such, the financial market overview section 
is not applicable.  No other sources of funds are available to the beneficiaries as they do not have access to institutional 
banking and other financial services.


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 55 
 
  C 
 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
10. While Uganda has shown great economic improvements in the past few years, with growth rates averaging 5.5 
percent between 2010 and 2014, i t still faces many challenges. Only 18.5% of the working labor force is engaged in wage 
employment. The remaining 72% are largely engag ed in subsistence agriculture. Agriculture remains the backbone of 
Uganda’s economy, accounting f or 25.3% of the country’s GDP, and employs 70% of the population (both formally and 
informally), 77% of whom are women, and 63% of whom are youth.   As of 2013, 19.7% of the population was  living below 
the poverty line and there remain significant disparities in poverty levels across the region.3 As of 2014, out of a total 
population of 28 million in the country, wetlands provide subsistence employment for over 2.4 million people.4  
 
11. As outlined in more detail in the first section of the feasibility study, several climatic changes will lead to specific 
impacts that will negatively affect wetland environments in Uganda, or exacerbate existing pressures on these 
ecosystems (these stressors, both human and environmental, are further examined in section C.2 below). The 2.4 million 
people dependent on wetlands for the livelihoods, as well as countless more who are indirectly dependent on these 
ecosystems, will also suffer due to these impending climate risks.  For example, as outlined in the National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA) (2007), projected drought conditions can lead to disappearance of wetland areas, which will result in a lack of water for livestock, humans and backyard crop irrigation impacting negatively on productivity and 
livelihoods.
5  Further, when rain- fed agriculture fails due to drought conditions, farmers encroach on wetlands, further 
destroying these ecosystems and changing the microclimate.6  Both strengthening th e resilience and sustainable 
management of wetland ecosystems  (which have their own climate change adaptation services ), and enhancing 
resilience of livelihoods through improving adaptive agricultural practices and diversifying income sources, are critical  
needs to support this vulnerable population.   
 
12. The policy context for this project  is already ripe for comprehensive impact in this area. Recent national policies and 
plans relating to development, wetlands and climate change have put in place a robust enabling environment for efforts 
on wetland restoration and resilient livelihoods. Sus tainable wetland management is promoted in the Vision 2040, which 
also recognizes that climate change will affect all sectors of Uganda’s economy.  It emphasizes the need for integrating 
adaptation strategies across all sectors to ensure the country is res ilient to impacts of climate change.  This is further 
substantiated under t he second National Development Plan (NDP).   The NDP is Uganda’s medium -term development 
strategy for the period 2014/15 to 2020 and serves as a guide for investment planning, budget  allocation and social 
interventions that are needed to reach the vision 2040. It includes sector -specific targets to achieve eight objectives with 
the overall theme of “Growth, Employment and Prosperity for Socio- Economic Transformation.”  Specifically, i n the area 
of environment and natural resources, the NDP has several relevant targets, including: “increase wetland coverage and 
reduce degradation,” “increase the functionality and usage of meteorological information systems,” and “increase the 
country’s resilience to the impacts of climate change.”  Overall, the NDP recognizes that addressing the challenges of 
climate change is crucial for  enhancing sustainable economic and social development.  The NDP also makes reference 
to the National Climate Change P olicy (NCCP),  and ensures the development strategy is aligned with implementation 
of this Policy.  
 
13. The NCCP of Uganda (2014)  aims to help meet Vision 2040’s goals through strategies and actions that address both 
sustainable development and climate change.  The NCCP supports the integration of climate change issues into planning, 
decision -making and investments in all sectors and trans -sectoral themes through appropriate institutional arrangements. 
In line with the East African Community  (EAC) regional policy, this national policy emphasizes climate change adaptation 
as the top priority for Uganda.  The plan identifies common adapt ation policy priorities for Uganda, one of which is 
specifically targeted at wetlands: “To promote long- term wetland conservation and restoration of degraded wetlands so 
that they can continue to provide global services, including mitigating climate change , while supporting the sustainable 
development needs of communities and the country.”  In addition, the policy also prioritizes the need to ensure climate 
resilience of several sectors, including agriculture and livestock, and fisheries and aquaculture sec tors, as well as 
ensuring sustainable management of water resources.  These are all supported under this proposed project .  In fact, the 
NCCP has developed a costed implementation strategy , which provides a more detailed action plan and roadmap, 
                                                             
3 Uganda’s Second National Development Plan, 2012 
4 Second National Communication, Uganda (2014)  
5 Uganda’s National Adaptation Programme of Action, 2007, p. 31, available here: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/uga01.pdf    
6 Uganda’s National Adaptation Programme of Action, 2007, p. 44, available here: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/uga01.pdf


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 55 
 
  C 
and outlines the additional costs needed for implementation. This proposed project  is fully aligned with the priorities stated 
in the NCCP, and the financial modalities have been derived from this costed implementation strategy.  
 
14. Furthermore, Uganda recently submitted a Second National Communication (2014) which elaborates its specific 
vulnerabilities to climate change impacts, as well as its contributions to the UNFCCC agreements. In this document, there  
is specific mention of the impact of climate change on wetland areas, as well as the value of sustainable water resource 
management (including wetlands) for adapt ation – “for keeping the sectors of the economy productive and function 
effectively, while also minimizing the losses and negative impacts  from floods and droughts.” Uganda’s National 
Adaptation Programm e of Action (2007) prioritizes a number  of adaptation strategies  including: promotion of  
community -based practices of collaborative natural resource management and water resource management,  
enhancement of  water supply to communities adjacent to protected areas (which includes wetland areas), promotion of  
appropriate and sustainable water harvesting, storage and utilization technologies, and expansion of  weather obser ving 
infrastructure and promotion of multimedia approach to dissemination for weather and climate information.  Uganda has 
also launched the process of developing a National Adaptation Plan (NAP), supported by the UNDP -UNEP Global 
Support Programme on National Adaptation Plans , with a focus on the Agricultural Sector.  Specific priorities were 
identified during the launch of the Agricultural Sector NAP in June, 2015, many of which are directly in line with the focus 
of this project (e.g. introducing resilient natural resource management including agricultural water management, climate 
smart agricultural practices, and improved early warning systems and agricultural meteorological information generation 
and dissemination).  In addition, the workshop discussions concluded that one of t he priority goals was to restore 
wetlands, and therefore introduce adaptive interventions to promote better and sustainable utilization of these wetlands.  
This project will therefore support the implementation of the NAP, and provide evidence and experience to the process 
as it moves forward.  Given that UNDP is managing the support for the NAP process, jointly with UNEP and FAO, the direct alignment and engagement between this project and the NAP process will be ensured.  
 15. In addition to policies at the national level, framework management plans  for wetland systems and Ramsar Site 
Management plans have been developed to provide a framework on which specific interventions are derived. Furthermore 
several local communities hav e established Community Conservation Areas  (CCAs)  within the wetlands, and specific 
management plans to ensure sustainable use of the natural resources in these CCAs.  This work was promoted under 
the Extending Wetland Protected Areas through Community Conservation Initiatives (COBWEB) Project, funded by the 
Global Environment Facility  (GEF) and supported by UNDP.  These management plans were developed in communities 
within the L. Mburo - Nakivale and L. Bisina –  Opeta sites.  While they have proved to be s uccessful (see full Terminal 
Evaluation of the COBWEB project in Annex VIIIa), they have not yet been developed in the districts targeted under this 
proposed project. GCF resources will build on these lessons and scale up the local level planning processes  
demonstrated.  
 16. With this strong political backing at the national level, and its links to global agreements and commitments, there are 
still challenges to implementing the vision, given capac ity and resource constraints. T he GCF funds will be used to 
address these challenges, by contributing to implementation of  national policies and strategies , and replicating and 
scaling up successful local strategies, which have been proven through recently implemented pilot projects.  
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
17. In Uganda, wetlands provide many important functions to the people , particularly in the context of food security. This 
is in addition to its role as a habitat for biodiversity that is also important  for the economy.  According to a recent 2013 
study on the value of wetlands in Uganda, several market and non- market benefits are identified: “T he market  benefits 
include water for domestic use and watering of livestock, support to dry season agriculture, provision of handicrafts, 
building materials, and food resources such as fish, yams, vegetables, wild game, and medicine. The non- market  benefits 
include flood control, purification of water, and maintenance  of the water table, microclimate moderation, and storm 
protection. Wetlands also serve as habitats for important flora and fauna, have aesthetic and heritage values, and contain 
stocks of biodiversity of potentially high pharmaceutical value. Over 80% of the people living adjacent to wetland areas 
in Uganda directly use wetland resources for their household food security needs .” 7 In addition to supporting food and 
water security, wetlands also support income generation and employment.  “ Of a t otal population of 34 million Ugandans , 
                                                             
7 Kakuru, Willy,  Nelson Turyahabwe, and Johnny Mugisha, Total Economic Value of Wetlands Products and Services in Uganda, The Scientific World 
Journal, Volume 2013 (2013).


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 55 
 
  C 
it is estimated that wetlands provide about 320,000 workers with direct employment and provide subsistence  employment 
for over 2.4 million.”8 
 
18. Wetland health and resilience can easily be compromised by climate change impacts.  Climate change models for 
Uganda predict that temperatures will continue to increase, and there will be changes in the seasonal distribution and 
amount of rainfalls, more f requent extreme weather events, and increases in the frequency of heavy rainfalls (see first 
section of the feasibility study for more specific details and citations, based on an extensive literature review).  Increases 
in temperature and erratic rainfall will result in more frequent and intense floods, droughts and heat waves, which will 
directly threaten wetlands and livelihoods that rely on its healthy ecosystem services. Hydrologic and drainage maps of 
the project targeted sites (the eastern and southwestern Wetlands Basin) indicate that most of the freshwater inflows 
pass through the wetlands and natural forests . These systems  have played an integral role in maintaining the quality of 
water over the centuries. However, over the last three decades , climate change impacts, as well as other baseline (non-
climate)  issues such as excessive sedimentation and non- native species invasions, have resulted in substantial water 
quality deterioration.  
 
19. Wetland health and resilience can easily be compromis ed by climate change impacts.  Climate change models for 
Uganda predict that temperatures will continue to increase, and there will be changes in the seasonal distribution and 
amount of rainfalls, more frequent extreme weather events, and increases in the frequency of heavy rainfalls (see 
feasibility study for more specific details and citations).  Increases in temperature and erratic rai nfall will result in more 
frequent and intense floods, droughts and heat waves , which will directly threaten wetlands and livelihoods that rely on 
its healthy ecosystem services.  Already , changes to current and historical rainfall patterns have led to chan ges in the 
hydrological regime, leading to significant changes in water availability  for key areas such as domestic use, watering 
livestock, and irrigation for agriculture.   
 20. As a result, the water table in both eastern and southwestern  Wetlands Basin have experienced  and are expected to 
experience more frequent and sudden drops. L ivelihood activities  (such as overexploitation of fish and agricultural lands, 
poaching, and extraction of reeds) in the catchment are already proving unsustainable for the wetland areas . These 
human stressors are resulting in direct  effects and changes in the wetlands that are impeding its ability to provide critical 
services. For example, in Kabale District, one of the proposed project  target areas in Southwestern Uganda, about 58% 
of wetlands have been drained to establish more arable land for agriculture and other livelihood opportunities (dairy farming, tree growing and fish farming).  These communities are searching for this land, since soils along the hillsides 
are becoming increasingly infertile due to temperature increases and other climatic changes.
9 As a result, the wetland 
ecosystems have lost their capacity to retain nutrients a nd store and filter water. This impacts water access for 
surrounding communities which are dependent on water from wells constructed near the wetlands. In addition, the ability 
of these wetland ecosystems to adapt to climate change and variability impacts are also grossly compromised, such a 
flood control, water storage and filtration, and maintaining the microclimate. The project proposes to address these issues 
by improving the ecosystem services of the wetlands and their associated catchments through reforestation and 
restoration activities, including water harvesting and aquifer recharge. Restored and reforested wetlands and their 
catchment will improve the capacity of the ecosystem to regulate extreme weather such as floods and drought, by 
reducing the impacts of flash floods thanks to absorbing the excess water better. The proposed interventions will also reduce the effects of droughts and desiccation by improving the retention of water in the wetlands and its catchment area, and by recharging ground water. A restored and improve d ecosystem is insufficient on its own to address the impacts of 
climate change on the people living and dependent on the wetlands for their livelihoods. Therefore, the project aims at 
implementing crop diversification, conservation agriculture techniques,  and train farmers in best practices for climate 
resilient farming. Improvement of value chains, local transformation of agricultural produce, and agri -based income 
generating activities (e.g. goat rearing, raising chickens, bee keeping, etc) will be promoted.  In addition, diversification 
of income sources through alternative livelihoods in the form of employment and entrepreneurship training will help the 
vulnerable target population to not entirely rely on agriculture for their livelihood and food securi ty. In order to ensure 
sustainability, women self -help groups will be set up or strengthened, and access to existing public or private microfinance 
and revolving funds will be strengthened. Finally, all of these climate change adaptation activities will require more reliable 
climate information. Without improved weather forecasting adapting to climate change is not possible. The LDCF project 
is setting the foundation for the improvement of the capacity of the Uganda National Meteorology Authority by increas ing 
                                                             
8 Second National Communication, Uganda (2014)  
9 Barakagira, Alex, and Eliezer Kateyo, “Impacts of W etland Drainage on Domestic Water Supplies and People’s Livelihoods in Kabale distric, Uganda,” 
http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/bitstream/handle/10535/1556/Barakagira_109901.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 55 
 
  C 
the weather and climate observational network, developing tailored products and initiating private sector engagement . 
This GCF initiative will build on this and complement these efforts, by supporting the development of flood, drought and 
extreme weath er forecasts for the wetlands specifically. Hydromet advisories will be developed and tailored to the needs 
of the people living in and around the wetlands, as well as the wetland management department.  
 The three critical barriers  that the proposed project  will overcome are presented below:  
 
21.The exact vulnerability of key agro -ecological and hydrological systems of the wetlands is only partially 
known and not adequately addressed by the various development interventions in the project zone . To-date, 
there is limited engagement  with local communities and resource managers in problem identification and solution finding 
related to improved wetlands ecosystem management for building climate resilience. A wareness of the composite 
impacts that poor land and resource management have on local livelihoods  is insufficient for actions at scale to take 
place. Weak  natural resource governance and control systems , poor understanding of incentive systems , and limited 
innovations in establishing and utilizing such eco- systems , is prevalent . Understanding of climate change risks and 
impacts on natural and social assets  is also weak . Complicated social systems  is also a constraint , including traditional 
communities that do not fully integrate culturally appropriate engendered approaches, i.e. targeted women’s  
empowerment, and being cognizant of the dynamics of (seasonal) migration on household composition and available 
work force.  
 22. The extent to which smallholders receive impactful agricultural advice from extension workers will affect the 
extent to which new techniques and adaptation practices are understood and adopted. C apacity  constraints  of national 
and sub- national institutions dedicated to extension support translates to an inability to use their planning and suppor t 
mechanisms and consequently their  investment plans, as a guiding tool for driving planned adaptation. The inability to 
set vulnerability reduction targets on the basis of needs and available (and reliable) funding, to identify adaptive 
investment actions, and source technical expertise and financ ial means to implement the plan is also a constraint . 
Agricultural extension officers and NGOs that are providing agricultural assistance are not only limited in number, but 
also lack experience and  technical skills in providing climate resilient farming techniques.  Technical capacity constraints 
for climate -resilient water infrastructur e design and livelihood support. For example, the design standards employed by 
Agricultural Department Authorit y officials responsible for designing and constructing  rural irrigation work currently do not 
take into account  changes in timing and intensity of rainfall and additional run- off, as well as extreme events such as 
floods and droughts . Furthermore, l imited access to markets restricts  farmers’ ability to sell goods and to source 
agricultural inputs  such as fertilizers, equipment and extension advice.   Information on current market prices is also rarely 
available , and post -harvest losses are high.  
 
23. Limited climate risk information  hampers decision makers’ ability to make informed policy changes.  At the 
farmer -level, planning tools are lacking for the planting and harvesting season. At the national level, strategic decisions 
on agricultural planning over the medium term are prevented by a lack of national -level long -term project ed changes in 
climatic parameters. Although there is a nascent early warning s ystem (EWS) in place in Uganda, there are a number of 
key weaknesses, namely: i) a lack of agro- meteorological stations; ii) inadequately equipped forecasting institutions with 
limited  capacity; iii) inadequate communication to stakeholders (such as water managers, extension officers, other 
agricultural/hydrological stakeholders) and, in particular, farmers (including packaging the information in a format that is 
not easily understood or accessible); iv) insufficient institutional processes in place to ensure effective distribution of 
information due to ineffective links between the UNMA and the District authorities; and v) limited capacity to cater for 
effective adaptation support at all levels (national, district, and local community).  
 
24. To address these challenges, several projects  have been implemented in recent years to pilot different approaches 
for improv ing sustainable wetland management in the face of the pressures outlined above. Specifically , the Extending 
Wetland Protected Areas through Community Conservation Initiatives (COBWEB) p roject clearly demonstrated how to 
use a given livelihood issue like poverty or water scarcity as an entry point to promote sustainable wetland use and 
management. Its primary focus was to showcase the direct link between wetland conservation and  livelihoods. The 
approaches focused on the livelihood needs of communities, and worked with t hem to demonstrate this value. This led 
to an interest in further engagement of communities and to guard and manage wetland resources  not only in the wetland 
regions but also in the immediate catchment that was under pressure.  
 
25. The project established local commi ttees and groups to manage the C ommunity Conservation Areas (CCA) through 
implementation of the plans, which provides a valuable model for participatory management  to be scaled up and


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 55 
 
  C 
replicated in other districts and communities.  However, the terminal evaluation  of the COBWEB project identified a barrier 
to this replic ation, namely that there was no link to the private sector and/or development of micro- businesses in these 
plans, with no economic incentives incorporated.  For example, the terminal evaluation recommends that community 
members should be trained in various  agro- based, livestock or fisheries products to establish small businesses.  Further, 
it recognized the lack of guidelines available for communities on undertaking specific management measures, which 
would help to replicate and scale up different intervent ions.  
 26. Responding to this challenge to replication and scaling up of successful community -based sustainable management 
practices, this project  will focus on supporting communities dependent on the wetlands in these targeted areas to 
introduce new livelihood practices and business opportunities that would use wetland resources sustainably.  Alternative 
livelihood options will also be introduced to help reduce pressures off of the wetlands, and minimize encroachment and draining.  Underpinning the abi lity to sustainably manage these targeted wetland areas is the need for reliable and timely 
climate -related information to identify climate risks and make informed livelihood decisions. This is also essential in terms 
of early warning for potential extreme events, such as floods, which as described above will become increasingly common 
due to the impacts of climate change.  
 
27. The project  will build on this context of country commitments and ownership, strong multi -stakeholder engagement, 
cross cutting sectoral synergies, existing community platforms, key baseline resource assessments, and other information 
captured in the pre- feasibility assessment, to strengthen the on- going and new activities that demonstrate sustainable 
wetland management and resilient livelihoods in the context of  climate change impacts.  
 
28. The main goal of this project  is to restore and sustainably manage wetlands and support target communities in wetland 
areas of Uganda to reduce the risks of climate change posed to agricultural -based livelihoods . This directly addresses 
the critical challenge outlined in the baseline scenario: climate change will further exacerbate increasingly degraded 
wetlands in Uganda, which provide valuable ecosystem services for local livelihoo ds, particularly for those 
dependent on the wetlands for water availability and agricultural production.  As such, the approach taken by this 
proposed project  will be three- fold.   
 
29. First, it will address the specific vulnerabilities of the wetland areas themselves, through sustainable management 
practices and restoration activities  that take into account expected climate change risks . It is anticipated that the restored 
wetlands will also enhance communities’ climate change adaptation and resilience, by reducing risk to flooding and 
drought associated with changing climatic conditions. GCF resources will be used to restore degraded wetl and 
ecosystems whose critical regulatory ecosystem services have either been lost completely or are under immense threat, 
posing a problem not only to the ecological character of the wetlands, but also to their continued provision of benefits to 
current and future generations (this is in line with the National Climate Change Policy of Uganda) . The Government of 
Uganda has committed funds under this project  to support monitoring of wetland areas –  through boundary  demarcation, 
strengthening the wetland infor mation systems, and undertaking economic valuation of the wetland areas.  The 
Government will also support communities to prepare wetland management plans, as well as build capacity at central and local levels within the government to support their implementation. GCF funds will further scale up sustainable 
wetland management practices and strategies that have been tried and tested in previous projects and through 
government support.  It will focus on two regions, namely eastern and southwestern Uganda (see map in the A nnex  IX). 
Specifically, this will include support for i mproving and increasing water storage and r etention facilities, rehabilitating 
degrading catchment areas, restoring different wetland areas and associated forests which can support reducing impacts 
of floods and drought, and strengthening wetland management practices overall.   
 
30. Second, through the proposed project, GCF resources will be used to strengthen agricultural practices and identify 
alternative livelihood options  for those living in the wetland catchment areas. These efforts will ensure that livelihoods are 
more resilient in the face of climate impacts, through introducing climate- smart interventions, technologies and land use 
practices relevant for the wetland and immediate area.  At the same time, project resources will be used to introduce new livelihood options and market -based activities, (e.g. by training on business and entrepreneurial skills, accessing new 
markets and employability, and introducing micro- credit sch emes). In order to avoid failed attempts in this field, a 
systematic approach of screening the market for gaps and employment opportunities will be done prior to delivering 
extensive training. Training and business providers will have a placement t arget of 80% of trainees to help ensure that 
training leads  to employment.  These interventions will have transformative impacts such as changing the agricultural 
practices of subsistence farmers living in and around the wetlands from a single crop to a mor e diversified agriculture that 
is more resilient to climate change  and transforming the local markets by building a variety of skill sets and


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 55 
 
  C 
entrepreneurship capacity for beneficiaries employability;  changes that Uganda has not yet been able to accomplish . This 
will allow beneficiaries to become less dependent  on wetland areas, thus taking the pressure off of these ecosystems.   
 
31. Finally, underpinning both of  these expected results , the project  will help strengthen  the generation, analysis and 
dissemination of relevant climate information and early warning sys tems  for the targeted wetland areas .  Access to 
information on climate variability and extreme events will help to enhance livelihood decision- making, for both resilient 
agriculture- based livelihood practices and alternative livelihoods.  It will  also strengthen risk reduction, which can help 
reduce direct impact of floods and droughts on wetland areas which threaten further degradation.   
 
32. These three expec ted results are inter -related and integrated. Without each of these results realized, the overall 
project  objective cannot be achieved. The theory of change section (in section E.1.2) further outlines the way in which 
the expected results are inter -linked.  
 
C.3. Project / Programme  Description  
33. To achieve resilient livelihoods in these communities, three sub-components will be necessary , each outline d in detail 
below. Given several recognized gaps with regards to further defining the specific feasibility and impact of several 
activities  of the project , each of these sub- components is divided into two p hases. The first phase (years 1- 2) focuses  on 
scaling up the community plans designed under the baseline project and putting in place the necessary capacities, 
structures and concrete products to ensure the project  reaches its  full impact potential.  The second phase (years 3- 8) 
builds on this enabling environment and insights reached through various assessments to fully  scale up activities .  
 
34. With regards to achieving each of the three project  sub-components, this will include support from the GCF, as well 
as other co -financing sources – namely the Government of Uganda and UNDP.  Under each sub- component /output  is a 
short description of the type of support provided by non- GCF sources, and how this will be complemented by  GCF 
resources. Each of the inputs listed specify their funding source(s) in parentheses .   
 Output 1: Restoration and management of wetland hydrology and associated forests  
 
35. Under  this sub-component, at least 760 km
2 of degraded wetlands and its associated catchment will be restored and 
the lives of 500,000 people will be improved in selected districts of Eastern and South Western Uganda. The overall aim 
of the intervention is to restore the ecological and hydrological integrity of the wetland and support  the development and 
implementation of a community -based framework  for wetland management plans. This will help support climate risk 
management and resilient livelihoods through enhanced ecosystems services in the area.  
 
36. The Government of Uganda has established a Wetlands Management Department ( WMD ) under the Ministry of Water 
and Environment  (MWE) .  This Department is responsible for managing  wetland resources, undertaking activities to build 
capacity of local governments to assess wetland resources, plan and implement activities for their sustainab le 
management.  In addition, they have also undert aken a series of data collection  exercises to develop District Wetland 
Inventory Reports (DWIRs) which outline existing wetland resources, their values, threats and possible management 
options.  However, while the WMD has done and will continue to do significant work to maintain wetlands and avoid further degradation, there is still extensive work to be done in restoring those that have already been lost.  The 
Government  of Uganda has therefore committed to USD 18.122 million  under the MWE  budget to support the aims of 
this project . The GCF resources will be used to scale up appropriate wetland restoration and management paradigms 
building on best practices and lessons learnt , particularly in selected districts of eastern and south western Uganda. 
Practical activities  will demonstrate the direct link between the benefits of wetland conservation and people’s livelihoods , 
with a specific focus on climate change risks and adaptation opportunities of these restored wetlands .  
 Activity 1.1:  Small -scale water storage and detention facilities designed and constructed or rehabilitated in 
critical waterways for communities to benefit from enhanced ecosystem functioning; (GCF)  
37. This activity will s cale up community plans ( designed under the COBWEB project (see annex VIIIb), including specific 
activities identified by communities such as small earth dams, ponds, drainage, clearing of waterways etc.  The objective 
is to improve water harvesting and aquifer  recharge. Small earth dams, bunding, clearing of small steams and rivulets, 
ponds, drainage will all be part of this activity. Much more detail will be provided in the feasibility study, on how many of these water harvesting structures will be impl emented. See Annex II.  The impacts of these interventions is the increase 
in water captured and stored in the wetlands and in ground water aquafers. This increased water will have a very positive


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 55 
 
  C 
effect on the health of the wetlands themselves, but will al so increase the availability of water for farming activities, for 
tourism (larger water bodies for boating), and to support the large biodiversity that these wetlands harbor.  
 
Activity 1.2: Improved inlet streams to increase water delivery;  (GCF) 
38. Under this activity, community plans  will be scaled up for increasing tree cover  in the Lake Bisina catchment areas  
(based on plans designed under the COBWEB project) . Also, under this activity , GCF resources  will be used to 
implement and scale up recommendations and best practices from the independent terminal evaluation of the COBWEB 
project  (summary in section E.4.6. ) such as  embankments, desilting of rivulets , water harvesting structures , etc , and 
the preparation of  detailed plans for silt traps, drainage, flood control and maximum water recuperation.  
 
Activity 1.3: Degraded catchment areas rehabilitated and land productivity improved; (GCF, GoU) 
39. Scale up  interventions identified in the COBWEB terminal evaluation as necessary follow up activities  (e.g. replanting 
and protecting indigenous grasses and herbaceous  vegetation resilient to climate variability, promote infiltration, 
decrease soil transpiration,  placement of gabions in areas subjec t to excessive erosion) (GCF). Boundary demarcation 
and gazettement of wetlands  will als o be established (GoU) . This activity will also s cale up the t raining of  community 
members and extension workers in sustainable land management techniques (GCF) and provide the necessary 
investments (infrastructure (earth movers, small earth dams) , tools, etc) to scale up successful pilots delivered under 
the COBWEB project (GCF) . Communities  will be trained on the sustainable use of wetlands goods like fish (to avoid 
over-exploi tation) and on sustainable land- use techniques  (GCF) and r aising community awareness on the importance 
of environmental protection  (GCF).  
 
Activity 1.4 : Strengthened wetlands management practices  (GCF, GoU)  
40. Under this activity,  the national wetland information system will be strengthened (GoU) and an economic valuation 
will be prepared for  research and development plans (GoU) . Institutional capacity will be built at central and local 
government levels on wetland management  by training on technical knowledge about the impact of climate change on 
wetlands, environmental management and sustainable land management , and mentoring (GoU, GCF)  will also be part 
of this activity, in order to s cale up the preparation of community wet land management plans in each targeted area (GoU, 
GCF) , and provide the necessary tools  (from maps to earth movers) , training and infrastructure to implement wetland 
management plans  (GCF). This activity will also f acilitate establishment of communities into committees and groups for 
management of local wetland areas and implementation of restoration activities  (GCF). Formulat ing and enforc ing by-
laws, control ling charcoal burning  
 
Output 2: Improved agricultural practices and alternative livelihood options in the wetland catchment 
 
41. Output  2 will target at least 150,000 farmers  including those who currently do not have secure access to irrigation, 
land-poor farmers, women- headed households, and the landless , to make  their livelihoods are more climate resilient. 
Investments in small -scale rural infrastructure (shallow bore wells, drip irrigation, tilling tools)  for agricultural purposes , 
especially on- farm water management infrastructure such as dams, canals, drip irrigation systems,  as well as  farming 
best practices and crop diversification will be implemented to realize high economic return giv en their coverage.  In 
addition, the output will focus on technical skills training for employment in key economic sectors  viable in wetland areas, 
such as tourism, health and construction . Most of the beneficiaries have very low levels of education and no skills that 
can help them find a job. Beneficiaries will be trained in specific skills with  high employability potential ( e.g. earth mover , 
driver, assistant nurse, reception clerk in hotels, desktop publishing). The training providers will have delivery target s to 
place at least 80% of the trainees in durable jobs. This will ensure that beneficiaries are not only trained but also placed 
in employment.  This will focus on  at least 50,000 of the most vulnerable people, particularly on women headed 
households, subsistence farmers and people identified as  very dependent on the wetlands for their food security. 
Entrepreneurship development training, including business plan development, book keeping, accounting, stock 
management, access to banking and finance will be provided using GCF resources to 10,000 pre- screened candidates 
in the target districts.  A mentoring programme to accompany the benefici aries in this new business will be in place to 
ensure the sustainability of the effort.  In order to deliver this output , the proposed project  will follow the successfully tried 
and tested ILO methodology on Training for Rural Economic Empowerment (TREE10) and Start and Improve Your 
Business (SYIB11). This methodology has been successfully applied in over 80 countries with tested results on 
employment and economic empowerment. GCF resources will be used to support most of the activities under this sub-
                                                             
10 http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ ---ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_159165.pdf  
11 http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ ---ed_emp/ ---emp_ent/ ---ifp_seed/documents/genericdocument/wcms_159435.pdf


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 55 
 
  C 
compone nt, with some funding from the GoU . However, it will actively build on existing efforts and replicate good 
practices emerging from the COBWEB  project  and UNDP’s broader project portfolio, specifically focusing on 
strengthening climate resilient livelihoods  in the targeted wetland areas . 
 
Activity 2.1: Crop diversification and resilient agricultural best practice adopted  (GCF, GoU)  
42. This activity will s cale up the c apacity building efforts of agricultural extension officers on resilient agriculture practices  
(smart agriculture, conservation agriculture) (GCF, GoU) , and t rain farmers at all project  sites on the importance of crop 
diversification and other resilient agricultural  techniques as an adaptive measure to climate change (e.g. planting drought 
tolerant crops, early mat uring crops, adopting multiple cropping techniques to spread risks) .  This includes scaling up 
established farmer and water user groups and/or agricultural  cooperatives to oversee and facilitate the adoption and 
dissemination of these practices and measures  (GCF).   This experience and good practice will also be disseminated 
through farmer to farmer exchanges, training of trainers, demonstration sites and other methods, to replicate and scale 
up impact (GCF).  
 
Activity 2.2: Economically viable and sustainable  agri-based  livelihood and income generating inte rventions 
introduced, promoted and supported in the wetland and immediate catchment (GCF)  
43. This activity will s cale up successful livelihood activities in the COBWEB project such as eco-tourism, aquaculture , 
and dairy products (GCF)  and i mplement the recommendations from the COBWEB terminal evaluation on engaging the 
private sector for increased eco- tourism (GCF) . The ILO methodology will be used to identify gaps, employment needs 
and income streams that are resilient to climate change (including market viability assessments)  (GCF). B ased on the 
findings, this activity will undertake the necessary  trainings of identified beneficiaries , and will s et up a model and 50 
training centres in order to  train and place beneficiaries in jobs, while making a profit  – this will transform the local economy 
and raise the skill training capacity of the region (GCF). Under this activity , local groups , cooperatives  and committees 
will be established to implement and manage the process of introducing and disseminating alternative livelihoods (participatory selection of beneficiaries, screening of skills and small and medium enterprises)  (GCF). This activity will 
then undertake the necessary trainings of established groups (e.g. management of plantation of economically important 
tree species in buffer zones and farmlands, starting a business of plant nurseries, orchard management, sustainable fish 
production and processing, biodiversity counts, animal husbandry, CBO formation and eco- tourism) ; s
upport the 
beneficiaries with the necessary small -scale infrastructure for identified livelihood options (e.g. beehives,  fish ponds, fruit 
processing plants, cold storage) ; and provide the necessary additional small- scale infrastructure (e.g. renewable energy 
systems (pumps, biogas), cell phone repair tools ) (GCF).   All good practices and lessons learned will also be shared  
through training of trainers, demonstrations, and other methods (GCF).  
 
 
Output 3: Strengthening access to climate and early warning information to farmers and other target 
communities  to support wetland management 
 
44. This output will focus on strengthening access to reliable climate- related information and scaling up advisories  for 
farmers and other target communities  in the two wetland target areas , to improve the adaptation capacity of the entire 
population in and around the wetlands –  around 1,000,000 people. This will include the expansion of networks that 
generate and process climate- related data into relevant information to the scale and location of local districts, villages or 
communities, as well as dissemination of climate- related infor mation/services , advisories  and early warning to 
communities.  A strong focus of this output will be on delivering actionable climate- related information to communities , 
taking the form of agro- met advisories for agriculture, as well as the dissemination channels for making information 
available to the “ last mile. ” The ongoing project “Strengthening Climate Information and Early Warning Systems 
(SCIEWS) in Africa for Climate Resilient Development and Adaptation to Climate Change,” supported b y the UNDP , will 
complement the GCF resources to ac hieve this anticipated output. Its planned activities will be founded on both the 
existing pre- feasibility assessments developed by the UNDP  project (see Annex II ), as well as additional feasibility and 
capacity assessments undertaken during phase 1 of this  proposed project . [In order to adapt to CC, accurate, reliable 
and locally relevant climate information is key to improving the management of the wetlands. By wetlands it is understood 
that it includes  the people living in and around the wetlands. For policy makers and environmental managers, accurate 
and reliable climate information is crucial to plan policies and interventions, budget and prioritize scarce resources. For 
the local farmers and benefici aries weather information is also crucial to plan their crops, the type of crop (short cycle, 
drought resistant) and the timing of planting, weeding and harvesting. The user uptake of information is a key step in the 
information dissemination cycle. The ongoing LDCF funded project on SCIEWS in Uganda, is currently working to develop 
tailored and packaged information for the target group. The project is also working towards partnering with mobile phone


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 55 
 
  C 
companies to use SMS for communication of advisories  and climate information. Last but not least, awareness and 
climate/ meteorology literacy campaigns are also being conducted under the SCIEWS project. This GCF funded initiative 
will build on and strengthen further the capacity to deliver relevant climate infor mation to the beneficiaries of this project. 
Although further work is required to advance this activity, it is ready to start as soon as the funding is approved as much 
baseline work would have already been completed.  
 Activity 3.1:  Meteorological and hydrological infrastructural investments supported including additional manual 
and automatic weather stations, lightning sensors, hydrological monitoring equipment, agro -meteorological 
stations, forecasting equipment, and data archiving systems.  (GCF, UNDP ) 
45. Under this activity, the Uganda National Meteorology Authority (UNMA)  database and information management 
system will be updated and link ed to Department of Water Resource Monitoring and Assessment ( DWRM ) water 
management and information system ( UNDP ) and the National Wetland Information System (NWIS) (GCF) . Data rescue 
and digitization process es will be undertaken from existing archives ( UNDP ), and a protocol and an agreement between 
the DWRM and UNMA  for data collection, data exchange, data processing, data analysis and flood, drought and severe 
weather risk assessment and warnings  will be established (UNDP ). This will be complemented by establishing protocols 
and agreements with agricultural extensio n services through the National Agricultural  Advisory Services Project (NAADS) 
and t he Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries (MAAIF)  (GCF). 47. An online web platform linked to 
DWRM and UNMA ’s official websites and information and management systems ( UNDP ) will be developed  and linked to 
infrastructure in targeted areas , which  will be procured and installed (GCF); infrastructure repairs will be done as needed 
(GCF), and new systems will be integrated into the existing DWRM  and UNMA  network s (UNDP , GCF) . 
 
Activity 3.2 : Capacity building of relevant staff on operation and maintenance of climate monitoring equipment, 
data interpretation, modeling  and forecasting.  (GCF, UNDP)  
46. This activity will d evelop an observation network quality control and maintenance toolbox , and e stablish training 
materials, approaches and lessons learned, for meteorological and hydrological technicians on technical aspects regarding the operation and maintenance of infrastructure (UNDP ). It will  also establish operation and maintenance 
training facilities including demonstration equipment and reference quality sensors at training sites in the project target 
areas (UNDP , GCF) , and t rain meteorological and hydrological technicians in targeted districts on  technical aspects 
regarding the operation and maintenance of new infrastructure (GCF) . Improvement of existing weather and seasonal 
forecasts will be undertaken through development of statistical downscaling approaches to correct biases in numerical 
model  forecasts, utilizing digitized data to develop model output statistics (GCF).  
 
Activity 3.3 : Climate -related information/services  provided to target areas , such as early warnings on flash floods 
and extreme weather, agricultural extension advice for a wide variety of crops, and short-  to long -range weather 
forecasts.  (GCF, UNDP)  
47. This activity will t rain UNMA and DWRM forecasters , in collaboration with M AAIF and NAADS staff,  to prepare weather 
and climate forecasts and package  hydro -meteorological data and information into suitable format for user -agencies and 
local community end- users, including those specific to wetland areas ( UNDP , GCF) .  It will also develop early warning 
products  and advisories,  utilizing satellite -based measurements of soil moisture and vegetation to enhance the usefulness 
and extent of these products, as well as SOPs for the target regions  and users (UNDP , GCF) . Training packages and 
toolkits will be developed to assist  trained meteorologists , agronomists  and hydrologists to bui ld the in-house forecast 
and advisory development (using GIS tools and environmental data) capacities  of DWRMA , MAAIF  and UNMA  and to 
enhance collaboration between the three departments and mainstream the online platform and integrated data storage 
management system  (UNDP , CGF) . This will be followed by the development of  weather and climate- related  alerts , 
tailored to the targeted wetland areas,  including colo r-coded advisories  for agriculture, watches and warnings for flood, 
drought, severe weather and agricultural stresses (GCF) . 
 
Activity 3.4: Customized ICT, mobile platforms, and other public and private communication channels identified 
and/or developed to support dissemination of the above information/services to the ‘last mile’ users to enable 
timely and urgent responsive action as well as short/medium/long -term planning for climate -dependent activities 
in sectors such as agriculture.  (GCF,  UNDP)  
48. Co-development of information requirements for end- users will be undertaken through participatory workshops, which 
will feed into advisory and warning development through activity 3.3. This will include information on indigenous 
knowledge and local customs , which can help package understandable products in local languages (GCF). Advisories 
and warnings will be disseminated via radio and SMS -based platforms (UNDP, GCF). A r eview and propos al for  revisions 
to the current i) cost recovery arrangement between UNMA , DWRM, WMD  and CCA to adequately reflect enhanced


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 55 
 
  C 
services and fee structures; and ii) government reimbursement levels for meteorological services to reflect higher levels 
of operating expenses and capital costs needed to maintain and operate automated and modernised equipment and 
retain forecasting skills ( UNDP ), will be undertaken. Further, an EWS national dissemination toolbox will be developed 
and operationalized, including a gender -sensitive training manual ( UNDP ). Community awareness  on climate information 
and interpretation/use will be built. ( UNDP , GCF)  
  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme  Sponsor  
49. The executing entity of the project and proposed sponsoring entity is the Mi nistry  of Water and Environment (MWE) . 
The Ministry has significant experience in successfully implementing projects in partnership with UNDP. It has undergone 
an assessment of its financial procedures and standards and has met the UNDP requirements to manage large amounts 
of funds. The Directorate of Environment Affairs will provide overall strategic direction and technical backstopping support  
to the project. Each project output will be coordinated and managed by the relevant departments in MWE and other  
relevant  agencies . The Ministry of Water and Environment has long and substantial experience in handling donor funds 
with the most recent being the World Bank Supported Water Development and Management Project worth US$135 
million.  The Ministry is also operating a Joint Water and Environment S ector Support Programme and a Joint Partnership 
Fund which serves as a basket to which different donors contribute. Financial management systems are fully aligned with the government financial management systems. The Ministry accounts include donor funded project are subjected to 
annual audits by the Auditor General. UNDP has reviewed the financial rules and procedures of the MWE and it has 
approved it as an executing entity . 
 50. The Constitution of Uganda 1995,  Part XIII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy states 
that “The State shall protect important natural resources, including land, water, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behalf of the people of Uganda”. This mandat es the Ministry of Water and Environment to formulate policies, 
regulations, strategies, and guidelines, and to monitor and evaluate their implementation and compliance. In addition, it 
provides backstopping support to stakeholders involved in the developm ent, management and conservation of water and 
environment resources including weather and climate.   
 
51. In fulfillment of its mandate, the Ministry has established a fully-fledged Directorate of Environment Affairs including  
a Wetlands Management Department, a Climate Change Department and a Forest Sector Support Department , and the 
Directorate of Water Resources Management which are key in implementation of the project. The Ministry is also the 
National Focal Point for the Ram sar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance.  Specific policy and on- the-
ground action related to wetlands and catchment management undertaken by the Ministry include:  formulation and 
implementation of the National Environment Action Plan (1994) , the National Environment Management Policy (1995) , 
the National Wetland Management Policy (1995) , The Tree and Planting Act (2003 ), the National Water Policy (1999) , 
the National Forestry Policy ( 1999) , National Climate Change Policy ( 2015) , as well as development and implementation 
of national demarcation and restoration strategies  and wetland management plans.  As a result , 443.3km of wetlands 
boundaries have been demarcated and 9,400 Ha of wetlands have been restored country -wide, which  has contributed to 
the increment of wetland coverage from 10.9 to 11 Ha of degraded sections of wetlands restored between FY 2011/12 
to 2014/15. In addition 83 Community Based Wetland Management plans, which rationalizes the use of wetland resources 
have been developed. 8 watershed catchment plans have been developed and finalized for implementation.  
 52. The Ministry of Water and Environment is expected to provide financial, technical and human resources during the 
implementation of the proposed project. In financial terms the Government through the Executing Ministry of Water and 
Environment will provide a total of USD 2  million  annually and this will be integrated within the Medium Term Expenditure 
Framework (MTEF) as a commitment by the Government of Uganda. The funds will be used for taxes and other 
operational costs. On the other hand the Ministry of W ater and Environment will provide the required human resources  
as well as offices to ensure efficient and effective implementation of the proposed project activities. In terms of the equit y, 
the project shall focus on the highly degraded wetland ecosystems  in the eastern  and southwestern  parts of Uganda and 
the project shall involve all categories of people including the women, children, youth, elderly as well as other vulnerable sections of the community in both rural and urban areas. In terms of management , the project will use existing structures 
at national, subnational and local government levels such as wetland regional technical support units and the water 
management zones. In terms of operations, the project will make use of the existing accounting, procurement, auditing 
as well as administrative procedures as stipulated by the Public Finance Management Act (2015)  and Public Procurement 
and Disposal Act  (2014) .


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 55 
 
  C 
53. The project activit ies, outputs and outcomes will be marketed and disseminated using the existing Ministry of Water 
and Environment Information, Education and Communication Strategy. In addition to the existing inter -district wetland 
management committees, Joint Sector Technical Reviews (JSR), Water and Environment Sector Working Group 
(WESSWG) forum and Annual Joint Sector Reviews will be utilized, as well as the Ministry website and community 
awareness meetings , among others.  
 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
54. Not Applicable for this project.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  
55. The National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) of Uganda “has been prepared and designed within the context of the 
country’s development vision and national development priorities; it provides a clearly defined pathway for dealing with 
the challenges of climate change within the current socio- economic context of Uganda, and looks ahead to the 
opportunities and benefits of a green ec onomy.” This  initiative is fully aligned with the prior ities stated in the NCCP and 
the financial modalities have been derived from the “Costed implementation Strategy of the NCCP.”   
  
56. The National Development Plan (NDP) is Uganda’s medium -term development strategy for the period 2014/15 to 
2020 and serves  as a guide for investment planning, budget allocation and social interventions. It includes sector -specific 
targets to achieve eight objectives with the overall theme of “Growth, Employment and Prosperity for Socio -Economic 
Transformation.” Uganda’s Natio nal Climate Change Policy (NCCP, 2012) supports the integration of climate change 
issues into planning, decision- making and investments in all sectors and trans -sectoral themes through appropriate 
institutional arrangements. In line with the East African C limate (EAC) regional policy, this national policy emphasizes 
climate change adaptation as the top priority for Uganda. Mitigation efforts are included in the policy as secondary priorities. Among the planned activities of the project there is promotion of  private and public partnerships (PPPs) 
development of small scale water storage facilities, promotion of climate- smart interventions and land use practices, food 
storage facilities, development of early warning systems.  
  
57. In accordance with the National Environment Management Act Cap 153, the proposed project does not require 
detailed environmental ass essment before implementation. However, in accordance with the wetlands, river banks and 
lakeshore regulations, the project will require wetland us er permits from the National Environment Management Authority 
in consultation with the Wetlands Management Department for regulated activities such as fish farming, bee keeping, and 
ecotourism. Water abstraction permits  will be needed  from the Directorate of Water Resources Management for irrigation 
activities in consultation with relevant institutions . The project will also be required to comply with the provisions of the 
Employment Act 2006.   The Act consolidates laws governing individual employment relat ionships and other connected 
matters.   In addition, the project will be subject to the Workers Compensation Act Cap 225 , which provides for 
compensation to workers for injuries suffered and scheduled di seases incurred in the course of their employment.  This 
Act shall apply  to workers employed by or under the Government of Uganda in the same way and to the same extent as 
if the employer were a private person, but the Act shall not apply to active members of the armed forces of Uganda.  
  
58. The F oreign Exchange Act 2004 amended and consolidated the law relating to foreign exchange in Uganda, provided  
for the exchange of foreign currencies in Uganda and the making of international payments and transfers of foreign 
exchange and for other related incidental  matters.   In accordance with the Act, Bank of Uganda may impose restrictions 
on the importation into or exportation from Uganda of banknotes, coins, traveler’s  checks  and securities denominated in 
currency of Uganda or in foreign currency, through regulat ions.    
 
59. In accordance with the Motor Vehicle Insurance (Thirds Party Risks) Act Cap 214,  it shall not be lawful for any person 
to use, or to cause or to permit any other person to use, a vehicle on a road unless there is in force in relation to the use 
of the vehicle by that person or that other person, as the case may be, a policy of insurance in respect of third party risks 
that complies with the requirements of this Act.  Notwithstanding, s ubsection (1) shall not apply to a vehicle owned by the 
Government of Uganda.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 55 
 
  C 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s 
60. The project will be  implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM),  according to the Standard 
Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Uganda, the Country Programme Action Plan 
(CPAP), and as policies and procedures outlined in the U NDP POPP  (see 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining- a-Project.aspx )  
 
61. The executing entity  for this project is the Ministry of Water and Environment . The Ministry of Water and Environment 
is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, 
achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources.  The MWE will sign a Memorandum  of 
Understanding (MoU) with Responsible Parties and contractors. These MoUs will specify in details the roles and 
responsibilities for all Parties. In addition, works, supplies and services will be sourced through a competitive procurement  
process for whi ch MWE will issue contracts to service providers.  
Project implementation and compliance will be done through the following:  
• Quarterly reports  
• Annual reports  
• Annual Performance Reviews  
• Annual financial audits  
• Mid-term project reviews  
Additionally the UNDP standard procedures for project implementation as described under section H2 will apply. The 
following parties have entered into agreements with Ministry of Water and Environment to assist in successfully delivering 
project outcomes and are directly accountable to Ministry of Water and Environment as outlined in the terms of their 
agreement : 
• National Forest Authority  
• Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries  
• Private sector  
• Department of Water Resources  
• Hydropower generati ng companies  
• Non- Governmental Organisations  
• Uganda Wildlife Authority  
• Uganda Tourism Board  
 
62. The management arrangements for this project are summarized in the chart below.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 55 
 
  C 
 
 The Project Board  is comprised of the following organisations : Ministry of Water and Environment, National Forest 
Authority, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Water Resources Department; Uganda Wildlife Authority  
Uganda Tourism Board, UNDP, Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, Department of Wetlands 
Management.  The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is 
required by the Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure 
management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international 
competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP Programme 
Manager . The Project Board will meet at  least twice a year.  
 
63. The Project Manager  will run the project on a day -to-day basis on behalf of the Ministry of Water and Environment  
within the constraints laid down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project terminal 
evaluation report, and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, has been completed and submitted to 
UNDP.   The Project Manager is responsible for day -to-day management and decision- making for the project. The Project 
Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project document, to the 
required standard of quality and with in the specified constraints of time and cost. Furthermore, he/she will m anage 
identified project risks and advise the Pr oject Board on mitigation plans, m aintain and monitor the status of these risks by 
maintaining a pr oject risk log (NIM Guidelines) and establish internal control processes for the project with oversight from 
the Project Board/Steering Committee.  
 
The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the Standard 
Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Uganda, the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) Action Plan  for Uganda and policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP. (see 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining- a-Project.aspx) The national executing entity -  also referred to as 
the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology -  is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP 
rules and regulations, policies and procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the 
national Government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreem ent (SBAA), together with a UNDP 
project document, which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds (once the funds are 
secured).  
C.8. Timetable of Project/  Programme Implementation  
See Annex X


---
*Page 24*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 55 
 
 
 
 D 
 D.1.Value Added for GCF Involvement    
64. The GCF’s involvement in this project is critical, given the country’s current economic context, the particular need 
that is not being addressed from other sources, and the potential transformation this initial fund can bring in the form of 
further investments and long- term financial sustainability.  Currently, domestic financ e for restoring degraded wetlands 
and strengthening sustainable management  are inadequate. The Government of Uganda  has a current debt burden of 
7 billion  USD , and therefore has limited ability to increase investment in this area. Current ongoing efforts b y Uganda 
need to be urgently comple mented with additional finance in order to ensure that early steps are taken to scale up both 
in terms of coverage as well as impact on reducing the vulnerability of the poor and marginalized.  The importance of the 
GCF support should not be underestimated as there are no other sources of fund to implement this urgent adaptation action for Uganda.  
 65. Given the rate at which wetland degradation is taking place and considering the scale of financing needed to address 
this degradation, it is necessary to diversify the sources of funding to support wetland restoration and sustainable management . This proposed project leverages the existing funds that are available from the Government of Uganda on 
supporting wetlands (USD 18,122,00 million), as well as the existing UNDP  funds which have been committed to Uganda 
(USD 2 million new and addit ional).  However, beyond these funds, there are no additional sources for Uganda to draw 
upon from UNDP, SCCF or the LDCF . Those that exist, such as the Adaptation Fund, are not accessible to countries 
until they have their direct access mechanisms in place.  While Uganda is  working on having this capacity in place, 
includ ing with support from UNDP, it is  not in a position to make use of this option at the moment . The specific activities 
required to restore and sustainably manage wetland areas in the face of climate change, especially in the context of rural livelihood opportunities, are not financially viable for private s ector investment at this time. 72% of the population is 
comprised of  subsistence farmers, and over 80% of the people living adjacent to wetland areas directly use wetland 
resources for their household food security needs. Addressing their needs  will only contribute to reaching sustainable 
levels of fo od security and bringing people out of poverty, and will not generate the type of profit that will incentivize 
private sector engagement.   
 66. Nonetheless, the activities proposed provide the necessary initial investments to remove the barriers to private sector 
investment, and ensure long term financial sustainability – thus transforming this sector. Specifically, initial restoration of 
wetlands  and putting in place sustainable management plans (particularly at the local level), will create a market for 
potential investments in eco- tourism which would further incentivize continued sustainable management of these 
ecosystems. Currently the potential for eco- tourism is high but prevented by the poor condition of the wetlands and the 
insufficient facilities. This initiative will improve the quality of the wetland as an attraction for tourists, and improve t he 
local involvement of beneficiaries in this  activity. The initial GCF investment is essential given the current financing 
landscape, but it is also an opportunity to catalyze market forces which will further shift this sector towards a climate-resilient development path.  
 
D.2. Exit Strategy


---
*Page 25*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 55 
 
 
 
 D 
67. To sustain the project interventions beyond its implementation period, this project will put in place the necessary 
ownership, capacity  and identify financing schemes  to ensure continued sustainable management of wetlands, sustained 
adoption of resilient  livelihood practices, and maintenance of the climate information network. With regards to ownership, 
relevant government departments, as well as local communities  (which have been consulted extensively) , will be involved 
in the implementation of project i nterventions. Integration into existing institutional framework  will ensure the continuity 
of the project, especially given the decentraliz ed nature of governance and on- going projects.  The strong commitment 
of the Government of Uganda to sustainably address climate change and its social, economic, environmental and 
financial impacts has been evident through several initiatives from the country’s leadership. This clear intention is 
reflected in the country’s National Climate Change Policy, Strategy and the establishment of the Climate Change 
Department in the Ministry of Water and Environment.  
 
68. A participatory approach, which has already been initiated through collaboration and consultations with national 
government departments and other stakeholders in designing the project, will include capacity building of the lead 
institutions as well as other stakeholders , including the private sector. Suitable policy and technical, legal and institutional 
capacity will be established at  both the local and the national level to ensure continued sustained engagement in 
sustainable wetland management and resilient livelihoods .  The activities for the implementation of restoration efforts 
will be conducted at a community level and aim at building an understanding and awareness of the issues at hand while 
including the communities in the development and maintenance of the restoration efforts. The participation of the targeted 
communities is, for example, an ins trumental part of the wetland restoration and adaptation measures related to flood 
control and water provisioning during drought periods.  Trainings and participatory processes as well as the establishment 
of local processes  and institutions (e.g. wetland m anagement committees) aim to create the local capacity to make 
informed decisions in regards adapting to climate change- related flooding and water shortages . Further, the project will 
include a component of “training of trainers,” to ensure continued capac ity building of both,  government staff and 
communities. Additionally , agreements will be established with individuals trained to ensure that they remain in the 
releva nt government departments for a minimum period after receiving the training. Ensuring sufficient budgetary 
allocations for the sustainable functioning of both the wetland ecosystem and the climate information network will be an 
important component of project sustainability, particularly with regards to MWE. As  the proposed project will complement 
existing government initiatives , operations and maintenance work requir ing government intervention will be integrated 
into the existing programs and plans and budgets to ensure sustainability. I mportant ly, the Ministry of Water and 
Environment has established a unit to handle operation and maintenance of infrastructure and will be responsible for 
O&M of infrastructure.  
 
69. Further, t he project will develop processes, build capacity to manage infrastructure/resources,  and identify financing 
schemes for enhancing the long- term functionality and sustainability of all three components of the project .  This will be 
done through engaging the  private sector,  including small and medium sized enterprises. First ly, to sustain the restoration 
and sustainable management of wetland areas, the project will strengthen the capacity of the Wetland Management 
Department to engage with private companies , particularly i n the eco-tourism sector, which has  incentives to restore and 
sustainably manage these natural resources.  Through support for institutional restructuring of the department , and 
introduction of further incentives for partnership, this new business model will  allow for cost recovery to ensure continued 
resources for managing the wetlands. Secondly, the project will help strengthen and diversify livelihoods of beneficiaries 
through skills development for both employability in local companies (e.g. tourism, health care, services) and entrepreneurship, access to micro- finance institutions and establishment of small -scale infrastructure.  These activities 
will h elp strengthen the long- term financial sustainability of vulnerable beneficiaries who will have new, economically 
viable livelihoods not dependent on climate- sensitive resources.  Finally, the project will contribute to  business models 
being set up as part  of the UNDP SCIEWS project,  to establish financially sustainable climate information and early 
warning systems. This project is strengthening the capacity of the UNMA to engage with private companies, such as the 
civil aviation authority, mobile phone, insurance and tourism companies to charge a fee against the forecasts and 
products that are being developed. While climate information will remain a “public good,” particularly for products used 
by vulnerable farmers  etc, private companies  may be prepared to pay a fee to the UNMA for  specific tailored information 
or the raw data if it is spatially detailed and reliable enough to be used for their operations .  This cost recovery model will 
help UNMA  invest in the operation and maintenance of the system.  The G CF project will further strengthen the public -
private partnerships already being established under the existing project, and help ensure financial sustainability of the climate information and early warning systems , as a result of developing products speci fically suited for the management 
of wetlands and agricultur e12, as well as being able to provide new sources of monitoring weather/hydrological data in


---
*Page 26*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 55 
 
 
 
 D 
                                                             
12 See special issue Agricultural and Forest Meteorology , Volume 103, Issues 1– 2, Pages 1- 228 (1 June 2000). In particular, Rijks D. 
and Baradas M.W. (2000) The clients for agrometeorological information. Agricultural and forest meteorology. Volume 103, Issues 1–
2, Page s 27– 42. these wetland areas. The market for these products will need to be established and promoted through out the project, 
but products  will potentially be marketable in other wetland areas  and beyond .  This project, therefore, is using a variety 
of mechanisms (e,g, setting up public -private partnerships, innovative market -based finance mechanisms, institutional 
restructuring and cost recovery ) to ensure financial sustainability of all three components of the project.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/ programme  to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
70. In addition to impacting a large number of direct and indirect beneficiaries (PM F-A core 1, numbers detailed below), 
the proposed project  will also contribute to several other assessment factors to demonstrate contribution to increased 
climate -resilient sustainable development. First, the project will increase generat ion and use of climate information in 
decision -making (PMF -A 6.0)  under output 3, by increasing meteorological and hydrological infrastructural investments 
and the capacity to operate and maintain these investments, strengthening capacity at national, sub- national and 
community levels to collect and analyze information,  develop this information into products and services relevant to the 
needs of beneficiaries in the wetland target areas, and to strengthen customized dissemination channels (e.g. ICT, mobile 
platforms) to reach the communities in a timely manner.   
 
71. Second, the project  will also contribute to strengthening adaptive capacity and reduc ing exposure to climate risk s 
(PMF -A 7.0) through activities from all three sub-components. Strengthening sustainable management and restoration 
of wetland areas will ensure that the adaptation benefits are realized –  specifically its ability to moderate the microclimate, 
and support  water storage and filtration. Maintaining healthy wetland ecosystems will als o reduce exposure to climate 
risk, by providing flood control and storm protection. Similarly, strengthening the resilience of existing agricultural 
practices and introducing new livelihood options less dependent on exploiting the wetlands, will make beneficiaries more adaptive to climate variability and change.  Finally, with more accurate and timely climate and early warning information, 
beneficiaries will have the tools and knowledge to make adaptive livelihood decisions, such as when to plant their  crops, 
which crops to prioritize in a given season, or where the market demands will be. They will also be able to reduce 
exposure to climate risk through weather projections and early warning systems.  
 
72. Finally, the project will support strengthen ing awareness of climate threats and risk -reduction processes  (PMF -A 8.0). 
Through support for establishing wetland management plans in output 1, beneficiaries will understand the threats and 
risks that climate change poses on wetland areas, and what strategies can be done to reduce these risks.  Beneficiaries  
will also gain knowledge o n how climate change and variability threaten their livelihoods, and new resilient practices or 
livelihood options will be introduced.  
 
73. Finally, through more accurate climate information and an increase in tailored climate products to be used by 
beneficiaries will strengthen understanding of climate impacts on their lives and livelihoods.  
 74. The process indicators, such as maintenance of lakeshore buffer zones, improved fishing methods, monitoring of 
biodiversity and increase in number of species, fish size increase and improved income levels through increase of productivity per unit and incom e being earned from ecosystem activities, indicate that the project will have a high impact 
on natural resource conservation and livelihoods, which otherwise could have been deteriorated over time. Medium to 
long-term societal benefits catalyzed  by the project will include increased land productivity and yi elds for both cash and 
food crops, increased fish catch, recharge of ground water, availability of water resources to livestock throughout the 
year in places where water is scarce, expanded grazing grounds, increased tourism revenue (where applicable), more 
varied and expanded availability of forest resources, among others. Considering that resource depleting strategies may 
make economic sense in the short run under certain circumstances, it will be key for the project’s success to not just 
enforce the pursuit of long- term benefits, but also to create incentives for the realization of these benefits. Under 
increasingly variable climate scenarios, short -sighted practices that degrade agro- ecological and hydr ological systems 
will make less economic sense and the benefits of maintaining and enhancing resilience will be an increasingly cost -
effective adaptation strategy that not only maintains, but also increases socio- economic benefits.  
 
75. This project does n ot plan to put in place long- lived, high emission or climate vulnerable infrastructure. The main 
infrastructures  that will be installed are automated weather stations that have no environmental impact, no emissions 
and need to be replaced on average every ten years. This infrastructure is not vulnerable to climate change and extreme 
weather events.
 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator


---
*Page 28*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual   
Lifetime   
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population (adaptation only)  Total  - 300,000 people in the target communities will 
have access to direct livelihood support  
- 300,000 people benefit from improved 
productivity in the catchment  
- 20,000 people benefit from wetland capture  
fisheries  
- 40,000 people be nefit from rainwater 
harvesting  
- 100,000 people benefit from irrigation water 
abstracted from wetlands  
- 20,000 people benefit from apiary farming  
- 20,000 people benefit from wetland based 
ecotourism enterprises  
- 64,370 hectares of wetlands restored and 
maintained  
Percentage  11% of the vulnerable13 population of Uganda  
Other 
relevant 
indicators   
• Expected reduction in the number of people affected by wetland ecosystem degradation and related 
disasters, especially vulnerable groups (women, elderly, etc.)  
• Expected increase in the area (ha) of habitat or kilometers  of coastline rehabilitated (e.g. reduced 
external pressures such as overgrazing and land degradation through logging/collecting); restored 
(e.g. through replanting); or protected (e.g. through improved fire management; flood plain/buffer 
maintenance)  
• Expected increase in the n umber (percentage) of households adopting a wider variety of livelihood 
strategies/coping mechanisms  
• Expected increase in the p ercentage of food- secure households (reduced food gaps)  
• Expected increase in the area (ha) of agricultur al land made more resilient to climate change through 
agricultural practices (e.g. planting times, new and resilient native varieties, efficient irrigation systems 
adopted)  
• Evidence that climate data is collected, analysed and applied to decision- making in climate -sensitive 
sectors at critical times by the government, private sector and men/women. [Core indicator]  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
The identified number of beneficiaries was calculated first based on the population of the targeted areas.  This is based 
on the total population in the targeted districts (between 400,000 – 600,000), as well as the number of counties, sub-
counties, parishes and villages and the average population per parish (between 5,000 – 7,000).  This population was 
then assessed based on proximity to the wetlands, as well as the targeted sub- counties affecting and benefiting from the 
wetlands (with an understanding that 99% of the population live in rural areas, and only 1% in urban areas).  Finally, 
households which are the basis for planning determined the final population of beneficiaries.  
 
Specifically, the different beneficiary numbers correspond to the following criteria:  
- Those that will have access to direct livelihood support (300,000):  people who are living adjacent to wetlands 
and survive solely on wetlands, that is, do not have any other land elsewhere; will benefit from diversified livelihoods;  
include both upstream and downstream communities  
                                                             
13 http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/uganda/overview


---
*Page 29*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
- Those that will ben efit from improved productivity in the catchment (3 40,000): people that have land both in the 
wetland and in the catchment, as well as those that only have land in the catchment but have become less productive 
due to poor agricultural practices or because of reduced rains w ill benefit from climate -smart interventions including small 
scale water harvesting and irrigation.  Furthermore, 300,000 people in the target communities will have access to direct 
livelihood support . 
- Those that will benefit  from wetlan d capture fisheries (20,000): people who are currently engaged in natural 
fishing of c larias using unsustainable methods like poisoning and other crude methods (exist primarily in western Uganda 
where they capture clarias and sell to other fishermen who fi sh only Nile Perch).  
- Those that will benefit from wetland based ecotourism enterprises (2 0,000): communities adjacent to wetlands 
that are habitats to biodiversity species that are endemic to wetlands (most communities are already organized in groups 
around wetlands awaiting for support, so are easily identified)  
- Those that will benefit from irrigation water abstracted from wetlands (100,000): people who fit into the second 
category above (benefiting from improved catchment productivity) but also includes those that take care of commercial 
farms around the wetlands that need increased amounts of water.  
-          Those that will benefit from apiary farming will be 20,000 people benefit.  
 
800,000 is the number of direct beneficiaries, with close to 4M indirect beneficiaries . 
 
Describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmark s established in a comparable context.  
A comparable project in Burkina Faso has shown effective impact with 150,000 beneficiaries  with a budget of 7M. Similar 
indicator values were used. This project will have a larger impact because the wetlands ecosystem in Uganda are much 
bigger and provide ecosystem services to a larger number of people.  
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which th e proposed activity  can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/ programme  investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)


---
*Page 30*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
 
 
76. This is a s ingle project  with one objective.  The Theory of Change articulated above illustrates the contribution each 
of the three output areas will have on the long- term outco me and impact of this project.  
 
77. Under output  or sub- component 1, project activities will focus on  strengthening the resilience of the wetland areas 
themselves to climate change impacts to maximize their ecosystem benefits. (i.e. temperature increase, changes in 
seasonal distribution of rainfalls , more frequent extreme weather events , increased  frequency of heavy rainfalls , and 
infertility of hillside soils and deterioration of water quality  – all further examined in the feasibility study).  This will include 
physically restoring wetlands , and putting in place wetland management plans that ensure sustainable and resilient 
management of these ecosystems. The resulting output of these two activities is healthier w etlands in the targeted areas  
which will be more resilient to impending climate risks, and also  lead to several short -term outcomes .  These outcomes 
relate to the specific services a restored and sustainably managed wetland ecosystem can provide in strengthening the 
climate resilience of the surrounding communities : strengthened live lihood activities, such as fishing and dry -season 
farming, water storage and filtration for use by hous eholds, livestock and irrigation or agriculture, and protection against 
floods, storms and droughts. Strengthened livelihoods will contribute to increasi ng sources of income (and thus increased 
income generation)  and diversification such that income is not susceptible to degrading wetlands and climatic changes.  
Strengthened livelihoods, as well as improved water storage and filtration, will also contribut e to increased food and water 
security, since surplus agricultural production, water access and income will be available to secure food and water.  Reduced intensity of natural disasters, resulting from healthier wetlands to protect against floods, storms and droughts, 
will lead to reduced losses of lives and livelihoods from these extreme events. Replicating or scaling up the activities 
under this output area both within these target areas and to other wetlands, will further improve the health of these or 
other wetlands, which will further multiply the potential short -term outcomes a healthy and sustainably managed wetland 
can provide.  
 
78. Under output or sub- component 2, project activities will contribute to both strengthen existing agricultural livelihoods 
by introducing climate- resilient practices, as well as introduce new opportunities for livelihoods that use sustainably 
managed wetlands . Climate -resilient agricultural practices will be defined and introduced based on communities’ needs,


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
and will inclu de smart agriculture, conservation agriculture, and crop diversification ( e.g. planting drought tolerant crops, 
early maturing crops, adopting multiple crop ping techniques to spread risks) .  Similarly, new livelihood opportunities will 
be introduced which do not further degrade wetland ecosystems, such as eco- tourism, aquaculture, and dairy products.   
With new livelihood options, not only will wetland degradation be reduced, but diversification will strengthen resilience of 
communities (since they will not be so dependent on one livelihood which may be susceptible to changing and uncertain 
climate conditions). With economically viable and sustainable agri -based livelihoods and more diversifi ed income 
generation, t he output of these activities will be more resilient and sustainable livelihoods adopted. This output also 
contributes to enhancing the health of the wetlands, (output 1), through reducing livelihood pressures which are 
exacerbated b y climate change.  Leading from this result, several short -term outcomes emerge, namely: increase crop 
production (in the case of resilient agricultur al practices ) and diversification of livelihoods  – both in the context of a 
changing climate.  Scaling up and replicating agri -based activities within the targeted wetland will be done by setting up 
farmer -to-farmer exchanges and training of trainers. The project will also support agricultural cooperatives to further 
strengthen organization of farmers and access to a range of necessary rural facilities, including those relating to input 
and output marketing, and financial services (further elaborated in para 86) . This sub-component, therefore, has potential 
to multipl y resilient and sustainable livelihoods within and beyond these target wetland areas.  
 79. Finally, output  or sub- component  3 focuses on strengthening access to climate and early warning information for 
farmers  and other target communities  in order to take preventative action against climate- induced extreme events, and 
strengthen livelihood planning in the face of climate change. The activities under this  output focus on expanding networks 
for generating and processing information that is r elevant and tailored to the needs at the local level  planning, as well as 
strengthening dissemination channels to ensure this information reaches t he local users (e.g. farmers). These two activity 
areas will lead to improved access of beneficiaries to rele vant climate and early warning information. As a result, 
beneficiaries will be able to integrate this information into livelihood planning and adaptation interventions, which would 
increase their resilience –  thus also contributing to activities under sub- component 2 and the outcome of increased 
income.  In addition, information particularly on early warning of extreme weather events, would allow communities to 
take timely and urgent preventative action to these events, such as flooding , and subsequently reduce losses from these 
events .  Putting in place the right systems and testing out the best technologies will provide a model for scaling up in 
other distric ts and regions of the country. Through engagement with the private sector, and setting up the nec essary 
enabling environment and incentive structures to engage the private sector, the project  will also pave the way for a much 
greater scale up and replication. Multiplicative impacts in this output area, such that even more beneficiaries have access 
to relevant climate and early warning information, therefore can also be attained building on the activities proposed in 
this project . Overall, therefore, this  proposed project  has the potential for a real paradigm shift by bringing successful 
activities to the scale required for transformational and significant impact that the previous pilot project s could not achieve.  
 
80. The three outputs  are interrelated by addressing the identified barriers and climate related drivers of wetlands 
degradation. The first output aims at restoring and strengthening the resilience of  the physical attributes of the target 
wetlands by improving reforestation, water flow and storage and indigenous species. This restoration effort will only be 
effective in addressing climate vuln erabilities if the people living in and around the wetlands have alternative and resilient 
livelihoods  that do not rely on the wetlands and further exacerbate their degradation.  Thus, output 2 will provide this 
alternative by deliver ing high quality traini ng to improve the skills of the beneficiaries for employment and help 
subsistence farmers  adapt and strengthen resilience of  their agricultural prac tices (including crop diversification) in the 
face of climatic changes,  and improve additional skills for alternative employment to buffer against climate- related shocks.  
Output 3 will provide reliable and accurate climate information and early warning to improve the resilient  management of  
the wetland and to ensure that  beneficiaries  have  the necessary  inform ation that is  crucial for resilient  farming practices 
and for reducing risks posed by extreme climate induced weather events.  
 
E.2.2. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
81. This initiative will have a strong catalytic effect in ensuring a sustained participation of both the public and the privat e 
sector. The proposed measures , for example restoration of the degraded parts of the wetlands and introduction of 
meteorological equipment to monitor weather variations , will help the communities and other stakeholders mitigate some 
of the CC impacts. The project will support establishment of farmer -agro- input supplier platforms and linkages to reduce 
the market distortions associated with middle actors.  Collection and dissemination of climate information will use public -
private sector model that involves mobil e telecommunication companies. The private sector will be actively involved in 
the development of alternative livelihood enter prises and wetland product value chains.  Skill training will be run by private 
sector companies that will provide the training, ensure the placement of the training, and make a profit out of it. Improving 
agricultural productivity in wetland catchments requir es strong linkages  between small -scale far mers and agro- input 
suppliers. An increase in the value chain will also have a conducive effect on the participation of the private sector 
because additional profits are going to be made and open up further opportunities for the private sector (for example 
running and operating transport operations form the farm gates to the markets).   
 
82. Adequate supplies and efficient functioning markets are important to stabilize and improve food security, and higher 
income levels. To help the rural poor participate in the markets, agricultural output must diversify, quality of produce must  
improve, and agro- based processing must add value to primary products. Rural agricultural communities must also obtain 
greater access to credit. GCF resources will provide precisely that, by providing the means for communities to diversify 
crop production, skills and l ivelihood options including improving the value chain of particular crops like fruits by 
transforming the raw fruits into juices, jams, pickles and other such products, vastly increasing the value of the product and also creating a local supply. This initi ative has a strong replication potential, it is estimated that this project will cover 
around 20% of Uganda’s wetlands, therefore it has an 80% replication potential. Also, an average doubling of income by 
the beneficiaries through income generating activi ties will reduce the pressures on the wetland natural resources. 
Currently the local agriculture market is 90% based on maize. This initiative will support crop diversification and thereby 
increase the variety of produce on the markets.  
83. The communitie s will become better organized through cooperatives  and local groups established and scaled up by 
the project (see activities 2.1.5 and 2.2.6) , which can help provide a range of necessary rural facilities, including those 
relating to input and output marketing, and financial services. Cooperatives provide a good linking mechanism, allowing 
farmers to collectively access the marketplace, both to market their crops and to access credit and farm inputs at 
reasonable rates. Agricultural co- operatives play an important role in supporting small agricultural producers and 
marginalized groups such as young people and women. Using cooperative model s in the targeted project  areas  will 
ensure empowerment of their members economically and socially and would create sustainable rural employment 
through business models that are more resilient to economic and environmental shocks.  GCF resources will foster such 
a change and increase income levels of farmers but also of the entire household by involving women in income generating 
activities through skills development and training. Investment in the agricultural sector and creation of employment 
opportunities generating income are essential for food security. Since the majority of Ugandan rural people rely on 
agriculture, livestock and related services for their livelihood, investment in this  sector will create employment 
opportunities that will enable people to have income that will be used for food purchases in associated markets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.3. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
84. Implementation of progra mme s and projects in Uganda is guided by a 5 year National Development Plan which  aims 
at addressing climate change impacts on peoples livelihoods. The proposed project will feed into the existing strategies 
and support implementation of the National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) including the NAPAs and other climate 
responsive programmes.  Uganda’s Vision 2040 commit s the Government to develop appropriate adaptation and 
mitigation strategies on climate change. S imilarly, the Uganda’s National Five- year Development Plan II  calls all sectors 
to mainstream climate change adaptation and mitigation at all level s. The Uganda N ational Climate Change Policy and 
its Costed Implementation Strategy was developed with the overarching goal “to ensure a harmonized and coordinated 
approach towards a climate- resilient and low -carbon development path for sustainable development”. The Nati onal 
Biodiversity Strategy also put s emphasis on supporting the designing, implementation and scaling up of ecosystem based 
adaptation (EBA) to climate change.  The Ministry of Water and Environment, Climate Change Department in 
collaboration with the National Planning Authority has begun the process of developing the National Low Emission 
Development Strategy (LEDS) which , among others things , will guide national low emission strategic interventions and 
support the implementation of the Nationally Appropria te Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) .   The proposed project  activities 
will therefore, feed into the existing NCCP  framework on addressing adaptation and mitigation strategic interventions and 
support the implementation of the NCCP. This will result in increased community  and ecosyst em resilience to climate 
change  as well as exploring possible mitigation co- benefits derived from conservation and sustainable utilization of 
wetlands and forests such as enhancing the GHG sinks and storage for low – carbon development paths  and green 
growth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.4. Potential for knowledge and learning  
85. Each of the three sub-components  (outputs)  of this project  contributes to creating and strengthening knowledge, 
particularly of the beneficiaries. With regards to output  1, knowledge on sustainable wetland management practices and 
the value of wetland ecosystem services will be shared with local communities, as well as other relevant sub- national 
and national stakeholders (governments , NGOs, private sector, etc.)  (See activity 1.4) . This knowledge will be 
substantiated through the comprehensive analyses done under phase one, aiming to further understand the specific 
ecosystem services being provided, and being lost, in the two project  sites. This information will be used t o inform the 
training and awareness raising above, as well as brought directly to policy makers to inform policies and decision- making 
for these areas.  Output  2 is founded in the creation and dissem ination of a wide range of knowledge on new adaptive 
pract ices, crop diversification and agricultural best practices, understanding of local  market  conditions  and factors 
affecting prices etc (see activities 2.1 and 2.2). Beyond simply sharing information with beneficiaries, through trainings, 
practical application, extension services, etc., beneficiaries will also be engaged in collective learning, such as farmer -
to-farmer exchanges, demonstration sites, training of trainers, and other methods  (see activities 2.1.10 and 2.2.11) . 
Finally, output  3 will also have a strong knowledge creation and dissemination aspect. C limate information producers 
(hydromet officers) will be targeted for strengthening knowledge in how to generate and analyze this information, as well as how to develop tailored information products  (see activities 3.2) . Information users (communities) will be targeted 
through the dissemination of these tailored products coupled with strengthening knowledge on how to use this information to make resilient livelihood decisions  (see activities 3.4  and 3.5) .   
 86. Further, one of the priorities for phase one of this project  is to undertake compr ehensive assessments in the two  
target areas, to better understand the ecological, social and economic dynamics of the target areas and generate detailed 
maps of the areas. This process will not only help identify specific practices and livelihood opportunities to be supported 
under phase 2 of the project , but it will also provide a baseline for better understanding the impact of the project  activities 
themselves.  Beyond collecting the specific indicators under the project  results framework , the project  will also undertake 
a mid -term and final assessment (as part of the mid- term review and final evaluation) which will return to the same 
asse ssment criteria examined under the initial phase one studies.  Comparing these assessments over time will provide 
insight into the impact of different project  activities, such that knowledge can be generated and shared on what types of 
activities are succe ssfully leading to impact.   
 
87. Results from the project will be disseminated within and beyond the project intervention zone through existing 
information sharing networks and forums.  The project will identify, analyze, and share lessons learned that might be 
beneficial in the design and implementation of similar future projects.   
  
E.3. Sustainable Development P otential


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
88. The proposed project  will make it possible for targeted communities in the two regions to realize and benefit from  
alternative livelihoods and economic and social benefits.  Ecosystem based approaches  to protect communities and 
ecosystems against clim ate change impacts are shown to be effective in reducing loss of life and property from floods 
and drought.  Functioning ecosystems and well informed accurate weather, climate and hydrological forecasts can reduce 
losses in the short and long -term. As  this will strengthen the overall framework and infrastructure for climate monitoring 
and tailored products for the agriculture sector, women and men engaged in agriculture based livelihoods will be able to plan for and adapt to variable climate conditions. Thi s helps increase crop yields through healthier ecosystems, 
strengthened agricultural pract ices, and reduced crop losses. It is expected that crop yields will increase by at least 
100%, thereby also raising income by similar ratios. Ultimately, this will contribute towards enhanced food security and resilient livelihoods and ecosystems.  The project  will also yield environmental benefits through strengthened ecosystem 
resilience and improved soil and water quality. The shift to a demand- based and multi -stakeholder network for  climate 
information and services will att ract private sector investment.  Livelihoods improvements will include enhanced 
agricultural and farming output and income, as well as income generating activities for beneficiaries that will incr ease 
income by at least 100%. Many empirical studies on valuating different ecosystems services in different regions in the 
world have been conducted. They helped revealing the relative importance of several ecosystem services especially those, which are not traded in conventional market such as the regulating services. For example the economic 
assessment of the ecosystem services provided by a coastal wetland in North Sri Lanka (Emerton and Kekulandala 
2003) revealed the most substantial benefits that accr ue to a wide group of the population as well as to economic actors 
are related to the regulating services such as the flood preventing capacity of the native wetland (1907 US$ per hectare 
and year) and the industrial and domestic wastewater treatment (654 US$ per hectare and year), whereas the several 
provisioning services such as agriculture, fishing and firewood, which directly contributed to the local income presented 
only 150 US$ per hectare and year. Coastal wetlands in the USA are estimated to current ly provide US$ 23.2 billion per 
year in storm protection services alone, whereas large areas of such wetlands have already been lost. A loss of one hectare of those wetlands is estimated to correspond to an average increase in storm damage of about US$ 33, 000 
(Constanze et al. 2008).  
 89. This project will put women at the center of the initiative (please see below the section on gender mainstreaming) . 
The project will focus on gender sensitive planning and implementation to ensure full sust ainable development potential. 
At least 50% of the project beneficiaries will be women, especially within the agriculture sector where women often make 
up the majority of smallholder farmers and are most vulnerable to climate shocks and variability. Gender -sensitive 
methods, including household surveys that take into account gender sensitivities and target both men and women, will 
ensure that women are beneficiaries of climate information and early warning systems established. Women would also need to be ab le to access climate information as easily as men –  even if it is through differing media –  otherwise there is 
the risk of the information either not being used at all or not being fully understood by women. Therefore, the communication channels will be developed with special attention to the needs of women.  
 Environmental Impacts of the proposed project  
90. In the long term, the expected outcome and impact of the project is that ecosystem functions and associated 
hydrological and ecological benefits of wetlands will be fully restored. The project is expected to yield positive 
environmental impacts that will contribute to Uganda’s obligations as a contracting party to several environment protocols 
and conventions, including the Ramsar Convention on wetlands. Key environmental processes such as nutrient re-
cycling, vegetation succession, water levels and flow patterns, climate modulations, carbon sequestration, climate 
change adaptation and mitigation, and biodiversity conservation will be enhanced.  
 
Gender  mainstreaming and other special impact assessment  
91. Gender issues will be mainstreamed at all levels during the project implementation in order to ensure promotion of 
gender equality and women empowerment. With respect to the gender element, it is worth noting that women are a very 
important group under thi s project; so is their role in the management and protection of natural assets (water, forests, 
fish and wildlife). Furthermore, women, children and the elderly are frequently amongst the more vulnerable of the poor. 
In the face of climate change, their vu lnerability will likely be exacerbated. Hence, women will not only be a key beneficiary 
of adaptation measures under this project, but they will also play a leading role in promoting the mainstreaming of 
adaptation measures in to the local economy. Furtherm ore, as previously explained, project indicators will be


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
disaggregated by gender where applicable and gender concerns incorporated in the planning of specific activities.  
Women will be involved in all aspects of the project, and will benefit more specifically from:  
• Improving wetland management skills: Although women have limited access to information and education, they 
are often knowledgeable in the management of natural resources. The project will further improve their 
management skills and identify and address any wetland management skills gaps.  
• Increasing water availability: GCF funds also aim to increase water storage and promote sustainable water use through the construction of small -scale water storage and detention facilities. In addition, benefici aries will benefit 
from rainwater harvesting. This will particularly benefit women beneficiaries by reducing their workload, 
specifically related to fetching water for household consumption and irrigation.  
• Strengthening of alternative livelihoods: GCF res ources will offer an equal number of men and women skill 
training for employability in tourism, health and construction , etc. Training in managerial and entrepreneurial 
skills for small- scale wetland enterprises will also be provided. These training program mes will diversify the 
livelihoods of communities and reduce their vulnerability to climate change.  
 
Expected socio -economic impacts  
92. It is expected that there will be increased value addition to wetland goods and services. This will not only enhance 
societal livelihood but also increase the participation by all gender groups, in turn leading to enhanced and resilient 
livelihoods. Practi cal income generating activities and adding value to wetland products, for instance through trademarks 
or improved market access, will be promoted. This will be accompanied by  community training in managerial and 
entrepreneurial skills for small -scale wetland enterprises.  Livelihoods improvements will include enhanced agricultural 
and farming output and income, as well as income generating activities for beneficiaries that will increase income by at 
least 100%. Many empirical studies on valuating differ ent ecosystems services in different regions in the world have been 
conducted. They helped revealing the relative importance of several ecosystem services especially those, which are not 
traded in conventional market such as the regulating services. For ex ample the economic assessment of the ecosystem 
services provided by a coastal wetland in North Sri Lanka (Emerton and Kekulandala 2003) revealed the most substantial 
benefits that accrue to a wide group of the population as well as to economic actors are r elated to the regulating services 
such as the flood preventing capacity of the native wetland (1907 US$ per hectare and year) and the industrial and 
domestic wastewater treatment (654 US$ per hectare and year), whereas the several provisioning services suc h as 
agriculture, fishing and firewood, which directly contributed to the local income presented only 150 US$ per hectare and 
year. Coastal wetlands in the USA are estimated to currently provide US$ 23.2 billion per year in storm protection services 
alone,  whereas large areas of such wetlands have already been lost. A loss of one hectare of those wetlands is estimated 
to correspond to an average increase in storm damage of about US$ 33,000 (Constanze et al. 2008).  
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability  and financing needs of the ben eficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
93. Uganda , is a low income economy (as listed in the GCF paper on Level of Concessional Terms  for the Public 
Sector ) and is classified as a least developed countr y. Uganda has an urgent need for wetland restoration considering 
the current reduction in the ecosystem services provided by wetlands. There is also limited capacity of the local 
communities to adapt to climat e change impacts using advanced technology, hence these communities mainly rely on 
natural ecosystems. The current assessments for Uganda illustrate the need for financing support to expand on the 
area planned for restoration. Uganda’s approved budget for 2009/10 was USD 2.1 billion with a projected budget of 
USD 2.02 billion  for 2010/11. 2.6%  was allocated to the water and environment sector in the 2009/10 budget and there 
was a 3.4%  projected increase in the 2010/11 budget. The allocation of 3 billion Uga ndan shillings to the wetlands 
management department within the Water and Environment Ministry is below 0.04% of the budget and less than 0.008% 
of the GDP for that year. Some of the most vulnerable people live around the wetlands and benefit from various 
ecosystem services, such as water, reeds, fish, etc. With increased variability in weather due to climate change, 
subsistence farming is becoming increasingly challenging and the dependence on functioning ecosystem services more and more important for food security and basic survival.  
 
94. In this regard, GCF will provide resources for restoration of critical wetland systems in ea stern and s outhwestern 
Uganda. Catchments restoration activities (such  as reforestation, improved agricultural practices, and sustainable land 
management) will improve the health of the wetlands by increasing the amount of water collected in the catchments. 
GCF funds  will also contribute to identifying and supporting alternativ e livelihoods for communities that are adjacent to


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
the wetlands, which is not feasible under the national budget. In addition, the project will address the capacity gaps and 
institutional issues related to sustainable wetland management.  This project is cr itical for the beneficiaries to adapt to 
climate changes impacts.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
95. This project  aims to improve  the income opportunities of subsistence farmers (men and women) as well as increase 
the skill set of vulnerable communities to access employment or engage in income generating activities. The gender 
balance between men and women, will benefit the entire s egment of the communities living in and around the wetlands. 
By helping the beneficiaries diversify their crops, improve their skills, access micro- credit and start micro and small 
enterprises, GCF resources will contribute to reducing food insecurity, but  also to the general economic and social 
development of the target beneficiaries . It must be noted that without this intervention subsistence farmers in and 
around the target wetlands will not be able to implement crop diversification, and diversify their income to adapt to 
climate change risks and impacts.  
 
96. The National Climate Change Policy prioritizes the need for strengthening the institutions and implementation 
capacity, but also the ability for the individual sectors and ministries to integrate climate change risks and impacts into 
their routine development planning, budgeting  and execution. UNDP , through this initiative , will continue to build the 
capacity of the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture by providing technical skills for better 
understanding the risk and opportunities from climate change. Standard operating procedures to strengthen the financial accountability and delivery mechanism, as well as accountability will also be provided to the concerned 
institutions.  
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
97. The project ’s thematic areas are in line with the priorities outlined in Uganda’s National Climate Change Policy, the 
Strategic Plan, National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), as well as its emerging National Adaptation Plan. In 
addition, the project is aligned w ith the existing functions and expectation of the Wetlands Management Department in 
Uganda as well as line Ministries such as Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries  and Directorate of Water 
Resources Management. Further, the process for developing this  detailed project proposal included a series of in depth 
consultations conducted between 24th June and 20th July 2015 with target stakeholders (see E.5.3 below for more 
details). . Due to this comprehensive consultation process, t his initiative has the greatest support possible in Uganda, 
with the Ministry of Water and E nvironment  spearheading the project. Time and resources in the form of consultative 
workshops have demonstrated that the Gov ernment of Uganda owns this project at the highest level.  Further, the 
National Designated Authority attended both of the national consultation workshops, and was deeply involved in the 
planning and design of the project proposal.  
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
98. UNDP is one of the world’s largest brokers of climate change grants for developing countries, with a current portfolio 
of USD 1.34 billion in mitigation and adaptation grant -financed projects in over 140 countries, supported by co- financing 
of USD 6.7 bill ion. This proposed project  is aligned with UNDP’s comparative advantage in the area of ecosystem 
restoration, capacity building, technical and policy support as well as expertise in project design and implementation. 
Specifically, the GCF project will build upon UNDP’s comparative a dvantages which includes experience working with 
governments and communities in Uganda and globally in: i) establishing and strengthening institutional, policy and 
legislative mechanisms; ii) building capacity; iii) undertaking risk assessments; iv) mainst reaming climate change 
adaptation, disaster risk reduction and early warning systems into development planning; and v) harnessing best practices and community -based approaches across different thematic areas for climate change adaptation and disaster 
risk reduction. This includes experience with initiatives focused on transferring knowledge and technology via south-
south cooperation.   
 
99. The UNDP country office in Uganda is well placed to oversee the implementation of the GCF project. This is 
because it h as built close connections with the MWE including Uganda National Meteorology Authority (UNMA), and 
Directorate of Water Resources Management (DWRM), Wetlands Management Department and National Environment 
Management Authority (NEMA ), through implementatio n of many natural resources management and climate change


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
adaptation  initiatives  including climate information and early warning systems project support in the country. UNDP also 
leads the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) Task Force on disaster risk redu ction (DRR) to promote collaboration 
on DRR issues among various UN agencies. The approach ensures synergies on DRR issues between different 
agencies and facilitates support to the national government in a coordinated manner.  In Uganda, UNDP has facilitat ed 
the review of the National Environment Management Policy to integrate climate change and the inclusion of DRR and 
early warning system aspects into the National Development Plan (NDP) as well as contributed towards the 
development and subsequent approva l of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Policy.  In addition, 
UNDP supported piloting community based wetland protected areas in the Wetlands of lake Opeta- Bisina and Lake 
Nakivale ecosystem.  This pilot resulted in integration of wetland areas into the wider protected area systems of Pian 
Upe in North Eastern Uganda and Lake Mburo National Park.  Through this initiative, community wetland Management action plans and a community environment fund model was developed.  These two models have n ow been scaled up 
in River Rwizi wetlands and catchment as a mechanism for providing economic incentives towards responsible 
environmental management behavior  at community level.  
 
100. More recently, UNDP has been focusing its efforts on supporting ecosystem based adaptation approaches in Mt. 
Elgon System, strengthening a territorial approach to climate change in Mbale region, development of a national 
Wetlands Atlas in collaboration with UNEP as a decision making tool for improved wetland management in Uganda,  
Low Emission Capacity Building support , and strengthening climate information and early warning sy stems. Through 
the UNDP supported project on strengthening natural resources, climate change, public -private sector par tnership 
models have been developed on Nakayiba and Lubingi wetland systems including development of management plans. These UNDP supported projects and programmes focus on building resilient communities and wetland ecosystems 
and align well with the GCF project and strong links will be achieved between the projects to share lessons learned on 
how to improve and expand livelihood options that increase community resilience while at the same time protecting wetland ecosystems services and goods in Uganda.  
 101. UNDP’s strategic positioning on natural resources and climate resilience building Uganda is informed not only by 
its comparative advantage but also by its global leadership position – in particular South- South cooperation –  on 
sustainable land managem ent and strengthening natural resources management as a critical element in increasing 
climate change resilience. UNDP has a high level of experience in managing climate resilience and ecosystems management projects in the region, in particular those with disaster management, early warning and climate change 
adaptation components. It is also informed by UNDP’s working principles of optimising resources and capacities through multi -sectoral and multi -stakeholder driven partnership approaches. This is the approach UNDP has been 
using in Uganda in particular through its DRR and natural resources management projects. The country office in Uganda has a fully -fledged Environment and Energy Team comprising of a Team Leader with an MBA and MSc, a 
Programme Analyst, a Programme Officer, a Programme Associate as well as two dedicated SGP programme staff 
and additional project level coordinators supported by Regional Technical Advisors at UNDP offices in Addis Ababa, as well as by policy, adaptation, economics and climate modelling experts in New York and Bangkok.  
 
102. The project  will build on Uganda’s extensive track record in implementing early warning systems and enhancing 
livelihoods (including ongoing UNDP supported projects). The project will be implemented by national i nstitutions using 
UNDP’s National Implementation Modality, which is designed to ensure domestic systems are used for accountability. 
The interventions through this project will be compliant with the Fund’s social and environment assessment and wi th 
stakeholder consultations. UNDP’s work programme in Uganda directly contributes to  this sub -component.  This is 
illustrated in the most recent Country Programm e Document (CPD), which prioritizes two areas under its inclusive 
economic development portfol io: (a) natural resources management, adaptation and developing resilience to climate 
change and disaster risk, and (b) green growth, expanding livelihood and employment opportunities including 
supporting the integrated approach to fostering sustainability  and resilience for food security.  
E.5.3. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
103. This project  has undergone comprehensive stakeholder input (see Annex VII) including approval by the Joint 
Water and Environment Sector Working Group meeting as required by the government policies and procedures for 
approving development Projects.   The Sector Working Group consists of both development partners and government 
agencies in the sector.   Following the Sector Working group endorsement of the project concept, a draft proposal was 
prepared and presented to the multi- stakeholder  GCF  workshop on 24th June 2015 in Kampala.    This workshop 
discussed the project concept in det ail, with stakeholders providing inputs for project proposal development, as well as


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
endorsement of the project concept.  The multi -stakeholder workshop was organized by the Ministry of Water and 
Environment in collaboration with Ministry of Finance, Planni ng and Economic Development with support from UNDP. 
The stakeholders consisted of development partners such as DFID, EU, World Bank, French Development Agency, 
Royal Netherlands Embassy and GIZ; civil society, private sector and government agencies.  Follow ing this workshop, 
a situational analysis was done in South Western and East ern Uganda, covering at least 16 districts.  During this 
analysis, a series of consultations were undertaken in each of the target districts with community members and representatives, district political, ad ministrative and technical staff, as well as representatives from sub- counties in  
these districts.  The consultations introduced the proposed project to district stakeholders, while also seeking views on 
social and environmental issues to be considered by the project.  As part of the process, specific needs were captured from the differ ent districts to identify the priority activities to be included in the project proposal.  Finally, a follow up 
consultative workshop was held 9- 10 July, 2015 for district political and technical officers from the target districts to 
discuss the draft prop osal.  A final Wetland Advisory Group and Local Partner Advisory Committee meeting was held 
on 20
th July to endorse the project for submission.    
 
104. This GCF funded initiative will build on the on- going National Wetlands Management project. The develop ment of 
this full project  proposal involved  detailed consultation and stakeholder engagement. Consultations were attended by 
national operational focal points, government departments, NGOs, and civil society organizations. The stakeholder 
retreat was attended by government departments that were identified as key stakeholders in the wetlands.  An extensive 
consultation process was undertaken from 24th June, 2015 to 20th July, 2015.   This included a GCF Stakeholder 
Consultation (24 June, 2015), a district -level situation analysis and consultation done in South Western and East ern 
Uganda, covering at least 16 districts (28th June – 4th July) where beneficiary communities and representatives from 
the district were consulted, and a Consultative workshop for d istrict political and technical officers from the target 
districts (9 -10 July, 2015), and a combined Wetlands Advisory Group and Local Partner advisory Committee 
consultation (20 J uly, 2015).  Communities within and adjacent to the proposed project area wer e mobilized and 
engaged in discussion with the intention of giving them chance to bring out their concerns. The engagement process 
was intended to secure the buy -in from the communities and other stakeholders prior to the proposed restoration of 
degraded w etland areas.  
Areas that were tackled during the engagement include;  
• Increasing awareness of the local communities and local leaders of the need to restore degraded wetland in 
the two project areas in order to enhance both the community and environmental benefits in conformity with 
existing policies and legislation;  
• Averting the possibility of future conflicts related to the restored wetland areas.  
• Preparing the local leaders and communities for their active participation in project implementation  
• Building  synergies and paving way for the smooth implementation of the project  
A participatory approach was used where the members were given a chance to make their comments and ask 
questions. This was carried out at the proposed project sites in all the districts . However it should be noted that 
community engagement is a dynamic and continuous process that takes place even during project implementation.   
The “high” level of risk factor 5 – lack of commitment from local communities, was a mistake in the original pr oject 
proposal.   Given the active enga gement by local stakeholders in the project development phase (illustrated through the 
above- mentioned consultations) as well as the expected participation in the design, implementation and monitoring of 
the project ac tivities, this is not considered a high risk factor.   There are extensive sensitization and public awareness 
activities also built into the project to ensure community engagement will not pose any risk to project 
implementation.   The risk level will be reduced to low. This has been adjusted in section G.2.  
Again, the consultation process ensured country ownership as part of this project design process, including review and 
endorsement by the Water and Environment Sector Working group.   The NDA specifically participated in these 
consultations, which discussed  details of the project proposal.    
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/ programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
105. The proposed project entails grant financing in the amount of USD 25.3 million . The funding is adequate for the 
scope of the project, for establishing infrastructure, capacity and an enabling environment (addressing institutional 
barriers) for generations, and for the use of effective, reliable, and sustained interventions and servi ces for resilient 
ecosystems and livelihoods. The funding estimate is calculated based on previous projects including JICA (USD 5 M, IDRC; USD 350,000, COBWEB; 800,000).   
 
106. The project contributes to aversion of economic and financial losses related to the consequences of wetland 
degradation, such as floods and drought. These losses can significantly impact the GDP of the country. The project 
facilitates the establishment of revenue streams for the Wetlands Management Department, hence ensuring financia l 
viability and efficiency of service delivery. The project will also mobilize additional stakeholders and partnerships to create viable business models for efficient and effective market -based delivery of climate information and services 
(such as insuranc e and finance products).      
 
107 Projects are said to be economically efficient  when the value of  economic  benefits flowing from their 
implementation (i.e. project economic benefits) are judged to be at least as great as the value of what society has to 
give up for their implement ation (i.e. project economic costs).  
 
108. To estimate the value to society of a project designed to restore degraded wetlands, two main classes of benefits  
could potentially be considered, where benefits are defined as the value of ecosystem services (ESS) society enjoys 
from functional wetlands . The first class consists of economic benefits society derives from provisioning ESS . The per 
hectare value of provisioning ESS from Uganda wetlands were estimated by Emerton, Iyango, Luwum and Malinga 
(1998) at Uganda Shillings (Ushs.) 12,348,756 per ha pear year distributed as follows: sugar cane production (1,800,000 Ushs./ha/year), coco yam production (785,500 
Ushs./ha/year), cassava production (785,800 
Ushs./ha/year), mirror carp production (1,868,819 Ushs./ha/year), tilapia production (319,232 Ushs./ha/year), papyrus 
production (4,285,714 Ushs./ha/year) and brick -making (2,500,000 Ushs./ha/year).  The second cl ass consists of 
economic benefits society derives from intermediate ESS . Emerton, Iyango, Luwum and Malinga (1998) also provide 
per hectare estimates of the following intermediate ESS provided by Uganda wetlands: water treatment and purification, 
sewage tr eatment, and water channel outflow.  
 
109. It is generally recognized in the environmental economics literature that relative to provisioning ESS, the modeling 
of intermediate ESS is not only very complicated but the methods used for their measurement are c ontentious. The 
literature also recognizes that the modeling of provisioning ESS is relatively straightforward and the values deriving from their measurement much less contentious.  It is for this reason that in evaluating the economic efficiency of this 
project, we conservatively limited project benefits to wetlands provisioning ESS.  
 
110. The economic net present value of the proposed investment project has been estimated to reach approximately 
US$61.4 million and to yield an economic internal rate of return of approximately 22.6%. This is expected to be an 
under -estimate as assumptions made in the economic analysis are conducive to under -estimating the true economic 
value of the proposed investment project. Sensitivity analysis shows the NPV to be robust to both increases in estimated economic costs and decreases in estimated economic benef its. As such, the proposed investment project is deemed 
to be economically efficient.   
 111. An objective approach to assessing the cost -effectiveness of the proposed project is to ask: “ suppose the project 
is not implemented. What would it cost wetland dependent communities in Uganda to obtain the following welfare 
enhancing provisioning ESS, assuming they are not to be relocated? Sugar cane, coco yam, cassava, mirror carp, tilapia, papyrus and mud for brick -making?” Recall the BCA of Section F1 only cons iders provisioning ESS, which 
underestimates the true value of the benefits society receives from rehabilitated wetlands. To be objective we must 
also ask the same question about intermediate ESS: “ suppose the propose project is not implemented. What would it 
cost wetland dependent communities in Uganda to obtain the following welfare enhancing intermediate ESS assuming 
they will not be relocated? Water treatment and purification, sewage treatment, and water channel outflow?”  
 
112. If wetland dependent communities were to be relocated, it is easy to qualitatively appreciate why the proposed 
project is likely to be cost effective. If the communities were not to be relocated, the likely alternative sources of supply  
for the provisionin g ESS would be importation (locally or abroad) over the 50 years the proposed project is projected


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
to be in existence. Alternatives for the intermediate ESS would involve investing expensive capital equipment that has 
to be maintained over 50 years. The TE EB for National and International Policy Makers (Box 9.3: cost -effectiveness of 
protection over engineered solutions: example of a US watershed) provides a compelling case to the effect that it is 
very expensive to substitute reproduced for natural capital . It is also easy to qualitatively appreciate why the proposed 
project is likely to be cost effective in the event the wetland dependent communities are not relocated.  
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments  (mitigation only)  
 
117. N.A.  
E.6.3. Financial viability   
113. The GCF grant resources being sought for this project help remove the barriers to support investments that due 
to the primarily public good nature do not entail revenue generation or cost recovery during the project duration. The financial and technical barriers in Uganda that prevent setting up of an enabling environment for wetlands restoration, 
physical restoration of degraded wetlands and strengthening access to reliable climate and early warning information 
in the country can only be removed by public investment financed by grant resources from international development institutions. As such, the public goods nature of this project’s outputs doesn’t entail revenue generation or cost recovery 
from the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries during the project duration. Hence, a detailed financial analysis of 
this project isn’t deemed pertinent.  
 
114. Uganda’s private sector that is directly affected by wetlands degradation and/or has direct incentives for restoration 
of wetlands ecosystems and obtaini ng early warning information currently comprises mainly of individual farmers from 
vulnerable communities or micro-  small and medium -sized enterprises (MSMEs) .  It is difficult to envisage generating 
revenues or recovering project investment costs or co- financing from these groups  for this project. However, the project 
does plan to engage with the agricultural communities ( Sub-component 2) farming in the wetlands areas t hat are t o be 
restored, by imparting improved agricultural practices, climate- smart technologies, developing entrepreneurial skills 
and providing access to micro- credit and revolving funds. These project activities, while strengthening these 
communities’ and the wetland ecosystem’s resilience, will also enhance livelihoods and income generati on capacities 
of these vulnerable communities, thereby increasing their willingness to pay for such ecosystem services at a later time, perhaps beyond this project’s implementation duration. The project also aims to engage with the private sector in dissem inating climate and early warning information by engaging with the country’s ICT/telecom industry ( Sub-
component 3), which is private sector driven. This might stimulate demand for climate information- based value added 
products and services from agricultur al communities and MSMEs in the project’s target area in future, which, in turn, 
might generate revenues and co- financing from them in the medium - to long- term, thereby supporting the project’s 
financial sustainability beyond its proposed duration, which i s also mentioned in the project’s  ‘Exit Strategy’ (Section 
D.2). Nonetheless, such revenues from the private sector are highly speculative at this point and hence, in accordance 
with the UNDP’s Guidelines for Financial and Economic Analysis of projects, a financial analysis of this project isn’t 
included.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
115. This project is up -scaling the best practices, lessons learned and community plans of the COBW EB project 
implemented in south western and north eastern Uganda. Some of the best practices incorporated from the COBWEB 
project include:  
- Community based approaches : Community based approach and involvement of all the stakeholders are the 
preferred approaches for the success of such a project. Stakeholders, particularly local communities 
(subsistence farmers, pastoralists, and commercial farmers), are the primary wetland users and the primary 
beneficiaries of sustained wetland ecosystems. Getting communities involved in project activities is a lesson 
learnt i n order to promote the sustainability of project wetland conservation activities. In addition, the proposed 
project will work with the GoU and the private sector to increase tourism revenue (where applicable) and create 
opportunities for communities to benefit from wetland  based eco- tourism enterprises.  
Hence, the project will develop relationships with the Uganda Tourism Board (UTB) and the Uganda


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 55 
 
 
 E 
Community Tourism Association (UCOTA). Furthermore, involving government institutions is recommended so 
that l essons learnt and best practices are included in policies, plans and strategies.  
- Wise- use of biodiversity : Wise -use interventions that have livelihood benefits are quicker to promote for adoption 
by communities. It has been shown in the COBWEB project t hat ecotourism undertaken by communities is a 
best practice to protect wetland habitats and biodiversity. This best practice involves communities guiding 
visitors to watch birds, take canoe rides, do sport fishing, scenery viewing, and biodiversity researc h. These 
wise-use activities have minimal to no impact on biodiversity and generate additional income for participating 
communities. This project will scale up these activities and ensure that the implementation of sustainable use 
strategies and the maintenance of biodiversity are positively correlated. Further, the project will rely on the 
contribution of communities towards monitoring and patrolling of lakes to increase community involvement and 
reduce conservation costs. It has been shown that communities demarking their own conservation areas and 
formulating management guidelines is a best practice to guide wise- use of wetland resources.  
- Increasing income opportunities at the household level : At the household level, the project will increase 
communiti es’ income levels by increasing fish yields with the use of the right sized nets and by improving food 
production via soil and water conservation measures. It has been reported that at Lake Nakivale CCA, Banana 
production has been increasing due to soil an d water conservation measures in combination with improved 
farming practices (COBWEB project). The proposed project will also ensure the protection of wetland sections 
known as major fish breeding grounds. It has been shown that the construction of boats t o monitor illegal fishing 
and encroachments in these areas  has improved conservation efforts. However, apprehending fishermen 
involved in illegal fishing has proven to be a difficult task for communities. Hence, it is recommended that local 
police be sensi tized to biodiversity conservation to take proper action against illegal fishermen and thieves.  
- Mainstreaming gender: By ensuring w omen participation in community -based organizations in all conservation 
areas, the COBWEB project empowered women and in t urn helped improve their family’s socio- economic 
status. It has been shown that most women spent their income on their children’s health and education. 
Likewise, the proposed project will empower women by ensuring their participation in training related to various 
agro-based, livestock and fisheries products to establish small businesses.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
N.A. 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/ programme  and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
N.A.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit generated as a result of the project/programme): N.A.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 55 
 
 
 F 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Programming of wetland restoration target  
 
116. The degradation of wetlands and their associated ecosystem services in Uganda is negatively affecting the 
livelihoods of the people living in and around the wetlands –  around 4,000,000 people. Over 80% of the people living 
adjacent to wetland areas in Uganda directly use wetland resources for their household food security needs.14 This 
project seeks to support the Government of Uganda to take climate change issues into account in the management of 
critical wetlands. The barriers that need to be overcome are:  
  
• the limited technical knowledge on the agro- ecological and hydrological systems of the wetlands;  
 
• insufficient extensions services for resilient agriculture and livelihoods; and  
  
• Inadequate climate information and early warning systems.  
 
117. This project will restore wetlands and their eco- system services with sustainable land management practices and 
reforestation, will support resilient agricultural practices and alternative livelihoods to reduce the pressures on the wetlands, and finally wi ll strengthen the climate information and early warning systems to communities. Under a set of 
reasonable assumptions, the economic analysis demonstrates the social desirability of the proposed project even in 
circumstances where the true net economic value of the proposed project is expected to be under -estimated.   
 
Basic Approach and Methodology  
 
118. The total benefits of the proposed investments as outlined in the project proposal can be categorized into:  
 
• Provisioning ecosystem services (ESS). The economic benefits society will derive from provisioning ESS 
include the use of rehabilitated wetlands areas to support agriculture (e.g. production of sugar cane, coco yam 
and cassava), fisheries (e.g. production of mirror carp and tilapia), papyrus and th e brick -making industry.  
 
• Indirect ESS . The economic benefits that society will derive from indirect ESS include (but are not limited to) the 
role of rehabilitated wetlands in water treatment and purification, sewage treatment, and water channel outflow 
control. In the language of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, these indirect ESS include regulating services, 
cultural services, and supporting services.
15 
 
For purpose of conducting the economic analysis of this investment project, we solely include the economic value of 
protecting and/or restoring the provisioning ESS provided by rehabilitated wetlands. In the environmental economics 
literature, such value is categorized as direct consumptive use value and its estimation is generally simple, unlike the 
estimation of the economic value of indirect ESS.  
 Ignoring the economic benefits of restoring indirect ESS, the estimated benefits of the investment project included in the economic analysis are expected to significantly under -estimate the true benefits of the investment project.  
 
119. The economic analysis of the proposed project was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Economic 
Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program (UNDP 2015). The economic efficiency of the investment  
was determined by computing the economic net present value (NPV) with an assumed 10% discount rate and economic 
internal rate of return (IRR). All proposals supported by UNDP have opted to use a 10% discount rate, in line with the 
existing practice of mul tilateral development banks.  
  
                                                             
14 Kakuru, Willy, Nelson Turyahabwe, and Johnny Mugisha. 2013. Total Economic Value of Wetlands Products and 
Services in Uganda, The Scientific World Journal , Volume 2013.  
15 Millenn ium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005 . Ecosystems and Human Well -Being: Wetlands and Water Synthesis . 
World Resources Institute, Washington, DC.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 55 
 
 
 F 
120. Economic values (costs and benefits) are all measured in real terms of 2014. Economic costs of the project are 
net of taxes, duties, and price contingencies. Furthermore, the analysis assumes a shadow wage rate of 1.00 f or 
unskilled and semi -skilled labor in Uganda. Provided that the economic cost of labor in Uganda is expected to be lower 
than the market wage rate (financial cost), we expect this assumption leads to significantly over -estimating the 
economic cost of the project, and under -estimating the true net economic value of the project. For example, in a recent 
cost-benefit analysis of road investment projects in Uganda, a shadow wage factor of 0.83 was used for unskilled and 
semi -skilled labor.16 Similarly, in a 200 6 procedural guidelines, Uganda’s Ministry of Works, Housing and 
Communication then estimated a shadow wage factor of 0.78 for semi -skilled labor in Uganda.17 
 
121. As is common when undertaking the economic analysis of investment projects, numerous assumpt ions were used 
to delineate the “with project scenario” from the “without project scenario”. These assumptions are presented and 
discussed in Annex XII of this proposal. Assumptions were made so as to under -estimate the true net economic value 
of the proposed investment project.    
 Net Present Value and Sensitivity Analysis  
 122. The project’s economic net present value (NPV) over a 25- year period is  estimated to be US$61.4 million with an 
economic internal rate of return (IRR) of 22.6%.  
 123. Results from sensitivity analysis suggest the conclusion that this project is socially desirable is robust. For example:  
• If we assume a 20% increase in costs over the base case, the project’s NPV is US$56.0 million and its IRR is 
20.4%.  
   
• If we assume a 20% decrease in benefits over the base case, the project’s NPV is US$43.7 million, with an economic IRR of 19.9%.  
 
• If we assume a simultaneous 20% increase in costs and 20% decrease in benefits, the project’s NPV is US$38.4 million and its economic IRR is 17.9%.  
 Other Benefits  
 
124. Some benefits of this project were not included in this analysis due to lack of data. These benefits include among 
others, (i) the intermediate services of wetlands including the role of rehabilitated wetlands in water treatment and 
purification, sewage treatment, and water channel outflow control, (ii) increased skills for employability and 
entrepreneurship capacity to start new businesses, and (iii) accurate and reliable climate information which will have a transformational impact on people’s lives in the targeted areas.  
 
Project Beneficiaries and Distribution of Benefits  
 
125. While the results and impacts of the proposed project are expected to eventually spread countrywide, the proposed 
project is expected to improve the lives of some of the most vulnerable people in Uganda dependent on subsistence 
agriculture and wetlands for their livelihoods.  
 
126. This follows from the observation that the areas targeted by the proposed project are South Western Uganda (6 
districts of Kabale, K isoro, Kanungu, Rukungiri, Greater Bushenyi and Ntungamo) and Eastern Uganda ( 10 districts of 
Pallisa, Kibuku, Bukedea, Namutumba, Butaleja, Budaka, Tororo, KaliroNgora and Mbale) with a total population of 
3,946,366 people and land area of 13,000 Km2. At least 800,000 people in and around wetlands will directly benefit s 
from the proposed  investment.  
                                                             
16 Crossroads. 2014. Building the Evidence Base for more Labour -Intensive Road Work Contracts and Increased 
Employment Opportunities  for Women. Prepared by M&E Associates.  
17 Republic of Uganda. 2006. Procedural Guide to Economic Road Feasibility Studies. Ministry of Works, Housing and 
Communication, Road Agency Formation Unit.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 55 
 
 
 F 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
127. For output  1, an integrated sustainable land management approach will be adopted, which include reforestation 
of indigenous species, erosion control, and drainage  and water storage for ground water recharge. The management 
plans for the wetlands will be developed thr ough a participatory process with the local stakeholders in order to maintain 
the biological diversity and productivity of the wetlands and to allow wise use of their resources by human beings. The 
structure of the plans will be developed according to Rams ar guidelines for the development of management plans. In 
order to achieve an overall agreement between the various stakeholders and decision makers, an iterative step by step approach will be carried out to finalize the plan for the 16 districts. The next step will be the preparation of the 
management plan on the basis of regular workshops with the relevant local and regional stakeholders. The members 
of these working groups will discuss the content and focus of the management plan and develop it in further detail. In 
addition public presentations and hearings took place. As a final result concerted management plans for each project 
area covering a period of five years will be presented to the public and handed over t o the competent administrations 
with the demand to approve the management plan officially and to start the implementation. The constructed wetland 
buffer zones with autochthonous plants, mainly bulrush and reed species will be implemented, which will quick ly 
develop into an attractive wildlife habitat. Plantations of various indigenous species because these plants are perfectly adapted to the climate conditions in the wetlands will play a crucial role on limiting soil erosion and water retention. A 
very imp ortant target of the project is the exchange of experience between the partners and stakeholders in the two 
project areas and the MWE. The exchange of know -how will be extended to include other organizations  involved in 
management of wetlands and lakes in Uganda.   
 
128. For output  2, a detailed market study  will be conducted that identifies the opportunities for employment as well 
as for entrepreneurship leading to small and micro enterprises . This market study will inform the project on the skills 
training that  will lead to employment and the type of products and services that have potential for small businesses. 
Beneficiaries will be organized  in self -help groups to facilitate the access to microfinance and promote women 
empowerment. Beneficiaries will be screened between those willing and capable of receiving training on business 
development including business planni ng, accounts, stock management , etc; while the others will receive employable 
skills such as cell phone repair, assistant nursing, construction wor k. Value chains will be identified and improved by 
transforming agricultural products into higher value items such as jams, juices, floor, pickles , etc. 
 
129. For output  3, a systematic  approach to project design will be used, starting from the types of services which 
are envisioned and required by farmers (assessed through local consultations and assessments). Particular attention 
will be paid to the content, presentation and ability to  interpret key messages and information, including use of 
language and simple non- technical visualizations. A key requirement will be to ensure that all weather/climate 
information is contextualized with other relevant social and environmental information (e.g. current market prices, 
crop status, access to markets and storage facilities etc), as well as constrained where necessary by scientific limitations on predictability and scale. Areas where observations are currently sparse and limit the ability to pr ovide 
the basic weather/climate data required to build services/warnings and information products will be identified. The 
benefits of placing extra equipment (e.g. automatic weather stations, hydrological water level/flow sensors) in these 
areas will be ev aluated, and if suitable (taking into account operations and maintenance costs and the capacity of 
UNMA  to service equipment), new equipment will be installed. In areas where flooding and short -term extreme 
rainfall can be dangerous and lead to loss of lif e, assets and/or crops, the introduction of community -based automatic 
reporting stations (sending directly to village and community leaders) will be undertaken. If rainfall intensity 
monitoring is required with short -lead times (hours or less), lightning s ensors and derived products will be considered 
as alternatives to weather radar (being expensive to operate and maintain) in order to identify severe weather which 
may lead to flooding and loss of life. The applicability of the WMO Severe Weather Forecasti ng Demonstration 
Project (SWFDP) and Flash Flood Guidance System (FFGS) will be assessed and access to relevant data ensured, 
as well as its integration into other decision support systems and tools.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender  Considerations


---
*Page 45*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 55 
 
 
 F 
130. This project is compliant with UNDP ’s social and environmental screening procedure (see SESP attached as 
Annex  VI).  UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards were reviewed by the GCF accreditation panel and deemed 
sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit low and medium risk projects. The overall social and environmental risk category 
for this project is low as highlighted below.  Specific project risks are listed in Section G below.  Appropriate mitigation 
measures are included within the following section.  
 
Environmental Impacts  
131. A terminal evaluation of the “Extending Wetland Protected Areas through Community C onservation Initiatives 
(COBWEB) was conducted in 2013. The evaluation investigated previous works that were undertaken that are suit ably 
similar in nature to allow a comparison with the potential environmental impacts associated with this project . 
 
132. The project will have a number of environmental impacts which will be temporally restricted.  During 
rehabilitation, it will be necessary to undertake earth works to re- stabilize the degraded wetlands.  The earth works 
will remove sediment that is currently impacting on the wetlands operating effectively.  These earth works will be 
limited to access into the wetlands and any movement of sedi ment.  Additional artificial wetlands will also be created.  
To ensure that the sediment is not mobilized through either wind or more specifically rain events, it will be necessary 
to prepare an erosion control sediment plan.  The plan should contain aspec ts including but not limited to the 
installation of sediment curtains to reduce sediment movement, covering sediment where practicable and using 
sediment for other works.  There will be a cut and fill balance and therefore no additional soil etc . will need  to be 
transported into the areas of works.  All works should be undertaken in the dry season.  Consist ent with the project , 
rehabilitation works around the wetlands will also take place.  All banks should be battered to ensure they are 
compacted and will not slump when inundated.  Any additional sediment that is not required should be used within the 
existing catchment as topsoil as it is likely to be richer in nutrients than  the existing topsoil.  
 
133. Alternative cropping is also planned as part of activities  for farmers.  There is the potential for pest species to 
be brought in within seeds.  Further, there is the potential for new crops to invade habitats in proximity to the farms 
through wind borne movement.  To mitigate this impact, all alternative crops w ill be local provenance thereby mitigating 
adverse impacts.  Weeds may affect the wetlands following construction.  As no additional soil will be moved to the 
site, there is unlikely to be an additional impact as a result of non- native plants growing in the wetlands.  To ensure 
that the rehabilitated wetlands do not “choke” through weed infestation, a weed control and maintenance plan will be developed to remove weeds and ensure the rehabilitation is effective.  Overall, it is expected that the project  will have 
limited environmental impacts and these can be mitigated effectively through appropriate management measures.  
The project  will have significant environmental benefits in the short to long term through the improvement of water 
quality and a reduction in sediment movement.  The social and environmental impacts of setting up a few automated 
weather stations will be very limited. The only environmental impacts associated with the installation of meteorological 
and hydrological infrastructure will be digging small (<100mm diameter) to place posts that will hold the infrastructure.  
The posts will be surrounded by a fence that will be 4 meters by 4 meters . To ensure no impacts occur such as erosion 
runoff, the installation will be undertaken during the dry season, thus reducing any potential loss of sediment into water 
courses as a result of rain.   All meteorological stations are proposed to be constructed on land currently owned by the 
Government of Uganda.  As such, there is no requirement for any form  of land acquisition.  
Social Impacts  
134. There are limited social impacts associated with the project.  Importantly, no people will be displaced or 
relocated.  There will be a reduction in the availability of land for crop production through the construction of the 
wetlands; however carefully planning and stakeholder consultation will be undertaken prior to the construction and 
development of any new wetlands and the rehabilitation of existing wetlands.  There will potentially be an impact on 
what  farmers curr ently utilize being converted back into wetlands.  To ensure there is limited impact on people, crop 
diversification is planned.  This will improve the livelihoods overall of people working in and around the wetlands and 
increase their income potential.  W here available, local people will be employed to undertake construction and


---
*Page 46*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 55 
 
 
 F 
maintenance of the wetlands, thereby providing a social benefit to the community.   Further , the wetlands will act as a 
buffer during flood and therefore reduce the potential loss of lives and assets.  
Grievance Redress Mechanism  
135. The project has developed a Grievance Redress Mechanism to ensure any complaints or concerns are fully 
addressed.  The project allows those that have a compliant or that feel aggrieved by the project to be able to 
communicate their concerns and/or grievances through an appropriate process.  The Complaints Register and 
Grievance Redress Mechanism set out in the Environm ental and Social Management Plan and to be used as part of 
the project will provide an accessible, rapid fair and effective response to concerned stakeholders, especially any vulnerable group who often lack access to formal legal regimes .  The Grievance Redress Mechanism  utilizes existing 
frameworks that have been proven to work in Uganda through a two tier structure.  
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
136. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and 
regulations available here: https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial -Rules -and-Regulations_E.pdf .  
Periodic financial reviews of project expenditures will be conducted to ensure funds were used for the purpose intended in the approved proposal. The project will apply international accounting financial reporting standards for the project 
reporting.  Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures available at https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/introduction.aspx . UNDP 
has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement standards and 
guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply  to all procurements in UNDP.  See here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx  
 
137. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM 
guidelines available  here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/documents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Im
plementation%20by%20the%20Government%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx&action=default&DefaultItemOpen=
1 
UNDP has  ascertain the national capacities of the executing entity by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following 
the Framework for Cash Transfers to executing entities  (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT ). 
 
138. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and 
together with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA currently being negotiated with the GCF. According to 
the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during 
the programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the executing entity 's risk rating and 
UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the executing entity  
were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audi t or an internal control audit.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 55 
 
 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of r isk Probability  of risk 
occurring  
 
Delayed implementation of baseline projects by the 
government and donors negatively affects GCF project 
outcomes.  
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Continuous sensitization of the policy makers based on evidence from the pilot sites to secure cooperation and commitment.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of r isk Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Installed hydro- meteorological equipment fails 
because it is vandalised or not maintained.  
 
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Awareness raising activities will be undertaken in target communities to highlight the importance of the installed 
equipment. In addition, the equipment will be housed within a secure fence.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of r isk Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Climate shocks occurring during the design and implementation phase of the GCF project result in 
disruptions to restoration activities and severely affect 
communities, prior to the EWSs being established.  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
139. Several risks, probability of occurring and mitigation measures have been identified in the below table. The 
risks range from delay in the implementation of baseline projects to the lack of commitment from communities . The 
overall assessment of risk is low to moderate. Each individual risk has been evaluated and a miti gation measure to 
reduce the incidence of the risk on the project has been identified. The mitigation measures will focus on building 
awareness and sensitization, but also on building capacity at various levels of governance, all the way down to 
extension officers and communities. A participatory approach will be adopted in order to ensure community b uy-in.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 55 
 
 
 G 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Disaster mitigation and response activities will be prioritized at the target communities whilst the EWS is being 
established.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of r isk Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Variation and limitation in technical capacity will 
reduce the efficiency of the project implementation.  
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Local communities and district environmental officer around the pilot sites will be trained in the design, planning and 
implementation of NWRP Project interventions. International experts will be engaged to assist local authorities in 
implementing NWRP Project interventions where national expertise is not available.  
Existing inter -ministerial climate change technical committee will be engaged to facilitate knowledge sharing and 
capacity building.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of r isk Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Lack of commitment from communities where restoration activities, alternative livelihoods and EWS 
are established undermines the effectiveness of the 
GCF project demonstrations.  
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified  risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The GCF project will avoid a ‘top down’ approach and seek to create community ownership of the project through 
community training and encouraging participation in project activities.  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
 
Description  Risk 
category  Level of r isk Probability of risk 
occurring  
Political instability  Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
A system of installments and disbursements against measurable outcomes and deliverables will be put in place to 
ensure that the funding is secure and any political instability does not affect the project impact.  
 
* Please expand this sub- section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risk


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .  
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Results Management Framework  and 
Performance Measurement Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts  at the Fund level18 
Paradigm shift o bjectives  
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development  Please elaborate on the paradigm shift objectives to which the project/ programme  
contributes.  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumpti
ons Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level i mpacts  
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem 
services  4.1 Area (ha) of habitat or 
kilometres of coastline 
rehabilitated (e.g. 
reduced external 
pressures such as 
overgrazing and land 
degradation through 
logging/collecting); 
restored (e.g. through 
replanting); or protected 
(e.g. through improved 
fire management; flood 
plain/buffer maintenance)  
 
4.2 Area of agroforestry 
projects, forest -pastoral 
systems, or ecosystems –based adaptation 
systems established or 
enhanced  IE reports and 
ongoing project  
M&E 
documentation. 
Field impact 
surveys. 
Remote 
sensing  images  
 
 
 
 483 ha 
(south 
western), 
141ha 
Eastern) of 
wetland 
restored. 
5000 ha of 
catchment 
restore d 
 
 
 
 
2000 ha of 
agroforestry  20,000  ha 
restored wetland  
 
5,000 ha 
restored 
catchment  
  
 
 
 
 
 
10,000 ha 64,370  ha 
restored wetland 
  
11,630 ha 
restored 
catchment  
  
 
 
 
 
 
35,000 ha  
A1.0 Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions  1.2 Number (percentage) 
of households adopting a 
wider variety of livelihood 
strategies/coping 
mechanisms  
 
 
1.4 Area (ha) of 
agricultural land made 
more resilient to climate 
change through 
agricultural practices 
(e.g. planting times, new and resilient native 
varieties, efficient 
irrigation systems 
adopted)  Field impact 
surveys, end of 
project independent 
evaluation 
reports . FAO 
statistics. Food 
security 
reports. 
Satellite remote 
sensing 
images.  150 hs 
(52% 
female)  
 
 
 
 
30 ha 15,500 hs - 
10% of hs  (52% 
female)  
 
 
 
 
4000 ha 
  75,000 hs - 50% 
of hs (52% 
female)  
 
 
 
 
12,500 ha 
 
  
  
                                                             
18Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at  the following link 
(Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Baseline  Target


---
*Page 50*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Mid-term (if 
applicable)  Final  Assumption
s 
Project/programme 
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund- level impacts  
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks  7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and public -
sector services of Fund-
supported tools, 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond 
to climate change and 
variability  
 
7.2 Number of males 
and females reached by 
[or total geographic 
coverage of] climate-
related early warning 
systems and other risk 
reduction measures 
established/ 
strengthened  IE reports and 
ongoing project 
M&E 
documentation. 
Field impact 
surveys.  
  
1000 hs 
(52% 
female)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1300 
females 
and 1650 
males  
  
15,500 hs -  10% 
of hs (52% 
female)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30% of the target 
population 
receives 
accurate and 
actionable 
climate 
information and 
EW  
75,000 hs -  50% 
of hs (52% 
female)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70% of the target 
population 
receives 
accurate and 
actionable 
climate 
information and 
EW  
Project/programme outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Restoration and 
management of wetland 
hydrology and associated 
catchment  Wetlands and 
natural grasslands rehabilitated  
 
 
 
 
Surface areas 
restored, 
rehabilitated or 
enriched with 
grassed, 
herbaceous and 
wooded vegetation, 
reducing loss of top 
soil, protecting 
riverbanks and 
improving infiltration 
in critical areas  
 Local adaptation 
plans and 
monitoring results 
reviewed as part of 
APRs /PIR 
 
 
Project’s periodic 
reports,  validated 
by independent 
evaluations and 
reviews . 
 
Satellite remote 
sensing images.  525 ha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7000 ha 
 64,370  ha Wetland  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11,630 ha Catchment   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Assumptions : 
Communities 
are willing to 
engage in 
EBA activities 
and see net 
benefits from 
it 
 
 
2. Improved agricultural 
practices and alternative 
livelihood options in the wetland catchment  Percentage increase 
in agricultural incomes  and 
alternative 
livelihoods  in the 
project sites.  
 
 
Number of women 
involved in 
livelihoods and employability 
interventions in the 
project sites.  Field impact 
surveys, end of 
project independent 
evaluation reports  Determine
d during 
year 1 
through 
field 
survey.  100% increase in agricultural 
incomes.  50,500HHs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At least 50% of the people involved 
in the interventions at each site are 
women (this includes management 
committees).  Farmer 
acceptability 
of risky 
adaptation 
measures 
may limit 
project 
implementatio
n. 
 
Commitment 
from the 
community


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
3. Strengthening access to 
climate and early warning 
information to farmers and other target communities  % of population with 
access to improved climate information 
and drought, flood 
and severe storm 
warnings (disaggregated by 
gender).  
 
 
 
 
 
 Review of 
agricultural 
practices and plans 
to validate 
incorporation of 
risk, weather and/or climate information 
 
Gender -sensitive 
field surveys 
undertaken within 
identified priority 
sites, 
representative of 
the Ugandan population; 
consultant reports.  
 Currently 
climate 
informatio
n and 
early 
warning 
are not 
provided  
to the 
majority – 
3,950 
people 70% of men and women in the 
project area have access to improved 
climate information and flood, 
drought and severe weather 
warnings  
 
 
 
 
 Awareness 
raising 
activities, and 
the 
demonstratio
n of the 
advantages 
of responding 
to the 
information 
provided 
through the 
established 
EWS, will 
ensure the 
commitment 
of the 
communities 
in 
participating 
in the GCF 
project.  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1. Small -scale water storage 
and detention facilities 
designed and constructed or 
rehabilitated in critical 
waterways for communities to 
benefit from enhanced 
ecosystem functioning Increased water retention and percolation 
for enhanced ground water recharge and availability.  1.1.1 Construct 100 trenches in the 
catchments  
1.1.2 Erect gabions along gullies created by excess erosion 
1.1.3 Develop community based 
catchment   management plans  
1.1.4 Support the establishment of 
community based/local institutions t o 
monitor the implementation of  
interventions (5 community institutions)  
1.1.5 Construct small earth dams with 
bundings  
1.1.6 Rehabilitation of existing water 
harvesting structures  
1.1.7 Desilting of clogged water ways  
1.1.8 Conduct EAIs to guide activities 
during the rehabilitation of water 
harvesting struc tures. Rehabilitation of water 
storage areas, building of 
water storage and 
technical assessments  
1.2 Improved inlet streams to 
increase water delivery; (GCF)  Desilting and clearing of inlet streams  for 
improved water delivery and recharge 1.2.1 Demarcate and mark  boundaries 
along streams  feeding into main wetlands (400 km)  
1.2.2 Procure Plant species including 
grevelia and ficus species to be used 
for marking boundaries along streams (50,000 seedlings)  
1.2.3 Support construction of cattle watering points to avoid animals going 
direct to the streams  
1.2.4 Mobilize and sensit ize livestock 
keepers (10 farmer groups)  
1.2.5 Prepare detailed plans for silt 
traps,drainage,flood control and 
maximum water recuperation (engage 
2 firms)  Improvement of water 
recuperation from inlet 
streams and training  
1.3: Degraded catchment 
areas rehabilitated and land 
productivity improved Reforest and revegetate catchment areas 
with indigenous species to reduce soil 
erosion and improve the retention of water.  1.3.1 Support the replanting/vegetating 
of bare catchment  to enhance infiltration (50 ha)  
1.3.2 Demarcate boundaries to protect indigenous grasses and herbaceous 
grasses from extinction (150 km)  Rehabilitation of 
catchment areas with 
reforestation and raising 
community awareness


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
1.3.3 Support establishment of climate 
change resilient plant species 
especially elephant grass, Napier grass 
and coriander that can also act as 
fodder for livestock during drought (50 
ha) 
1.3.4 Engage NGOs, CBOs and 
consultant to train community members 
and extension workers in sustainable land management techniques  
1.3.5 Organize exposer/exchange visits for local communities to learn from 
each other  
1.3.6 Procure consultancy services (10 groups)  
1.3.7 Mobilise and sensitise the 
beneficiaries (30 groups)  
1.3.8 Establish and operationalise 
community committees to oversee the 
reforestation process  (30 committees)  
1.3.9 Procure and supply seedlings to 
the beneficiaries for establishment of 
woodlots and reforestation  
1.3.10 Organize exchange visits for learning experiences  
1.3.11 Stakeholder mobilization and 
sensitization (20 groups)  
1.3.12 Mapping and zoning (1000 km)  
1.3.13 Physical restoration and rehabilitation (25,000 ha)  
1.3.14 Set up operational and 
maintenance committees (20 
district/village level committees)  
1.3.15 Construct the necessary infrastructure (embankments, 
reservoirs, ponds, etc.) identified for 
increasing water storage in wetlands 
(10 s ites) 
1.3.16 Train beneficiaries in water 
storage technology and mechanisms 
(5 groups)  
1.4  Strengthened wetlands 
management practices  Capacity building of Govt and communities 
for improved wetland management 
practices. Training on the latest knowledge 
in science on wetlands, climate change. 
Management techniques and best practice 
in wetland management.  1.4.1 Procure consultant services (1 
firm) 
1.4.2 Procure consultant services (1 firm) 
1.4.3 Procure consultancy services (1 
firm) 
1.4.4 Procure consultancy services (5 
plans)  
1.4.5 Procure equipment (2 units)  
1.4.6 Carry out community mobilization and sensitization (5 groups)  
1.4.7 Establish and operationalise 
committees to oversee the 
management of protected sensitive 
areas (5 committees)  Training to improve 
management of the 
wetlands  
2.1   Crop diversification and 
resilient agricultural best practice adopted  Smart agriculture and conservation 
agriculture prac tices to change the way 
farmers farm their land to become more 
resilient to climate change.  2.1.1 Procure consultancy services 
(Hire 2 training firms, each covering all 
extension officers in 1 region)  
2.1.2 Engage 10 NGOs at local level  
2.1.3 Procure 2 training firms  
2.1.4 Engage 2 training consultancy 
services  
2.1.5 Undertake 10 stakeholder 
consultative meetings  Improve farmers capacity 
to do resilient agriculture 
and farming best 
practices


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
2.1.6 Establish and operationalise 10 
farmer and water user committees at 
local level  
2.1.7 Procure assorted  seed varieties 
of beans, maize, Irish potatoes 
(215,500 kg)  
2.1.8 Procure assorted herbicides for 
30 farmer groups  
2.1.9 Procure assorted  hoes, pangas 
and fork hoes for 30 farmer groups  
2.1.10 Set up 10 nurseries of improved varieties (coffee, Irish potatoes, rice)  
2.1.11  Set up 4 farm er schools at 
community level  
2.1.12 Procure water pumps, sprinkler 
and drip irrigation systems for 20 
farmer groups to facilitate small scale 
irrigation 
2.1.13 Engage 4 NGOs and CBOs 
operating at the local level  
2.1.14 Construct ponds, canals and 
water supply facilities for livestock and 
irrigation   
2.2 Economically viable and 
sustainable livelihood and 
income generating 
interventions introduced, 
promoted  and supported in 
the wetland and immediate 
catchment  Alternative livelihoods are strengthened 
and diversified, with focus on high growth sector and employability.  2.2.1 Fish farming, ecotourism (20 
groups)  
2.2.2 Engage 10 groups of 
NGOs/Consultants  
2.2.3 Undertake stakeholder  
consultative meetings  
2.2.4 Establish and operationalize farmer and water user committees at 
local level  
2.2.5 Procure assorted beehives for 30 
farmer groups  
2.2.6 Procure small scale fruit 
processing equipment for 30 farmer 
groups  
2.2.7 Procure cold stor age equipment 
for 20 farmer groups  
2.2.8 Procure solar panels  
2.2.9 Procure biogas equipment (10 
farmer groups)  
2.2.10 Procure equipment to support drip irrigation initiatives for 20 farmer 
groups  Provide skill training and 
organize the community 
in order to receive inputs 
for improved livelihoods  
3.1 Meteorological and 
hydrological infrastructural 
investments supported 
including additional manual and 
automatic weather stations, 
lightening sensors, hydrological 
monitoring equipment, agro-
meteorological stations, 
forecasting equipment, and 
data archiving systems.  
 Ensure equipment and observations are 
available to develop m ore accurate and 
localized climate and weather observations , 
improving monitoring and warning 
capabilities, as well as enabling the long-
term development of more accurate 
forecasts.  
 3.1.1 Weather Observatory suitable 
site surveying and Identification  
3.1.2 Procurement of analysis software 
(ArcGis)  
3.1.3 Visit to the rain gauge sites  and 
service the rain gauges in catchments 
of the targeted districts  
3.1.4 Calibration of meteorological equipment in the targeted districts and 
catchment areas (to improve 
observational data quality).  
3.1.5 Hiring 5 people for data entry for 
1 year and carryingout data entry staff 
competence assessment.  
3.1.6 Collection of hardcopies of 
meteorological data from observatories 
in targeted areas to head office 
(including postage and courier 
services)  
3.1.7 Procure  desktop computers,  
printers and UPS  Installation of hydromet 
infrastructure, tailored to 
the needs of users in 
wetland areas.  
 
Ensuring that data 
communication streams 
are functioning and 
provide data in time to be 
useful.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
3.1.8 Procure servers for manual 
observations and automatic data 
archival  
3.1.9 Procure lap top computers   
3.1.10 Procure telephone and internet 
facilities for weather observatories in 
the targeted districts for dissemination 
of observations  
3.1.11 Procurement of specialised 
equipment (Scanners - 20, Cameras -  
4) for data rescue + 5 GPS for positioning new stations  
3.1.12 Procurement of specialised 
equipment (Scanners - 20, Cameras -  
4) for data rescue + 5 GPS for 
positioning new stations  
3.1.13 Procurement of specialised 
equipment (Scanners - 20, Cameras -  
4) for data rescue + 5 GPS for positioning new stations  
3.1.14 Transform climsoft data to 
clidata data for targeted wetland area 
catchments including refresher training 
of  data entry staff  in use of climsoft  
3.1.15 Procuring Clidata software for 
data archival.  
3.1.16  Procuring a consultant to train 
UNMA staff on use of clidata  
3.1.17 Training of data entry staff in 
use of clidata  
3.1.18 procure a consultant  
3.1.19 Procuring Weather 
observatories  
3.1.20 Installation of the new weather observatories  
3.1.21 Procure specialised stationary 
(e.g rainfall cards, sunshine cards) for 
the new weather observatories in target 
areas  
3.1.22 Validation of Automatic weather against manual instrument s in the 
target areas  
3.1.23 Seminar for presentation of findings of the study in 3.1.22 to all 
stakeholders (UNDP, DWRM, WMD 
etc) 
3.1.24 Procuring assorted equipment to 
upgrade existing weather observatories 
in the proximity of the targeted areas  
3.1.25 Upgrading weather 
observatories in the targeted area   
3.2 Capacity building of 
relevant staff on operation and 
maintenance of climate 
monitoring equipment, data 
interpretation, modelling and 
forecasting.  
 Training on operations and maintenance 
(O&M) of equipment. Developing schedules 
and forward planning for fut ure O&M.  
 3.2.1 Capacity needs assessment for 
meteorological and hydrological technicians in the targeted districts and 
refresher training  
3.2.2 Training (30) staff in use of data 
analysis software (ArcGis, Python, 
CDO andGraDs) once per year  
3.2.3 Acquisi tion of Bi -annual synergie 
licences for satellite data reception system  
3.2.4 Procure servers to archive 
satellite imagery and analysis charts to 
aid forecasting for the targeted districts  
3.2.5 Support training of staff in 
seasonal weather forecasting  Train UNMA staff for the 
operation and 
maintenance of 
infrastructure and 
associated 
communications systems.  
 
Develop forward planning 
materials and training for 
budgetary planning


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
3.2.6 Supportthree (3) senior staff to 
attend Greater Horn of Africa Climate 
Outlook Forum meetings twice per year  
3.2.7 UNMA Staff training in statistical 
techniques of downscaling of the 
season weather forecast of the 
targeted wetland areas  
3.2.8 Training of meteorological and hydrological technicians at sub- national 
level to collect and analyse data  
3.2.9 Support senior meteorologists and hydrologists to conduct training 
workshops for water management 
officers and weather observers in 
targeted wetland ar eas. 
3.2.10 Dissemination of daily weather 
forecasts and early warning alerts to 
targeted wetland communities  
3.2.11 Workshops to develop and review of operational manuals and 
competence assessment of staff in 
targeted districts  
3.2.12 Acquisition of 4 mechanical 
toolkits, 4 dust blowers, 15 assorted 
personal protective wear.  
3.2.13 Training of technicians in the 
targeted districts  
3.3 Climate -related 
information/services provided 
to target areas, such as early 
warnings on flash floods and 
extreme weather, agricultural 
extension advice for a wide 
variety of crops, short - to long-
range weather forecasts.  
 Tailored  products (bulletins, advisories and 
warnings) provided to beneficiaries and 
stakeholders, based on improved weather and seasonal forecasts.  
 3.3.1 Training weather forecasters in 
Numerical model product downscaling 
techniques and running  of numerical 
weather forecasting models (WRF 
model) for the targeted wetland areas  
3.3.2 Regional Training Centre training 
to enhance technical skills of 
forecasters in generation of tailored 
products for the targeted districts  
3.3.3 Conduct stakeholder needs 
assessment on weather and climate 
products and formats  
3.3.4 Design appropriate weather info 
dissemination platforms and strategies 
based on 3.4.1.3  
3.3.5 Assessing the targeted area 
specific Indigenous Knowledge (IK) of 
targeted communities in relation to 
weather extremes such as floods, droughts etc  
3.3.6 Workshops for forecasters to 
harmonise IK and scientific weather 
forecasting for targeted districts  
3.3.7 Conduct baseline surveys to 
understand weather hazards affecting 
different targeted communities  
3.3.8 Assessment of high impact 
weather events in historical data of the 
targeted wetland districts.  
3.3.9 Stakeholder (targeted 
communities’, emergency response 
organisations, Local authorities, NGOs, Social scientists, aca demia) workshop 
to design and refine severe weather warning system for targeted districts  
3.3.10 Seminars for  local FM radio 
stations’ staff on weather and climate 
information dissemination  
3.3.11 Facilitate a resource person 
from UK Met Office and semin ars for Tailored products are 
communicated according 
to sectors and needs


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
twenty (20) meteorologists and 
hydrologists to develop training 
packages.  
3.3.12 Support weather forecasters in 
monitoring interannual modes of rainfall 
variability (El Nino, Indian Ocean 
Dipole) with focus on targeted areas  
3.3.13 Assessing the performance of the short, medium and long term forecasts of the targeted districts  
3.3.14 Studies to establish atmospheric dynamics associated with high impact 
weather in the targeted regions so as 
to improve weather and climate 
predictions  
3.3.15 Seminar for presentation of 
findings of 3.4.4.3 to stakeholders 
especially academia, numerical weather modellers.  
3.4 Customized ICT, mobile 
platforms, and other public and 
private communication 
channels identified and/or 
developed to support 
dissemination of the above 
information/services to the ‘last 
mile’ users to enable timely and 
urgent responsive action as 
well as short/medium/long- term 
planning for climate- dependent 
activities in sectors such as 
agriculture.  
 SMS -based and traditional communication 
systems are used to reach recipients and 
users of weather and climate information and 
warnings.   
 
Develop private sect or  
 3.4.1 Procurement of a consultant  
3.4.2 Procurement of a consultant  
3.4.3 Developing and printing 
operational manuals for weather 
forecaster and observers  
3.4.4 Workshops to operationalize 
operational manuals at local and 
national level  
3.4.5 Workshops/seminars for weather 
and Climate information use with 
communities in target areas (start of 
every season).  
3.4.6 Assessing the utilisation of weather forecasts by the targeted 
communities twice per year in each 
region 
3.4.7 Conducting radio talk shows on 
seasonal forecast updates on Local FM 
radio stations twice per year/region 
3.4.8 Seasonal Weather forecast 
impact assessments twice per 
year/region    
3.4.9 Seminars for building capacity of 
agriculture extension staff  on use of 
weather and climate information for 
farm level planning 
3.4.10 Documentation of past and on-going climate and climate change 
research in the targeted areas  
3.4.11 Engaging telecom company for 
internet band costs for the weather 
stations  
3.4.12 Procure an ICT consultant  
3.4.13 Training of UNMA staff in use of 
the SMS -based alert  
3.4.14 Downscaling of seasonal weather forecast workshops involving 
local communities, and all stakeholders 
in each of the targeted regions 
conducted at district level  
3.4.15 Translation of the weather 
forecasts into languages of local 
communities in the targeted wetland 
areas.  Improve users platform for 
dissemination and for 
short term action. Support 
UNMA with financial 
sustainability


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
 
 3.4.16 Printing and binding booklets 
forthe seasonal forecasts in different 
languages of the targeted communities.  
3.4.17 Dissemination of the seasonal 
forecast booklets to t argeted 
communities (twice per year/region)  
3.4.18 Consultancy within UNMA to 
test systems  
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
140. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP an d the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy. The primary responsibility for day -to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project 
Manager. The Proj ect Manager will develop annual work plans , which gets approved by UNDP,  to ensure the efficient 
implementation of the project. The Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any 
delays or difficulties during implementatio n, including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the appropriate 
support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.  
141. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP. Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be provided 
by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA 
Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.   
142. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to: a) re- orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project im plementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework and discuss reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation roles and responsi bilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review financial reporting procedures 
and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan and schedule Project Board 
meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than 
one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the 
UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board.    
143. A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager, 
the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to the annual PIR. The Project Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well in 
advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the 
PIR. The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will 
coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR.  The quality rating of the previous year’s 
PIR will be used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation report 
and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report package. An independent mid- term 
review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on  
the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP 
Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report will be available in English.  
An independent term inal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of the 
project.  The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates and 
guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final TE report will be cleared by the UNDP Country 
Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 55 
 
 
 H 
 available in English. The UNDP Country Office will include the plann ed project terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country 
Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to 
the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) (www.erc.undp.org).  
 
144. The UNDP Country  Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations.  A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the UNDP project document.  
145. Given the nature of the project, the focus on community livelihoods and the large- scale areas of wetlands 
to be rehabilitated, a further  2 sets of activities will  added to the M&E work. These activities will facilitate both a 
more rapid and extensive evaluat ion of catchment and wetland rehabilitation (using remote sensing), as well as 
more in -depth knowledge on the impacts of the project on people’s livelihoods (using impact surveys). The latter 
has already been undertaken in Uganda through the LDCF EWS proje ct, the results from  which have been used  in 
the feasibility study . For th is project  a similar set of impact surveys will be undertaken, based around a 
redesigned survey instrument which assesses the extent to which the impact and targets of this project a re met. 
The remote sensing work will be overseen by the M&E specialist within the project management unit, and the 
generated data and information (both from remote sensing and the impact surveys) will feed into the NWIS , 
enabling  the information  to be easi ly accessed  and used.


---
*Page 59*
---

A
NNEXES 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 55 I
*Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicabl e
s
upporting documents.  I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -Objection Letter Annex I  
☒  Feasibility Study Annex II  
☒ Integrated Financial Model Annex III   
Not applicable: The public good nature of the project does not entail revenue generation during the lifetime 
of the project; hence a financial model is not deemed applicable for this proposal.  
☒ Confirmation Letter (Co- financing letter)  Annex IVa and Annex IVb  
☒ Term Sheet Annex V  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessments  Annex VI  
☒ Appraisal report or Due Diligence Report  Annex VII  
☒ Evaluation report of the Baseline Project  Annex VIIIa and Annex VIIIb  
☒ Map Annex IX  
☒ Timetable of Project Implementation Annex X  
☒ Project/ programme Confirmation Annex XI  
A
dditional Information  
☒ Economic Analysis  Annex XII  
☒ Additional Background Details Annex XIII  
Not Applicable.  
☒ Responses to GCF comments on Concept Note Annex XIV  
Not Applicable.  
☒ Additional Supporting Documents Annex XV


---
*Page 60*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.0 7 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 61*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.0 7


---
*Page 62*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.07 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Building Resilient Communities, Wetland Ecosystems and Associated 
Catchments in Uganda  
Accredited entity  UNDP  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -11-03 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  
Link to 
disclosure  http://www.mwe.go.ug/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&Itemid=2
23&gid=22&orderby=dmdate _published  
The ES MP below contains an impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the 
requirements of PS1 for a category B project.  
Other link(s)  http://www.ug.undp.org/content/uganda/en/home/library/SustainableInclusiveE
conomicDevel opmentProgramme/UgandaEnvironmentalandSocialManagementPla
n2016.html  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -11-03 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  
Link to 
disclosure  http://www.mwe.go.ug/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&Itemid=2
23&gid=22&orderby=dmdate_published  
Other link(s)  http://www.ug.undp.org/content/uganda/en/home/library/SustainableInclusiveE
conomicDevel opmentProgramme/UgandaEnvironmentalandSocialManagementPla
n2016.html  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  n/a 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  
Link to 
disclosure  http://  
________