=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20161117162511+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
/ModDate: D:20161124162822+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum V 
Funding proposal package for FP032 GCF/B.15/13 /Add.05  
24 November 2016  Meeting o f the Board 
13 - 15 December 2016 
Apia, Samoa 
Provisional agenda item 16(e)  
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ Enhancing Women and Girls Adaptive Capacity to Climate
Change in Bangladesh ” submitted by UNDP ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents  are presented as submitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.05  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-objection l etter is sued b y the national de signated authority or f ocal p oint 
Environmental a nd social r eport(s) dis closure


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme Title:  Enhancing Women and Girls Adaptive Capacity to Climate 
Change in Bangladesh  
Country/Region:  Bangladesh  
Accredited Entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Date of Submission:  04 Nov 2016


---
*Page 4*
---

Contents  
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
S
ection B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
S
ection C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
S
ection D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
S
ection E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
S
ection G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
S
ection H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
Section I  ANNEX ES 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
•Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into thisproposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents
such  as project appraisal document.
•The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
P
lease submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
P
lease use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

PR
OJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 61 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Enhancing Women and Girls Adaptive Capacity to 
Climate Change in Bangladesh  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion          Bangladesh  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Mr. Mohammad Mejbahuddin  
Senior Secretary, Economic Relations Division, Ministry 
of Finance  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐ Direct  ☒ International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  Ministry of Women and Children Affairs , 
Department of Women Affairs  
Beneficiary: About 4.745  million beneficiaries  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐ Micro (≤10)
X Medium (50<x≤250)☐ Small (10<x≤50)
☐ Large (>250)
A.1.8 . Mitigation / adaptation f ocus  ☐ Mitigation  ☒ Adaptation  ☐ Cross -cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission  
 Date of resubmission  04 Sep 2015  
04 Nov 2016  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Reis Lopez Rello  
Regional Technical Specialist - Adaptation  
Organization  UNDP  
Email address  reis.lopez.rello@undp.org  
Telephone number  +66 92 248 7752  
Mailing address  United Nations Service Building,  
Rajdamnern  Nok Avenue, Bangkok 10200 Thailand  
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)
Reduced emissions from:  
☐Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐Low emission transport 
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)  
☐Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
Increased resilience of:  
☒Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g.  sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

PR
OJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 61 A 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1.The coastal areas  of Bangladesh are highly susceptive to the impacts of climate change including from cyclones  and
tidal flooding. Shortage of drinking water  and adverse consequences of livelihoods disproportionally  affect women and 
adolescent  girls. Hard won development gains  are increasingly compromised due to recurrent and ever increasing climate 
induced shocks and stress es. This  perpetuates and/or worsens a poverty  trap familiar to households in these areas. The 
resources, skills and technology that can support women and adolescent girls to overcome such pressures in specific 
localities  are beyond their access  and not available. N ational climate change adaptation expenditures show that there is 
limited, if any , dedicated investment from public sources to address the disproportionate vulnerability of women and girls. 
2.T
he proposed GCF funded project will intentionally targets and benefit s women and adolescent girls living below the
extreme poverty line  in south- western Bangladesh, where exposure to climate change induced hazards is very high. The 
project objective is to enhance the adaptive capacity of women and adolescent  girls (and by extension, their families ), 
who are in extreme poverty,  in six  districts  that are constantly exposed to cyclones, tidal flooding and salinity.  Specifically, 
GCF resources will be used to  enable the Ministry of Women and Children Affairs (MoWCA)  to implement investment 
activities in the context of a national initiative that will empower  targeted vulnerable women and girls  to rise above their 
current economic and social abilities with the aim of reducing vulnerability to climate change for themselves and the 
communities that they belong to.  Specifically, GCF financing will also be used to roll out a social protection programme  
that specifically  promotes climate -resilient livelihoods. Resources will also be used to effect a significant  expansion of 
safe drinking water supply  in response to diminishing supplies  as climate change compounds existing pressures on water 
resources . 
3.The primary measurable benefits that will be realized as a result of the GCF investment  includes:
•E xpansion of safe drinking water supply for 1,250,000 people where the current access to clean safe drinki ng
w
ater is as low as 5 % of the population;
•Provide assistance  to 40,000 women and 17,000 adolescent girls1 in six districts  to pursue climate resilient
livelihoods ;
•Strengthen community participation in the provision of early  warning services directly to benefit 1.27 millio n
w
omen and girls , and indirectly to 2.0 million people;
•Strengthened capacity of MoWCA to iteratively address the needs of women and girls as forecasted climat e
c
hange impacts worsen.
•Empower women and girls in fragile coastal regions to address climate shocks through training and skill
building in climate resilient livelihood options that will compliment ongoing efforts to help them rise abov e
c
urrent poverty levels.
4.T
he project supports and strengthens GoB ’s priority actions to build resilience to climate change as enshrined in th e
B
angladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 2009 and Climate Change and Gender Action Plan 2013 . The 
project is aligned to the prio rity areas of promoting climate resilient livelihoods , early warning systems  and water security  
as per Bangladesh’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).  The design incorporates the lessons derived from recent 
climate change adaptation projects and disaster management and livelihood projects implemented by GoB , UNDP and 
other agencies.  
5.The project relies on grant finance as the proposed interventions (a) will benefit the extremely  poor and climate
vulnerable women and adolescent girls (and their families ) who are in no position to be accept  non-grant finance; (b) are 
focused predominantly on the provision of public goods and services (safe drinking water, early warning) ; and ( c) does 
not generate significant revenue that lends itself to providing reflows  at scale. The project is fully aligned with the 
Government of Bangladesh’s national development strateg y as well as GCF’s investment framework,  and was designed 
following extensive stakeholder consultations  including participation of civil society. The NDA and his office has been 
closely involved in the project formulation process including validation process and has issued a no- objection letter for 
the project  after reviewing and vetting the final design of the project . 
A.3. Project/Programme Mil estone  
1 Though Adolescent age is count in Bangladesh from 13- 17, but for the project, we only have to provide skill support through TVET for the 
girls from 15 -17 years age. Whether they are in school or not, TVET programme is designed in a way that they can gain the skills in between 
vacations, practice on field and then also go and demonstrate the skills with refresher training. However, we will primarily target to those girls 
who are compelled to do paid domestic work and dropped the school so that they can have incentives to go back vocational schools.


---
*Page 7*
---

PR
OJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 61 A 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  03 November  2016  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  TBD (Date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GCF)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: March 2017  
End:  February  2023  
Project/programme lifespan  Benefit stream: 20 (twenty ) years   
Project Implementation lifespan: 6  years


---
*Page 8*
---

F
INANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 61 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
The project relies on grant finance as (a) the proposed interventions will benefit the extreme poor an especially climate 
vulnerable women and girls and their families (b) majority investments are public goods including water provision and 
early warning systems  and (d) does not generate revenue that lends itself to providing reflows.  
Component  Sub- component (if 
applicable)  GCF  GoB Currency Total in 
USD Total   in 
BDT Local 
currency Currency 
of 
disbursem
ent to 
recipient  
Enhancing 
Women 
and Girls 
Adaptive Capacity 
to Climate 
Change  O
utput 1 Climate -
Resilient Drinking 
Water Supply for 
Women and Girls 
Expanded  43.270  2.783  million 
USD ($)  46.053  3,609.420  Million 
Bangladeshi Taka  Million 
USD 
Output 2 Adaptive 
Livelihoods of 
Women and Girls 
Supported  22.707  4.113  million 
USD ($)  26.820  2,101.984  Million 
Bangladeshi 
Taka  Million 
USD 
Output 3 
Institutional 
capacity within 
MOWCA to 
monitor, evaluate 
and report on 
adaptive social 
protection 
strengthened  1.243  0.948  million 
USD ($)  2.191  171.738  Million 
Bangladeshi 
Taka  Million 
USD 
Total project financing  67.220  7.844  75.064  5,883.142  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  75.064 million USD ($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants *  …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
………………… 
………………… 
67.220  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD ($)  ( ) years  
( ) years  (  )  % 
(  ) % 
(  ) % IRR


---
*Page 9*
---

F
INANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 61 B 
*Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected
to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing 
and that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  67.220  million USD ($)  
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Options  
Grant  
Options  
Options  7.844 million USD 
($) 
Options  
Options  
Options  Ministry of 
Women and 
Children 
Affairs 
(MoWCA ) ( ) years  
( ) years  (
  ) % 
(  ) % 
(  ) % IRR  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: Green Climate Fund  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.
(d) Financial 
terms 
between GCF 
and AE  (if 
applicable)  Not Applicable  
B.3. Financial M arket s Overview (if applicable)  
The public good nature of the proposed project entails no revenue- generation or cost -recovery. With GoB seeking 100% 
grant resources for the proposed project, the financial market overview is not applicable.


---
*Page 10*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 61 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
6.Bangladesh is one of the most densely pop ulated countries with around 156  million people living in 147,570 km2.
Given its geographic location, many areas of the country are exposed to major climate- induced hazards. Over 67% 
of the land mass is vulnerable to flood;  35% to cyclone, 21% to sea level rise (SLR), and 17% to salinity intrusion . 
7.S
ince independence in 1971, Bangladesh has made significant development progress. The poverty rate has
reduced from 60% in 1990 to 31.5% in 2010  and 24.8% in 2015. Economic growth has averaged 6.5% since 2010 
and over 70% of its Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets were  met by the end of 2015.  At the same time, 
there are a significant number of people below  the upper poverty line. Using the World Bank measure of $3 per day, 
74% are below this poverty line.  T hree- fourths of the population remain near to absolute poverty . The proportion of 
the population that is highly  vulnerable to climate shocks  is very large . 
8.I
n disaster risk reduction, Bangladesh has made significant strides in address los s of life as a result of cyclones.
Compared to 1991 when more than 150, 000 people perished, Cyclone Sidr in 2007 left a relatively smaller number 
of deaths (3,400). Cyclone Mahasan in 2013 led to 17 deaths. The recent Cyclone Roanu lead to 27 deaths . On the 
other hand, economic losses from disasters has increased significantly. However, Bangladesh remains extremely 
vulnerable to climate change impacts, both to extreme natural shocks  and to the continuing onset of climate  change. 
As a low -lying delta ecosystem, Bangladesh ranks sixth amongst the ten most climate vulnerable countries in the 
world (Climate Risk Index 2015, Germanwatch2). To address the chronic poverty and the impact of recurrent climatic 
and other hazards, the GoB currently allocates  2.2% of its GDP on social safety net programmes, of which 40% is 
deliberately targeted towards vulnerable individuals , including women, while the rest is  community focused. The main 
aim of these social protection schemes  is to address  chronic food and nutrition insecurity and personal asset loss, 
and help prevent further decent into poverty .3  
9.Climate data clearly indicates that surface temperature in Bangladesh has increased gradually since the 1950s .
(Choudhury et al., 2003; Islam et al., 2008). Early modeling indicated a n increas ing trend  in surface temperature, with 
higher rate of change during the drier periods (Ahmed and Alam, 1998; Agrawala et al., 2003; Mondal et al., 2013). Although there has not been any significant change in average annual rainfall across the country, an initiation of a 
bimodal peak of rainfall in pre- monsoon and late- monsoon seasons has taken place between 1950s and present 
timeline (Chowdhury, M.R., 2007), with an increase in intensive rainfall episodes throughout the monsoon period. Higher than average monsoon rainfall has also been reported (Islam and Neelim, 2010; Choudhury et al., 2003), 
which has been associated with increasing frequency of occurrences of high intensity floods. Moreover, the reduction  
of rainfall during the drier months (November to March) threatens to impact livelihoods (especially those based on 
agriculture)  by increasing moisture stress, especially in the western parts of the country (BCAS -RA-Approtech, 1994; 
Huq et al., 1996).  
10.B
eside these hydro- geophysical factors , developmental factors also increase the susceptibility of marginal
communities to adverse conditions that affect livelihoods and opportunities for prosperity. These include high 
population densities, high poverty rates, income inequality, gender inequalities, regional disparity, fragile infrastructure, limited integration of disaster risk into national and local planning and a number of other factors that lend itself to depressing human development. In a bid to reduce household and community level vulnerability, the Bangladeshi people have been devising new coping strategies and sharpening indigenous response mechanisms to 
manage a variety of pressures. A long history of resistance to natural hazards has shaped the culture and various 
practices of marginal  communities in Bangladesh, but the additional challenge of climate change now threatens to 
overwhelm existing capacities. Support is therefore essential to capacitate vulnerable populations to become resilient to the challenges of climate change.  
11.O
ver th e past four decades, Bangladesh has been able to reduce mortality from disasters significantly. Yet
exposure of its people and economy to climate induced losses continues to grow given the high frequency of extreme events in a context of higher economic growth, increase in assets and urbanization rates  and other factors . By a 
conservative estimation, at least five major climate related disasters since 1998 have caused damage equivalent to 
approximately 15% of GDP , with an average of 2.7%  of GDP  per event (Government of Bangladesh, 2011). There is 
an array of reasons that attribute to Bangladesh’s high exposure to climate change impacts:  
•About 88% of the landmass is floodplain, located within major river deltas (Rashid, 1991);
2 https://germanwatch.org/en/download/10333.pdf     
3  The Lower Poverty Line in Bangladesh is defined as below the minimum level of dietary energy consumption of 1,805 kcal.


---
*Page 11*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 61 C 
•The topography is flat and most  of the landmass is less than 10 meters above mean sea level;
•The geographic location is such that it is heavily influenced by monsoons and the landmass, which is only 7%
of the combined catchment areas of three great rivers the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna (GBM),
has to drain over 92% of rainfall runoff generated in the combined GBM catchment within four and a half months
(June to mid- October) (Ahmad et al ., 1994);
•The monsoon season is followed by a prolonged dry season, where lack of appreciable rainfall and almost
continuous evaporation from the top soil give rise to aridity and subsequent (phonological) moisture stress;
•The rivers are braided and undergo erosion- accretion cycles, resulting in severe erosion in one bank and
accretion in the other;
•The inverted funnel shaped shoreline is located on the path of cyclonic storms and associated surges, bot h
oc
curring in the northern Indian Ocean;
•The neap tides during peak monsoon are high enough to penetrate the coastal plains even where they areprotected by embankments, leaving the entire area inundated with saline water ;
•The rising sea level and the high salinity in Bangladesh leads to the lack of fresh water, which brings problemssuch as the decline of yield, reduced income and increased poverty and health issues ;
•About 60 million people in rural and urban areas of Bangladesh face food insecurity, and do not consume t
he
m
inimal daily caloric intake required for a healthy life, according to the World Food Programme;
•Almost one- third of all women of reproductive age in the country are extremely underweight, and the analogous
condition is prevalent even in the wealthiest section of the society;
•UNICEF data while another study by the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations showsthat 56 percent of all pre- school children are underweight.
12.W
ithin the period covered by the S eventh Five Year Plan (2016- 2020), the population of Bangladesh is project ed
t
o increase to 172 million (MOEF -GoB, 2012), and by 2021 Bangladesh is on course to meet the criteria for becoming 
a middle income country. One of the criteria - average per capita income - was achieved in June 2015. The other , the 
proportion of the population below the lower poverty line - will only be met if, at least 20 million people are able to rise 
above current poverty  levels  and no longer require Go B support from existing social safety net programmes.  
Implications of Climate Change in Bangladesh  
13. There is an extensive literature demonstrating the vulnerabilities of Bangladesh to climate change and sea level
rise (for example, Huq et al., 1998; Huq et al., 1996; Yu et al., 2010; World Bank, 2000; Ahmed, 2005; Rahman et 
al., 2010; MOEF -UNDP, 2005; MOEF/ GoB, 2012). The anticipated and current impacts  include sea level rise 
combined with higher sea temperature will drive the tides with invigorated energy  (this has already  adversely 
affected/been affecting coastal wetlands and ecosystems ), increasing low formation weather fronts including 
depressions in the Bay of Bengal and increases in peak monsoon rainfall. These changes  which has led to  flooding 
and aggravated already serious drainage problems. Another likelihood is exacerbated drought conditions. Further 
details are contained within the Feasibility Study Report (Annex -II).  
14.T
he ramifications for people and their livelihoods of climate change are multifaceted. Human health impacts
include increased water borne diseases, pneumonia, dengue, malaria, perinea rashes and urinary tract infections for 
adolescent girls, and increased health care expenditure in the country. Climate change impacts also adversely affects 
the quality of groundwater which many rely  for potable uses (including drinking) . Economic impacts of climate change 
include diversion of investments from development to aid disaster recovery efforts. The expected loss of livelihoods 
is anticipated to result in increased migration leading to hasty urbanization, further complicating already stressed 
living conditions  in urban centers . Poverty eradication efforts might face extreme difficulties due to disproportionate 
impacts of climate change on extreme poor and differentiated impacts on women and men.  
15. Salinity  of groundwater : Increasing sea level rise has resulted in salt water intrusion into groundwater drinking
water supplies throughout coastal Bangladesh. Baseline studies show that there has been a 22% increase in the area of salinity -affected agricultural land since 1973. Land demarcated as level 5 category (very strong saline area) has 
increased by 79% since 2000. About 20 million people in the coastal areas of Bangladesh are already affected by salinity in their drinking water. With increasing climate variability, salinity encroachment will continue to be a major problem for the people of South- West Bangladesh. During the dry season, access to suitable drinking water becomes 
an acute crisis for households, and it becomes the responsibility of women as homemakers, irrespective of their 
physical condition, to secure saline- free drinking water for household consumption. With water sources in the 
neighborhood already affected by a variety of factors, increasing salinity is simply compounding distances ( typically


---
*Page 12*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 61 C 
5-6 km) that women need to travel on foot every day . This  obviously cons umes a large r part of their daytime hours 
resulting in significant opportunity costs  in terms of lost wages, and other alternative and more productive use of time. 
16. Current cyclones conditions:  Bangladesh is vulnerable to climate change in a large part due to its location, and
climate conditions that define the Bay of Bengal. A number of studies have pointed out the propensity of the country 
to experience very strong cyclones. The impact of cyclones is especially adverse for the agriculture sector and farmers across the lowland regions that dominate the coastal strip. Various sources quote cyclones, which have resulted in wave surges in the range of 1.5 to 15m in height, as one of the catastrophic impacts on livelihoods (OECD, 2003).  
17. T
he World Bank (2013) suggests that due to rising sea levels and the continuously melting ice caps, surges will
be elevated . Also, as a result of the warmer oceans, the cyclone activities would be even more intense. Scientific 
research reveal s that the vulnerability of Bangladesh necessitates an urgent need of greater disaster preparedness. 
The estimated financial post disaster losses and damages  from cyclone Sidr (2007) is estimated as high as $1. 1 
billion USD4, while projections for 2050 would lead to an additional loss of $4.560 billion USD.  
18. Access to Early Warning: baseline surveys suggest that access to early warning information is higher am ong
men (57.3%) than women (42.7%). Most women reported to receiving early warning signals from the following sources: the volunteer -run Cyclone Preparedness Programme (54.8%), Radio (35.7%), TV (4.1%), and from 
neighbors (4.1%). The warnings are gender neutral but , critically,  the responses and means of response are not 
gender neutral. The warning therefore does not guide gender specific risk reduction and adaptation measures. A 
gender -sensitive early warning system , therefore, needs to consider these factors in its design and roll- out. 
Gender Equality in Disasters and Climate Change 
19.The impacts of climate change and disasters affect women and men differently. Climate change impacts can be
m
ore severe for women, poor and marginalized groups because of their specific livelihood circumstances as well as 
societal inequality such as unequal power, information asymmetry and constraints in decision making abilities (Alam 
et al., 2008; Ahmed et al., 2007). In relative terms, women lack access to productive resources, in particular land. I n 
rural Bangladesh, women are most severely affected because of their multiple roles as drinking water collectors; food producers and providers; guardians of health; caregivers to the family and community; and, economic actors  and 
changes in circumstances as a result of climate change tip the balance against them succeeding. As access to basic 
assets and natural resources, such as shelter, food, fertile land, water and fuel is hindered, women’s workloads are 
significantly increased. The lack of natural resources, caused by flooding, drought and erratic rainfall cause women 
to work harder to secure natural resources and livelihoods  which , in turn,  diminishes their ability to advance out of 
poverty particularly when they have, for example, lost their land due to the impacts of flooding during cyclone events  
(Dankel man, 2010).
 
20.P
henomena such as marginalization of women in the labor market , girls dropping out of school, “child” marriage,
deterioration of reproductive health due to lesser intake of nutritious food and water , migration and trafficking of 
women and girls have all been observed (Ahmed et al., 2007; Ahmed et al., 2012). Further, more women than men die during and immediately after disasters, not just because they do not receive early warning information in time, but 
due to their limited autonomy of responding when disaster strikes. The impact of disasters on women’s health is 
significantly higher. Moreover, t he lack of access to safe water and sanitation, especially following the aftermath of 
extreme climate change induced events,  for personal hygiene is an aggravating factor.  
21. Not only do women suffer more from disaster s, they also play a vital role in protecting, managing and restori ng
t
heir households during and post disaster s. Women have the knowledge and capacity to contribute towards adapting 
to the changing nature of disasters. A range of studies has highlighted the essential functions adopted by Bangladeshi 
women in disaster management and recovery including: forecasting climatic hazards , preserving food and animal 
fodder, ensuring household safety, educating children on safety, protecting physical and livelihood assets, supporting 
recovery of livelihoods and, drawing upon social networks to manage a wide range of shocks (Dankleman, 2010). Over the years there has been a gradual shift in the typical perception of the role of women, and communities are generally more ready to accept women leading their disaster risk reduction efforts. This shift has been reinforced by GoB policy and it is now  an established provision that at least 10% women have to be involved in local disaster 
management committees (DMC) formed within the local government system. However, in practice, women voices 
are less raised and prioritized in the decision making process  of DMCs. In addition, livelihood initiatives for women, 
4 https://www.gfdrr.org/site s/default/files/2275_CycloneSidrinBangladeshExecutiveSummary.pdf


---
*Page 13*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 61 C 
with gender transformative components, can also increase gender equality overall by reducing risks to violence from 
men and improving sexual and reproductive health (Fulu et al, 2015).   
Challenges of the present Social Protection systems to address gender needs in disaster and 
climate -related events.  
22. Bangladesh’s  National Social Security  System (NSSS) is complex, comprising of 142 social safety net
programmes managed by 23 implementing ministries/divisions . It is also prone to pilferages and mis -targeting.  64% 
of households below the national upper poverty line do not have access to any social security programme. In addition, 
due to a proliferation of programmes, the budget s for most pr ogrammes are small and the average transfer  per 
individual is low - constraining options  in terms of what the funds are used for. A strategic review of programmes 
shows that some 65 percent of the SSPs are seeking to address life- cycle related risks. Furthermore, only a small 
proportion of people with disabilities and elderly receive some form of support from these existing program mes.  
23. G
ratuitous Relief (GR), General Relief Activities, Block Allocation for Disaster Management, Test Relief (TR),
Vulnerable Group Feeding (VGF), Vulnerable- Group Development (VGD), Food for Work (FFW) and Employment 
Generation Programme for the Poor ( EGPP) are the main safety net programmes that are relevant at least in part  to 
the impacts of climate change and natural disasters. The programmes mentioned cumulatively  spend around 1  billion 
USD per annum to protect the most vulnerable and these costs are recurrently increasing. However, none of these programmes consider future risks of climate change and build appropriate adaptive capacity. Bangladesh’s overall  
social protection strategy is yet to address the issues of climate change and transform these  existing programme s to 
build adaptive capacity of vulnerable people, community and ecosystem  to expected climate change risks . The above 
programmes are also not gender responsive nor transformative. W hile they target women, the programmes  often do 
not address the practical and specific needs of vulnerable women and adolescent girls.  
24. O
f relevant to the proposed GCF project is the VGD programme. The VDG is a social protection programme
managed by the MoWCA that targets extremely vulnerable woman on Bangladesh. However, as highlighted above, 
it does not target climate change affected women and girls but more generally provides cash transfers  to extremely 
poor women.  The proposed GCF programme will use the knowledge and experiences gained from the VDG and will 
use that  information to better target and assist women and girls that would meet similar criteria but more based on 
climate change above those of the VDG programme.  
Bangladesh’s Response to Climate Change  
25. Bangladesh has been very active in climate change action global ly, national ly and local ly since 1990. A few
relevant initiatives of the Government of Bangladesh are worth mentioning here.  
- B
angladesh signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in June 1992 and 
ratified it in April 1994.The country also ratified the Kyoto Protocol in October 2001. In  April 2016, Bangladesh 
signed the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In addition, GoB  submitted its Initial National Communication 
(INC) to UNFCCC in October 2002, its second national communication in October 2012, and is now developing its third national communication, scheduled to be submitted to the UNFCCC in 2017;  
- The GoB  also adopted the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) in 2005 and has recently committed to adopt 
Sendai Framework of Action’s priority action, guiding principles and practical means for achieving disaster resilience for vulnerable communities in the context of sustainable development ; 
- The Bangladesh National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) and Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) were formulated in 2005 and 2009. Furthermore, the Climate Change Gender Action Plan (ccGAP)
5, National Plan for Disaster Management (NPDM), and S even th Five Year Plan ( 2016- 2020) of 
GoB boldly articulate the country’s commitment to addressing climate change and equitable development, while 
the National Plan for Disaster Management ( NPDM ) also specifies the need to address Disaster Risk Reduction 
(DRR) and climate change adaptation (CCA) in all development plans, programmes and policies ; 
- The BCCSAP incorporates a multi -pronged approach to the country’s efforts for climate change mitigation and 
adap tation. It identifies 44 priority programmes , including general awareness raising, capacity building, and 
project implementation in vulnerable regions, with special focus on agriculture and water resources and 
5 The specific objectives of ccGAP (2013) that the programme addresses are “Introduce innovative agriculture and aquaculture technologies for 
female farmers and entrepreneurs”, Enhance women’s knowledge and access to financial instruments”, ensure women’s involvement in efficient 
water management”, and “improve social security/protection of women, adolescent, and children pre, during and post -disaster and emergency 
situation” under Priority Se ctor I.


---
*Page 14*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 61 C 
considered only urgent and immediate prioritie s for adaptation. The National Water Policy, 1999 called for 
institutional changes in enhancing the role of women in water management ;  
- The BCCSAP is the key climate change national plan and current basis for climate investment in Bangladesh. 
The strategy is to integrate climate change challenges and opportunities into the overall development plan and 
program mes involving all sectors and processes for economic and social development and provides an overall 
framework for action recognizing the need for adapt ation with a priority focus on poor and vulnerable including 
women and children; and  
- Equal rights for men and women are enshrined in the Constitution of Bangladesh. In the context of Sustainable 
Development Goals ( SDGs), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW) (1979), and the Beijing Platform of Action (1995), Bangladesh has developed a number of policies 
and sectoral strategies to ensure gender equality.  
- Bangladesh’ Intended National Determined Contribution (INDC) , beside its mitigation targets , also states the 
key areas of work to address climate change adaptation priorities include promotion of climate resilient 
livelihoods, water security, early warning systems , and cyclone shelters, among others.  
- Bangladesh has developed a long term plan – the Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2010- 21 based on which the 
6th Five Year Plan was prepared and implemented and the 7th Five Year Plan will be implemented. Apart from 
that, the Government has also approved the National Sustainable Development Strategy 2010- 21 which 
provides a roadmap for accelerated growth with equity and lay down broad approaches for eradication of poverty, inequality and vulnerability faced by the poorest of the country.  
- Government of Bangladesh also developed National Climate Fiscal Framework (CFF) to strengthen the 
governance of climate finance, specifically the efficiency & effectiveness of the climate spending to achieve 
adaptation and mitigation goals of the country’s climate change strategy.    
- The National Social Security Strategy developed in 2015 is built on social safety measures for all deserving 
citizens, particularly the poor and vulnerable, to make the country free of hunger and poverty. The NSSS has a 
special focus on reducing risks and vulnerabilities from climate change, environmental degradation and disaster 
preparedness. It is expected that the implementation of the NSSS will allow a high proportion of the citizens to 
be much more resilient than at present. By expanding the coverage and value of transfers of priority schemes, 
the poor and vulnerable population will be in a significantly stronger position with sufficient cushion against 
shocks.  
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
26. The objective of this project is to enhance adaptive capacity of extreme poor women, adolescent girls and their
families , living in highly exposed areas  in southern , coastal  Bangladesh to climate  change- induced extreme events 
and shocks . As climate change poses a serious threat to sustainable potable water resource management , the project 
will also significantly expand drinking water supplies across six districts frequently affected by water shortages . 
Recipients of programme assistance will also benefit from tailored assistance in developing skills for a future where 
climate change impacts will be more severe. This will  benefit the next generation of young women entering the 
employment/ productive markets and contribute towards making them  more adapted to livelihood opportunities in the 
not too distant future.  
27. B
angladesh has been ranked sixth  among the ten most affected countries by climate change, during the period
of 1994 to 2013. The Climate Risk Index (CRI) also gives an average rate of 749.10 deaths per year, due to climate 
disasters during 1994 - 2013.  This project  therefore addresses the intersection of two key issues: (i) rural women in 
extreme poverty – as defined and identified by Government of Bangladesh and (ii) geographical locations with high 
climate variability and exposure to climate risks. Here, the focus of attention is on people affected by  sea level rise 
induced s alinity, cyclones and water shortages .  
Baseline Scenario  
28. Three baseline initiatives underpin the proposed project:
(a) S ocial safety -net programme baseline drawn from, among others, the National Social Security System
(NSSS).6 The NSSS 2015 reports that upper level poverty declined from 48.9 percent in 2000 to 40 percent 
in 2005; and 31.5 percent in 2010 to 24.8% in 2015, while the percent of chronic poor, defined as population 
below the lower poverty line (LPL), fell from 34.3 in 2000 to 17.6 in 2010 and 12.9 in 2015. The targeted 
project beneficiaries in this proposal are all below the lower poverty line.  
(b) Knowledge gained  from the experiences of the VGD and other similar  social protection  programmes.  
6  National Social Safety Net Programmes Budget 2013- 14 and 2014 -15 reproduced in Annex  II.


---
*Page 15*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 61 C 
(c) Climate change resilience  feasibility studies and baseline survey results, including  those produced under 
two Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) grants (administered by the World Bank) which supported 
strategic investments in critical areas of climate resilience planning and implementation. The first PPCR 
grant leveraged government funds to conduct a comprehensive assessment of Bangladesh’s institutional 
capacity for climate resilience planning in the public and private sectors.  
(d) The South Asia Women’s Resilience Index 2014 . This report discusses the findings of the South Asia 
Women’s Resilience Index (WRI), a tool that assesses countries’ capacity for disaster risk reduction and 
recovery and the extent to which the needs of women are integrated into national resilience- building efforts. 
The WRI was designed and constructed by The Economist Intelligence Unit  (EIU) using the latest available 
data for seven countries in South Asia and including Japan as a benchmark.  The findings show  that 
Bangladesh is the second lowest in terms of women’s resilience in South Asian countries.   
29. The Local Disaster Risk Reduction Fund  (LDRRF) of the Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme
(CDMP)7 identified risks faced by vulnerable communities through Community Risk Assessments (CRA), which were 
then translated into a Risk Reduction Action Plan (R RAP), and led to climate change sensitive (risk informed) micro-
planning at the local level. LDRRF lessons provide valuable evidence for demand- driven local climate change action 
as an effective and efficient means of engaging communities in developing their local solutions and approaches to 
adaptation.  
R
ural women’s livelihood assessments drawn from:  
30. UN Women, BCAS (2014) Baseline Study on the Socio- Economic Conditions of Women in three Eco- Zones8of
Bangladesh. A broad range of studies  on the environmental (including climate change) impact on livelihoods of 
women 9 have been conducted over the last five years in Bangladesh. According to a WASH baseline national study , 
evidence shows that women ( and adolescent girls , in particular ), suffer acutely as sanitation systems are destroyed . 
Many, consequently , suffer health problems such as urinary tract  infections . Schools located in flood- prone areas 
have poorer water supply (as well as  drainage) facilities, i.e. provision of having tube wells - compared to the schools 
located in cyclone affected areas. Only 63.6% of poor and extremely -poor households have access to adequate and 
safe drinking water throughout the year, while extremely -poor households often need to travel around 5-6 km per day 
to collect drinking water (CGC, 2013).  
31. T
he recommendations arising from a baseline study conducted by UN Women point s to the criticality of disaster
risk reduction and climate change adaptation in addressing the inequalities in the household and the community and 
to lessen women’s vulnerability. When women have more equality in opportunities for income generation, asset  
accumulation, resource management , health, education and decision making, their roles in disasters and climate 
change can move from victim to active leaders and change- makers. (UN Women 2014). The study further 
recommends:  
•To ensure that children, especially girls, return to school as soon as possible after climatic disasters to prevent
possible drop- out;
•Women need access to training on the production and sale of market able goods/services  in climatic shock -
prone areas ;
•Women’s knowledge of disaster risk reduction and climate change issues should be increased through gender -
specific training and information education communications  materials ;
•Women should be included in all levels of decision making in risk management ;
•Access to clean water and hygienic and safe toilets during disasters – either in shelters or other facilities - is a
priority for community health ;
7 CDMP is a UNDP programme implemented by Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief started in 2004 with two phases: 2004- 2009, and 2010-
2015 supported by the DFID, EU, Norway, Sweden, Australia and other development partners.  
8 The baseline study covered the area where the average household income in climate vulnerable areas is 71,833 BDT and about 39 percent of 
household annual income was earned by the agricultural sector, 25 percent from agricultural labour sources, 16 percent  from non- agricultural labour 
sources and 8 percent from businesses. In accordance with the seasonality and their variability, the rural households depend upon multiple sources 
of income including post -harvest activities, cow fattening and milking, goat farming, backyard poultry rearing, aquaculture, agriculture, horticulture, 
food processing, cane and bamboo work, silk reeling, handloom, garment making, fishing, fishnet and coir production, handicrafts, rural construction work. The study observed that the female headed household income was lower than the male headed household incomes in every climate vulnerable zone and in drought -prone areas it is almost half of male headed household income.  
9UNITAR studies weigh up the environmental impacts of some livelihood options promoted among rural women.


---
*Page 16*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 61 C 
•Income generation training for women in poverty and climate vulnerable areas is an effective strategy to buil d
women’s economic resilience, as well as provide a space for increased education and psycho logical- social
support around risk informed  preparedness, management and recovery; and
•As women are more at risk when disasters  unfold from extreme events, there is a need to have gender -specific
pre-disaster risk awareness, planning, response, and recovery programming interventions that address the clear
needs of women and their sources of vulnerability - lack of income, information, training, education (includi ng
s
chool access), and maternal health.
32. A
s a result of prevailing socio- economic structures, women tend to have lower levels of information, educatio n
and p
articipation in decision making, leading to low levels of resilience and adaptive capacity. 
T
able 1 : Recommendations for gender equity in coastal, drought and flood zones  
Flood -prone Zone and Coastal Zone  
Ensuring and prioritizing women’s safety in shelters, latrines and public spaces.  
Ensuring equal access for women and men to food and nutrition.  
Access to and gender sensitive accessible medical care (female doctors, private spaces, reproductive 
health) with the capa city to address women’s specific needs.  
Increase gender awareness of migration push and pull factors and the social and economic impacts on 
the household  
Maintaining enrollment of girls as well as boys in school. Assistance from male members of the fami ly with 
collection of fuel and water  
Ensure that women’s voices are heard as well as men’s voices at all stages of flood management (from 
preparedness to recovery) on their specific gendered needs and concerns  
Ensure that women and men are represented on all decision making and rescue/recovery committees.  
Source: UN Women 2014  
33. T
he critical nature of water and sanitation issues cannot be over -stated. Safe and fresh drinking water, sanitation
concerns and open sewerage affect women significantly , and more than men. Rana10 found that the effects of salinity 
on reproductive health included early or delayed menarche, birth defects, premature birth , Pelvic Inflammatory 
Disease (PID), Urinary tract infection (UTI) and other health related problems.  This has flow -on effects over future 
populations  in terms of the human development . 
34. The project design also draws on country experience in a range of comparable interventions. Valuable lessons
are incorporated from: (i) The Char s Livelihood Programme’s  approach (financed by DFID)  to reducing the 
vulnerability of the extreme poor in the riverine islands of North- West Bangladesh. The elements of the CLP include 
improved social and economic assets, reduced environmental and economic risks, and increased access to m arkets 
and services and sharing of best practice; (ii) The Shouhardo Project  (financed by USAID) , which  involved four inter -
related strategies including: Promotion of climate- resilient livelihoods; Disaster risk reduction; Capacity development; 
and, Advocacy and social mobilization; (iii) The Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme (CDMP), which 
introduced sustainable livelihoods, adaptation interventions, natural ecosystem management, social protection, and 
early warning community management in vulnerable localities; (iv) The Rural Employment Opportunities for Public 
Assets (REOPA) Project (funded by EU ; supported by UNDP ) which  created employment opportunities for destitute 
women and the landless poor, contributed  towards  improving the public assets to benefit rural communities and also 
strengthened the capacities of local government institutions for better management of social safety nets and pro poor 
initiatives ; (v) The Vulnerable Group Development for Ultra- Poor (VGDUP) Programme  (European Uni on funded)  
which attempted to contribute to reduce the level of deep poverty by enhancing the capacity of 80000 ultra- poor 
women by transferring assets and supplementary financial  assistance to create a persistent source of income and 
(vi) The RESOLVE (Regenerative Agriculture and Sustainable Livelihood for Vulnerable Ecosystems) programme of 
Oxfam which , among other things,  promoted livelihood diversification as a means of supporting climate resilience for 
the poor . 
35. Three important lessons from past initiatives are factored into the design of this  GCF supported project. Firstly,
GCF resources will build on ongoing and existing initiatives of the target communities to address the climate change 
risks instead of introducing initiatives that are new and not already accepted by local communities . These initiatives 
10 Muhammad Abdur Rahaman Rana, (2014) Impact of salinity on Women Reproductive Health in Saline Prone Rampal Upazila of Bagerhat, 
Bangladesh.


---
*Page 17*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 61 C 
range from diversification of  livelihood options, formation of new forms of local governance  systems for interventions 
that range from managing sluice gates to collective initiatives in maintaining embankments, raising the ground level 
of homesteads, and maintaining water channels and drains. Secondly, it has been found that the capacity of 
communities to find innovative solutions largely depends  on their recognition of  the issues as being within their 
capacity to address. This is also the case with addressing climate change vulnerabilities. Therefore, target ed capacity 
building measures and resources to help people to develop positive attitudes towards risk management and to 
mobilize communities to act together to adapt to climate change  is an important aspect of the proposed project . 
Thirdly, the flexibility for local institutions that support communities to adapt, be at the central or local level to 
continuous ly review and make adjustment s to risk reduction and management strategies  should be built-in together 
with capacity building  for local entities  to tackle both uncertainty and complexity associated with climate change 
adaptation. Other lessons that are taken into account in this project include: the maintenance of flexibility  and adaptive 
management ; the provision of space for innovation; the investment in capacity building for local staff of key institutions ; 
the allocation of adequate funds and time to ensure that a series of  impact s can be achieved; and, focusing on the 
household level where adaptation must ultimately be achieved.  
G
ender Perspective  
36. The proposed project is building upon some other successful projects implemented in Bangladesh like the Chars
Livelihood project (CLP). The CLP funded by DFID provided various livelihood resilience support to poor women in the river islands in Bangladesh. Its impact study conducted in 2013 concluded that targeting the women of the household has had a positive impact on their status. Women from core beneficiary households explained that attending weekly social development meetings has helped to develop their  confidence to move around the community 
and visit others. At the core of CLP- 1 activities was the Asset Transfer Programme (ATP), which involved an initial 
injection of capital into selected extreme poor households with no land, jobs or assets. According to the CLP evaluation, there is evidence to suggest greater levels of respect for women in the community and improved intra-household relationships.  
37. The same study took a critical view when looking at impact on intra- household relationships and decision -
making. It suggests that while some women felt that they were consulted more on decisions relating to how money is spent, there was virtually no change in the degree to which women make decisions on expenditure and loans. But in qualitative term, the same study provided vast evidences of more positive picture of decision- making. Some studies 
suggest more positive picture such as one done by Oxfam suggesting that livelihood grants exclusively targeted at women does not affect gender relationship at household level (Oxfam 2015;  International Programme Management). 
38. T
he CLP impact assessment suggested that males and females from core beneficiary households appeare d
s
atisfied that the female member was selected and intra- household relationships were not negatively affected. It 
suggests that programmes women only targeting criteria and processes did not aggravate community harmony (International Programme Management, 2011: Impact assessment of CLP phase - 1). There was improved social 
mobility of women within core beneficiary households and their interactions within the community. A recent study 
examined cash intervention targeting women in humanitarian setting and suggested a few (8%) of the respondents 
reporting disputes or conflicts within family on how the financial support should be spent (Ashmayar Nabi Asif, 2015 ).  
39. F
or the proposed project, UNDP has conducted 6 Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) during project development.
One of the key aspects during these discussions was to understand the current gender relationship at household and 
community level. Similarly, women and UP representatives were asked in FGD to tell us how climate resilient livelihood support and drinking water supply will make impact on gender. A compilation of the results of the 6 FGD 
findings are summarized in Annex II (Feasibility Report), which clearly demonstrate that the gender relationship both 
at household and community level is not a balance. Women are heavily engaged in unpaid domestic work and very 
marginalized in community and productive role.  
40. T
he project has integrated activities in order to promote behavioral change against gender -based violence
(GBV) , especially considering that women and adolescents girls become empowered and will have more a prominent 
decision -making role at the household level. For this reason, empowerment -based curriculum for women and 
adolescent girls will be offered and a sequence of community -based conversations with men and male leaders in the 
target districts will follow. These approaches are based on evaluation evidence and the monitoring and evaluation structure of the project, based on Randomized Control Trials will provide more evidence and data on this regard that will inform MoWCA’s other social protection programmes.


---
*Page 18*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 61 C 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
41. The project objective (to enhance adaptive capacity of extreme poor women, adolescent girls and their families ,
living in highly exposed areas  in southern, coastal  Bangladesh to climate  change- induced extreme events and 
shocks) will be attained by achieving the following project  outputs:  
Output 1:  Climate -Resilient Drinking Water Supply for Women and Girls Expanded. 
Output 2:  Adaptive Livelihoods of Women and Girls Supported.  
Output 3:  Institutional capacity within MOWCA to monitor, evaluate and report on adaptive social protection 
strengthened  
42. E
ach of these outputs are associated with eight impact -oriented activities. This design is underpinned by a theory 
of change which is described in section E.2 as well in the feasibility study (Annex II).  
43. T
he project is designed to overcome a number of key barriers  to enhancing the adaptive capacity of extreme
poor women, adolescent girls and their families , living in highly exposed  areas  in southern, coastal  Bangladesh to 
climate  change- induced extreme events and shocks . One is the extremely limited economic options available for 
women and adolescent girls to respond and overcome climate change shocks that impact their livelihoods and assets. 
Another barrier is access to safe drinking water. The current price of water in saline- prone areas restrict s access for 
safe drinking water from households, especially from women- headed households living under the extreme poverty 
line. Removing these key barriers will contribute towards not only em powering women and girls to climb at least 
several key rungs from the current poverty cycle that they find themselves trapped in but also advance resilience 
towards extreme events and shocks, especially in the context of water shortages . 
44. B
uilding on past knowledge of adapta tion and disaster risk reduction in Bangladesh, the project will be the means
through which the Government (led by the Ministry of Women and Children’s Affairs (MoWCA) will be able to take vital steps to build adaptive capacity of women,  girls and their communities to climate extremes and stress in six 
districts in Southern Bangladesh. The funding will be utilized to provide  (a) the  means  for communities to advance 
and embark upon resilient livelihood options including skills development (targeting adolescent girls); (b) improved 
access to higher quality, sustainable safe and fresh drinking water to 1,250,000 people in six districts in South-
western and southern Bangladesh;  and risk reduction measures by communities that minimize the likelihood of  asset 
erosion and loss . It will also provide capacity building support for MoWCA and other key government agencies to 
address poverty -gender -climate change related issues nationwide.  
45. I
n summary , the expected key Fund level impact is increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most
vulnerable people, communities and regions . The primary measurable benefits that will be derived from the project 
include:  
•Expansion of safe and fresh drinking water supply for 1,250,000 people in six districts where the current
access to safe and fresh drinking water is as low as 5% of the population;
•Promotion of climate resilient livelihood opportunities for  40,000 women and 17,000 adolescent girls i n six
d
istricts;
•The provision of early warning services directly to benefit 1.27 million women and girls and indirectly to 2.0
million people, including strengthened community participation in dissemination;
•Strengthened capacity of MoWCA to iteratively address the needs of women and girls as projected climate
change impacts unfold;
•Empowerment of women and adolescent girls in fragile coastal areas to address climate shocks and
overcome current levels of vulnerability.
I
nterlinked interventions - EWS training, expansion of water supply through RWH and support for climate resilient 
livelihoods  - will be targeted at 6 districts (Satkhira, Bagerhat, Barguna, Patuakhali, Khulna, Pirojpur).  
B
elow a table of the proposed target beneficiaries in the selected districts per intervention:


---
*Page 19*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 61 C 
Type of Intervention  Direct beneficiaries  Indirect beneficiaries  
CC resilient livelihoods  40,000 women &  
17,000 adolescent girls  260 ,000 people  - 
assuming an average 
household size of 4 
people  
Safe drinking water  1.25 M women and 
men who do not have 
access (50% are 
women/girls)  Total population of 
target project Upazila 
in six target districts.  
(Approx. 3 M)  
Early Warning  1.27 million (50% are 
women/girls)  2.0 M people  (early 
warning benefits by 
indirect dissemination)  
TOTAL:  1.27 million (50% are 
women/girls)  3 million (50% are 
women/girls)  
F
or more socio- economic data di saggregated by District/Upazila/Union Parishad, please refer to Annex 5 in the 
feasibility report.  
Output 1: Climate -Resilient Drinking Water Supply for Women and Girls Expanded 
A
ctivity 1.1   Social Mobilization for Community Level Rain Water Harvesting Management  
46. Studies suggest climate change pressures relating to water will affect women and girls the most. Women and
girls spend a significant amount of time collecting water in tidal flood, drought and salinity affected areas. This precious 
time takes away  from their other important livelihood and development activities. Moreover, women in the areas with 
water stress drink less water, and this results in significant health impacts as outlined in the baseline section C2.  
47. T
he impacts of climate change have had a significant impact on available potable water, on both surface and
groundwater. Due to the high level of salinity and arsenic in the water sources of Bangladesh’s rural areas, the level 
of safe drinking water is already scarce. These challenges are compounded by climate change driven impacts. As 
widely documented, health hazards develop where sources of water are saline and/or are contaminated. The 
available water in the project areas  is highly saline and the sources of fresh water are far away from their locat ion of 
residence.  The quality of the water sources do not comply with acceptable drinking standards .  
48. W
ith respect to groundwater in South- western Bangladesh, there are a number of potential sources of water  but
all of them are compromised one way or anot her. In the six districts selected for the intervention, there are a number 
of sources of drinking water. The sources include groundwater, water from sand pond filter and water produced through reverse osmosis of groundwater. The number of  acceptable (in terms of quality)  sources of potable surface 
water at scale to meaningfully and sustainably support communities that live in these areas  are scarce. Shallow 
aquifers (with a depth of 90 meters) have been severely impacted by sea level rise and salinity  intrusion. The existing 
groundwater in the shallow aquifer has salinity levels at 15 ppt (parts per thousand)  The salinity levels increases 
during the dry season. Alternatively, water can be sourced from the deep aquifer (350 meters) . However, during field 
investigations in the preparation of this proposal, water from this depth was also found to be saline. While some 
modelling has been undertaken into groundwater in southern Bangladesh, current modelling results do not indicate  
that there is sufficient potable water available in the aquifers to provide for the communities that live in these regions . 
49. Other available sources of water include sand filters . However, these are highly polluted and impacted by saline
ingress following storm events. The other options practiced at local level is the use of desalination plant s. The use of 
desalination plants for the provision of safe drinking water has a number of drawbacks  (expensive, difficult to maintain, 
is energy intensive, results in a byproduct that can result in adverse environmental impacts following processing of the water (eg. brine). etc.). Further investigation during the project preparation process found that desalination as an 
option would face significant sustainab ility issues without continued subsidization , even if adverse environmental


---
*Page 20*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 61 C 
impacts associated with such technological solutions could be efficiently dealt with . Moreover,  desalination assumes 
that there is an unlimited supply of groundwater , which there is not .  
50. Following an options analysis, t he GCF financed project will enable MoWCA and other relevant li ne
Ministries/Departments to ensure communities in the targeted region have access to safe drinking water . This will be 
achieved by using GCF resources to procure and install water harvesting tanks in the worse affected areas (see 
Activity 1.2).  
51. I
n the design of this activity, significant consultations have already taken place with communities including civil
society representati ves to identify project specific interventions. Building on what is already known, the process of 
engagement with local Governments, the exact location to install the water harvesting tanks, water management, 
distribution and maintenance will be led by wom en. The project will coordinate and foster partnerships among women 
beneficiaries with MoWCA and local governments through open space dialogues in the six target districts to define 
jointly an inclusive strategy for water management. In addition, a general  public awareness campaign will be jointly 
designed and rolled out  to inform about water management strategies in the face of worsening climate change risks . 
By encouraging extremely poor women to exert their leadership in managing such an important resour ce like water, 
the project aims to catalyze behavioral change among community members  and thereby overcome societal 
inequalities currently faced by women in Bangladesh.  
A
ctivity 1.2   Year round access to sustainable and environment friendly safe and fresh drinking water 
(1350 large scale rain water tanks)  
52. The project will make it possible for the Government to sustainably provide drinking water for 1.250 million  people
in six  target districts by making use of an internationally recognized technology that has many decades of proven 
reliability in some of the harshest environments. The project will make the funding available to ensure year round 
access to safe drinking water for the selected six districts, affected by severe salinity in southern Bangladesh, by 
installing 1350 rainwater harvesting tanks in project areas (605,000 liter per tank) at 450 locations (approximately 
1.815 million liters/site). Resources will also be used to install sterilization and purification processes including first 
flush diverters to ensure rainwater is potable.   
53. G
iven that the six districts receive rainfall of in excess of 2,000  mm of rain a year, with rainfall  projected t o
i
ncrease as a result of climate change, these tanks provide the most practical and sustainable solution  (compared to 
all realistic alternatives)  to meet the demands of the 1,250,000 beneficiaries  in the targeted region of Bangladesh. 
Importantly, the tanks require almost no maintenance.  Any limited operational and maintenance costs, likely to be 
minimal, will be covered by Government as  well as community based management schemes.  Formal agreements 
with communities will only be entered into when there is confirmation of funding, not prior to it given legal and other 
issues.  
54. W
ater capture and retention from the 1,350 rainwater harvesting tanks will fulfill the total daily water requirements 
for 1, 250,000 people based on available rainfall data even in the worst case scenario (eight month dry season) which 
is highly unlikely given current rainfall data and the  likelihood that rainfall (based on climate change scenarios for the 
region) will increase as a result of climate change  (refer to feasibility study ). The on- going costs of water production, 
following the initial construction costs, will be minimal as only  sterilization and purification of water; and water quality 
assessments to ensure the potability of the water will be carried out every 3 months to maintain drinking water standards. Importantly compared to alternatives to the proposed technology  (such as desalinization) , there will be no 
major environmental and social impacts. By contrast, any overflow from the tanks, which is considered likely, especially during rain periods will be used to recharge groundwater aquifers, thereby reducing their salinity. A s such, 
this is a win -win for environmental and social sustainability. Finally, the proposed intervention is extremely cost -
effective, in that the overall cost is US$32 per beneficiary to provide safe drinking water for life. (See Economic Analysis).  
55. T
he DWA in partnership with 118 Union Parishad will implement the activities of establishing and managing rai n
w
ater harvesters. The DWA will form four committees at different levels to ensure the quality, effectiveness, efficiency 
and maintenance of the system: procurement quality assurance committee, technical quality assurance committee, 
field level implementation monitoring committee, and operation and maintenance committee, as shown below:


---
*Page 21*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 61 C 
56. Loc
al Governments (Union Parishad) in each district have the roles and responsibilities to provide the supply of
drinking water. Each Union Parishad has a S tanding Committee to oversee the operation and maintenance and 
management of the water supply system.  A Water Management Group for each rainwater harvesting syst em will be 
formed women who will collect water from it  and report to the Standard Committee. The Water Management Group 
will be formed by 7 users and will be responsible for one year. Each group will ensure the operation and maintenance 
of the rainwater harvesting system. The Standing Committee and Water Management Group will determine the 
maximum drinking water allocation of each household. T he tasks involved in the operation and maintenance of the 
water tanks is definitely not onerous; however , having the beneficiaries as the “managers” of the project will ensure 
that feel ownership to ensure water supplies are maintained at a high standard.  Further, it is anticipated that the 
women beneficiaries will lead the decision of distribution of  drinking water to  the overall community and ensuring all 
community members are provided equal access. This will give the beneficiaries an important role in their community 
as the “owners” of the water. By assuring women representation in decision making in RWH management, we are assuring women to have equal access, control and distribution of benefits of water supply system.  
57. T
here is no cost that will be borne by GCF grants to operate these committees. These committees are already
in place and form the way in which support  is provided on the ground. The GCF financed project will simply make 
use of these systems in line with country driveness and respectful of country systems. UNDP will obviously oversee this as the GCF AE. The only GCF related expenditure is with respect to the formation of water management group 
for each water plant and that will be formed under the activity 1.1 and GCF resource will be used for the requisite social mobilization.  
58. T
he proposed institutional arrangement is not new and is built on existing institutional arrangements on water -
related activities by government and non- government agencies. This is critical for country ownership, driveness and 
being respectful of systems in place. UNDP has confidence that the current system that is described is the most 
appropriate based on our field level experience. These mechanisms are thoroughly reviewed and prescribed as most suitable and sustainable and accountable for Bangladesh.  
Output 2: Adaptive Livelihoods of Women and Girls Supported  
Activity 2.1   On- farm and off- farm climate adaptive livelihoods of 40,000 extreme poor women  
59. This activity will contribute to the empowerment of the targeted women and consequently, a reduction in their
vulnerabilities  to climate change induced risks. The feasibility study that underpins this project (see Annex II) suggests 
that the most vulnerable women are capable of transforming their existing livelihoods and/or of adopting new livelihoods that are more resilient to a changing climate. Their prospects are currently constrained by the lack of 
financial means, material and technical skills, technical assistance support and tools.  
60. GCF resources will be used to address these constraints and build capacity of women so that they can mak e
adjustments to their income streams . In part, this will be done by financing activities that targeted  women and girls


---
*Page 22*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 61 C 
identify and implement viable climate resilient livelihood options  (Adaptation Support  Mechanism - ASM) . GCF 
resources will be made available through MoWCA, using the national implementation modality, to qualifying 
beneficiaries that will permit climate resilient  livelihood options to be pursued.  
61. D
uring a 24-month period, 20,000 women and 8,500 adolescent girls will be supported to implement activities
that will allow the pursuit of climate resilient livelihood options. A second 24-month period will result in a n additional  
20,000 women participants and 8,5 00 adolescent girls receiving support  for skill building to pursue climate resilient 
livelihoods . GCF resources  of US $385 total/beneficiary/cycle will be provided to each of the 40,000 women while US 
$325 in total per beneficiary  per 24- month period will be made available to each of the 17,0 00 adolescent girls  to 
utilize . The amounts  identified that MoWCA will use to finance such activities are based on best practices from studies 
of other similar schemes in practice in Bangladesh.  
62. W
omen and girls will have to fulfil the following requirements outlined in the Selection Criteria below to be eligible
for support : 
•Gender: Female;
•Age: Women between 18-49 years old; Adolescent girls between 1 5-17 years old;
•Location: Living within the six programme districts targeted by project (Satkhira, Bagerhat, Barguna,
Patuakhali, Khulna, Pirojpur);
•Residency:
oBeneficiaries must live within a rural setting in unions with a population of less than 50,000.
oBeneficiary must have a national ID as evidence.
oBeneficiary has not left the village more than 6 months in last five years other than being displaced
due to disaster. In case of newly married women residing in the area, the husband has  a track record
of five years residency in the village.
•Income: Household income less than $1.25 USD per person per day and must be of low economic status,
having few or no assets, being compelled to accept employment at low wage.
•Household Status:
oWomen beneficiaries must be from a household, where there are no able male members to earn
livelihood.
oThe preference will be given to those households, where there are more number of dependentmembers on the women (household members chronically ill, physically, mentally and visually
impaired or disabled) .
oThe preference will be given if the woman is widowed, divorced, or separated/abandoned.
oFor adolescent girls, they must be selected if they belong to households in extreme poverty , wher
e
t
here is not even any eligible women or men (due to disability or very elderly members) to purs ue
adap
tive livelihoods.
oWomen or girls of those households which are affected by cyclone, tidal surge and sea level rise in
last 10 years and could not recover.
oWomen and girls from those household which are at risk to climate change impacts .
oWomen and girls from those households, whose livelihoods are affected by the impact of climate
change.
•House Condition: the home must be made of non- concrete primary material and does not contain any
concrete construction;
•Land: The household possess less than 15 decimal (606 m2) in previously usable agricultural land, an d
pos
sess less than 25 decimal (1,011 m2) total land;
•Other requirements to assess eligibility :
oT
he women beneficiary cannot have been a recipient of a GoB ’s or any NGO’s schemes of similar
nature and/or quantity of support within the last two years;
oAdolescent girls’ beneficiaries must have completed primary education.
63. The selection of beneficiaries will be undertaken by  MoWCA /DWA with support of  local NGOs (whose
participation in this programme will also be subject to an open procurement process) led by  MoWCA. The NGOs will 
be competitively selected following UNDP’s procurement rules and regulation and will enter into subsidiary 
agreements with UNDP  (to be completed in year 1 of implementation). Selected NGOs will need to demonstrate 
financial, probity and technical capacity assessment, as well as be subject to approval by the Project Board.


---
*Page 23*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 61 C 
64. Using GCF resources, the local NGOs will be tasked to develop Household Adaptive Livelihood Profiles (HALP)
for selected beneficiaries. The profiles will include baseline information on basic household demographics, ownership 
of assets, existing livelihood options and both the women and their assets’ exposure to climate change, and 
recommend options for preferred and suitable livelihoods and assistance that might be required for pursuing the 
adaptive livelihood. The HALPs will form the broad livelihood strategy for each beneficiary and they will also be utilized 
by th e field workers to plan their nurturing and follow -up support to the beneficiaries. The HALPs will be conducted 
by the trained field staff of the implementing partner  and NGOs.  
65. M
oWCA will conduct a training programme for beneficiaries with a group of qualified trainers from their partner
NGOs with proven experience in capacity building of most vulnerable women and adolescent girls. The trainings will 
have two objectives. First, the training will raise awareness of climate change risks on women and girls so as to 
contribute to changing attitudes around the behaviors and practices in everyday life. Secondly, an Income Generating Activity skill development training package will target enhance livelihoods and self -reliance. The livelihoods trainings 
will include a gender empowerment approach that will increase women’s agency, voice in and decision making capacity within their households and communities. The training programme will be supplemented with en gagement 
of the private sector (Local Small and Medium Enterprises) that will provide apprenticeship training in close collaboration with Government Technical Training Centers.   
66. G
CF resources  will be transferred by MoWCA through a secure electronic transfer mechanism to individual
beneficiary accounts (please see Annex II – Section Adaptation Support  Mechanism). Such type of mechanisms have 
been widely used by the humanitarian community and the UN agencies in Bangladesh with significant cost efficiency 
and security.  
67. T
he support that will be provided to 40,000 women and 17,000 adolescent girls during the two 24- month cycles
(20,000 women and 8,500 adolescent girls per cycle) to pursuit of climate resilient livelihood options will be monitored 
based both on inputs and results described below:  
•Completion of Household Adaptation Livelihood Profile (HALP);
•Completion of t raining on specific adaptive l ivelihood options  (to be delivered by MoWCA), and a financial
plan to implement measures to pursue an adaptive livelihood;
•Verification of purchase of materials to implement the HALP by project team; and
•Verification by field staff of the result of the livelihood development trainings  and subsequent ( and
at
tributable) generation of income.
68. Mo
WCA and MoWCA’s partner NGOs will monitor progress against above key milestones. In the case of any
beneficiary (women and/or adolescent girl) unable to complete the sequence of the key milestones, financial support will be frozen while project team and partner NGO investigate main reasons of delay.  
69. A
 short list of proposed livelihoods that GCF resources could support are listed below :
Example of possible livelihoods  
Hydroponics  Ring Vegetable Cultivation  Rice Fish Culture  
Seed Preservation  Salt Cultivation  Shrimp Cultivation  
Plant Nursery  Golpata Plantation  Lakha (Lac) Cultivation  
Compost/Organic Manure and 
Traditional Fuel Preparation Charu Making (Fish Trapper)  Reed Cultivation  
Tailoring and Embroidery  Kewra tree plantation  Handicrafts (fish cage, bamboo -
made goods, snail -made toys)  
Poultry Farm  Cattle Rearing and Daily Farm  Small Business/ Grocery Shop


---
*Page 24*
---

D
ETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 61 C 
Floating Agriculture and Kandi 
Method of Cultivation  Duck Rearing  Ground Nut Tree Plantation  
Murta Cultivation and Weaving 
Shitol Pati  Homestead Gardening  W
inter-seasonal Cake Making 
(Pitha)  
70. T
he proposed livelihoods are currently not implemented in the target districts at the scale required given financial
constraints and limited safe water supply. In addition, the proposed project, MoWCA will provide women with training 
to implement livelihoods based on their current socio -economic condition and preferences. By combining financial 
support, expansion of the safe water supply and skills training, GCF resources are targeted to overcome interlinked 
barriers preventing extreme vulnerable women and girls to increase their resilience to climate change risks.  
F
or more detail description of climate resilient livelihoods, please refer to “Annex 7: List of Practiced Adaptive 
Livelihood Options for Women in Bangladesh” and “Annex 12: Technical Description of Adaptive Livelihoods” in the 
feasibility study.  
71. T
he project includes a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to allow beneficiaries to make their complaints
and/or grievances about any aspect of this social protection programme including for example, their eligibility, fiduciary or Gender based violence (for details refer to the “Environmental and Social Management Plan” – Annex VI ). The 
Project’s GR M will focus on mobilizing and lodging grievances at Union Parishad level, with strong linkages to the 
upazila administrative structure to address grievances that can be solved at that level The field- based project team 
will provide intensive follow -up, on- job training and additional information for the entire duration of the project to 
support the beneficiaries to make the most cost -effective use of the AG.  
72. W
hen a beneficiary opts to drop out (including by failure to complete steps), as part of the operat ional
ar
rangements already in place the following protocols will apply: (1) payments due will be immediately and temporarily 
halted. (2) MoWCA staff will initiate one- to-one discussions with the beneficiary to understand better the challenge 
the recipient faces. Possible remedial measures will be discussed in order to help the beneficiary stay with the programme. (3a) If the beneficiary can remain with the programme with this additional assistance, resources will be unfrozen. (3b) If the beneficiary is unable to remain in the programme , then MoWCA will attempt to find an alternative programme that can support the beneficiary and assistance from the GCF financed adapted livelihoods support programme will be discontinued. Furthermore, MoWCA will replace those  leaving the programme with other potential 
beneficiaries who are in the MoWCA registry waiting list.  
73. T
he overall management framework for the Adaptation Support Mechanism  is explained in detail in Annex II –
Section Adaptation Support  Mechanism.  
2.
2. Skills on climate resilient off- farm livelihoods (vocational, trades and green technologies) for 1 7,000 
adolescent girls  
74. Activity 2.1 will target the 40,000 women beneficiaries while activity 2.2 will target 17,000 adolescent girls
beneficiaries. Both activities are interlinked and will use the same management structure. This activity will contribute to the empowerment and skill development of adolescent girls by providing training on climate -resilient livelihood 
opportunities and counseling.  
75. T
he transfer of skills required for adaptive livelihood will be assessed and prioritized for each of the HALPs. T he
pr
oject plans to deliver to targeted beneficiaries, locally relevant and appropriate skills to support the pursuit of 
livelihood options that are resilient to climate change risks and impacts. This support will be designed to help adolescent girls to develop skills to adopt climate resilient livelihood options as they come of age to enter the labor 
market . The support includes technical and vocational education and training (TVET) for those girls who has dropped 
education and engaged in domestic works to earn wages for family. The TVET on those skills which is helpful for 
climate smart livelihoods, jobs or entrepreneurship.  
76. 17,000 adolescent girls will become the recipients of skill building, counselling, informal solidarity gro up
f
ormation and career advice support. They will also receive learning stipend in trances scheduled in the HALPs to 
access formal training from existing training service providers and also, in relevant cases, apprenticeship training. As 
in activity 2.1 above, the trainings for adolescent girls will adopt a gender empowerment approach to complement the


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 61 
 
 C 
livelihoods trainings. Trainers will follow standards as per the Tech nical and Vocational Education and Training 
(TVET) system in Bangladesh11, which includes gender responsive training, delivering training courses to promote 
the interests of adolescent girls and young women, and the use of women instructors. These training courses would 
play a critical contributing role to enable adolescent girls to take up opportunities in the current and future job market. 
The training will be provided by Government training institutes as well the private sector or NGOs. This is based on  
existing models MoWCA is implementing with UNICEF in other areas. GCF funds  will help to scale up this model in 
climate change vulnerable districts.  
 77. Skill training will be based in Skill Transfer Initiative for Adolescent Girls currently implemented in other districts 
which include the following curricula:  
• GEMS (Gender Equity Movement in Schools) - Classroom based training, where the teachers will conduct 
sessions following the GEMS curriculum. This curriculum involves the role of boys and girls and gender 
equality.  
• Life skill training - Adolescents are trained on sexual and reproductive health, apprenticeship, confidence 
building and leadership.  
• Leadership development, rights & entitlement, primary health care & nutrition, financial literacy, disaster  risk 
reduction, following TVET approach.  
• In addition, MoWCA will establish informal clubs in each union, based on the successful initiative “Club for 
Adolescent Club (kishori Club)” as a place for these girls to  reflect  upon their learning with each other . The 
club would also function as a community knowledge center.  
 
78. The empowerment -based curricula to be offered to adolescent girls is intended to also generate co- benefits in 
terms of behavioral change to reduce gender based violence (GBV). As stated in the theory of change:  
o Societal inequalities in Bangladesh have limited women’s decision making efforts that are being hampered by climate change impacts.  
o Extremely limited economic options available for women and adolescent girls to respond and overcome 
climate change shocks that impact their livelihoods and assets.  
 
79. MoWCA will conduct the training following a curricula for both women and adolescent girls with a group of 
qualified trainers from their partner NGOs with proven experience in capacity building. The trainings will have two objectives. First, the training will raise awareness of climate change risks on women and girls so as to contribute to 
changing attitudes around the behaviors and practices in everyday life. Secondly, a skill development training 
package will target enhance livelihoods and self -reliance. The livelihoods trainings will include a gender 
empowerment approach that will increase women’s agency, voice in and decision making capacity within their households and communities. The training programme will be supplemented with engagement of the private sector 
(Local Small and Medium Enterprises)  that will provide apprenticeship training in close collaboration with 
Government Technical Training Centers.   
 80. In addition, GCF resources will support establishment of real time efficiency and longitudinal impact monitoring 
mechanisms for gathering lessons and policy evidence (Output 3). Impact evaluation techniques such as 
Randomized control trials (RCT) will be used to assess actions to pursue climate resilient livelihoods by beneficiary women and adolescent girls.  
 81. By encouraging extremely poor women t o exert their leadership in managing such an important resource like 
water and decisions – making in livelihoods at the household level, the project aims to catalyze behavioral change 
among community members and thereby overcome societal inequalities currently faced by women in Bangladesh.  
 
2.3   Establish, capacitate and equip women based early warn ing volunteer team s in 357 wards  
82. Bangladesh has a well -established early warning system for tidal flood (surge and high tide) and cyclones. The 
information is disseminated through radio and television . Further at the local level this is done through various means 
                                                             
11 Bangladesh’s National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty Reduction (NSPR) appropriately identifies the strategic goal of promot ing vocational 
training and skill development to accelerate the growth process, which will help Bangladesh reduce poverty and vulnerability. The main emphasis of 
the strategy is to address the challenge for the skill development system which is related to the inadequate orientation to t he labor market. Formal 
providers of technical and vocational education and training do not have str ong linkages with the private sector employers that drive the changing 
patterns of labor demand, nor do they have proper incentives to build those connections, which would ensure that skill development courses are 
relevant and useful to both graduates and employers. Please see an assessment on TVET in the link 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/BANGLADESHEXTN/Resources/publications/384630- 1209074736457/Bangladesh_Nov2006.pdf


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 61 
 
 C 
and channels such as the local government, local disaster committees and NGOs. Dedicated volunteers of cyclone 
preparedness programme in Bangladesh and Red Cross in Orissa also help in the dissemination of early warnings.  
 
83. However, people living in marginal areas, many of whom  are women, do not get relevant  information on time. 
In general, only 65% people in Southwest coast of Bangladesh receive early warnings in time (Alam K, 2008) in a 
context where only 15% and 5% most vulnerable households have radio and television,  respectively. Knowledge 
about cyclones, access to early warning, preparedness information an d people’s ability to make use of these can 
significantly reduce the impact of cyclones and flooding. A s many as 40% of vulnerable people in Bangladesh do not 
understand the meaning of the cyclone warnings (ibid).   
84. However, women and girls still have chal lenges with accessing early warnings on time and making use of 
therm. While the Cyclone Preparedness Programme (CPP) includes volunteers of both sexes it does not otherwise 
take into account gender considerations in volunteer management, equipment distribution training or message delivery.  
 
85. GCF resources will be used to address the additional costs associated with the CPP to increase the number of 
women and adolescents volunteers and ensure that they have access to training opportunities and equipment 
necessary to perform their role. GCF resources will not seek to generate early warning information. The intention is, 
rather, to invest in proven community -based and women friendly dissemination mechanisms that ensure timely 
delivery of the information rel evant for climate change adaptation based on traditional ways of organization where 
groups and group leaders will be formed and selected, respectively.  More importantly, GCF resources will be used 
to increase the number of women and adolescents  in the Cycl one Preparedness Programme (CPP) and to tailor 
climate change adaptation Plans to their needs.  
 
86. The project will support social organizations to reach and deliver early warning information with clear advice on 
what to do and make sure that women understand the need for action. In particular, 300 community -based women 
volunteer groups will be formed. These groups will provide direct access to early warning information to 1. 27 million 
people and could reach another 2.0 million by other means of communication.  These communities are located in 
areas of Bangladesh that are highly susceptive to climate change disaster events.  
 
Output 3: Institutional capacity within MOWCA to monitor, evaluate and report on adaptive social protection 
strengthened  
 
3.1   Set up system for performing impact evaluation of climate resilient livelihoods.  
87. GCF resources will be used to provide risk management information to all targeted beneficiaries  throughout the 
project  lifetime . This constant support will ensure that beneficiaries are well informed on best ways to pursue resilient 
livelihoods , especially the training s that will be conducted by MoWCA . By the end of the first 24- month period; 20,000 
women and 8,5 00 adolescent girls will be beneficiaries of the support including  livelihoods training, lessons learned, 
information.  Data will be compiled and analyzed (guided by experimental design/impact evaluation principles) by 
MoWCA  to track results . Given the learning opportunity that this support will present, GCF resources wil l also be 
used to gather the evidence necessary to inform and integrate climate change risks and adaptation interventions into 
other government run social protection programmes. The multiplier benefit of the GCF investment will therefore be 
significant as other larger social protection programmes are also adjusted to reflect and adjust to the realities of 
climate change.  
 
88. GCF resources  will therefore finance the  establish ment of  longitudinal impact monitoring mechanisms for 
gathering valuable data that will  enable evidence based lessons and policy to be formulated. A tracking system will 
be developed and implemented based on individual profiles to ensure beneficiaries are being provided with the best possible assistance and information to adapt to climate change. Impact evaluation (based on the principles of 
experimental design) will be conducted by an independent local third-party (procured through an open process) to 
capture whether or not and how the project interventions lead to increase adaptive capacity  of the beneficiaries . 
 
89. GCF resources will also be used  to develop a toolkit to support the transformation of other ongoing social 
protection programs towards ones which are climate change risk informed. This will ensure that the gains and 
achievements as well as lessons learned in the targeted districts spill over to other  parts of Bangladesh.  The toolkit 
is designed to be utilized by MoWCA’s  partners and will include a number of components including modules on 
programme design and management and assess ment of adaptive capacity to increase resilience to climate change.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 61 
 
 C 
It will include a flexible methodology to consider and apply evidence based learning from other GoB social protection 
programs at different institutional levels. The toolkit will also be s hared with other countries supported by UNDP  and 
GCF  on similar initiatives. Moreover, based on the experiences from existing lessons and best practices, a capacity 
building programme will be designed for staff at different levels from NGOs, local government institutions and the 
Department of Women Affairs (DWA) offices that will inform other social protection programs as well as to the social 
protection reform process during the NSSS implementation to on addressing climate change impacts while integrating 
fully a gender perspective into safety nets projects.  
 
90. The project will also organize high level policy dialogue (at the Director, Secretary and Ministerial level)  to 
support the development of a policy environment for adaptive social protection that are likely to result in changes to 
the way broader GoB  policy is delivered. The project will capitalize on policy influence opportunities over time, 
including the 7th Five Year Plan, Vision paper beyond 2021 and implementation of the NSSS  as well as various 
initiatives related to advancing the SDG agenda in Bangladesh. The lessons from the project will be gathered, 
documented and shared through partnering with national and international knowledge institutions.  
 
3.2   Establishing a Gender and Climate Change Cell in th e Department of Women’s Affairs  for Promotion of 
Adaptive Social Protection  
91. Efforts by GoB  to integrate climate change into their policy and planning are constrained by the lack of  
sustained technical support and lack of policy evidence. To address this, the project will support the GoB  to establish 
a Climate Change Cell within DWA, which will be modelled on a similar cell (http://www.climatechangecell.org.bd) 
supported by the UNDP i n the Department of Environment. One of the main purposes of development of Gender and 
Climate Change Cell is to conduct advocacy for adaptive social protection within MoWCA and stronger gender and 
climate change dimension in all relevant safety net and development programmes implemented by other ministries. 
The cell will play a number of roles: (1) Lead the knowledge management component of the project; (ii) make available 
lessons from the project to policy makers; (iii) take forward activities after the project.  
92. During the two 24- month cycles of the livelihoods support output, a system to perform impact evaluation 
based on randomized control trials (activity 3.1) will serve as the structure to monitor and evaluate results from the project. RCT will be used to generate information and data that will enable evidence- based lessons and policy to be 
formulated at MoWCA. This compilation of data, information of RCT reports and analysis, annual performance 
evaluations and development of toolkits to inform other s ocial protection programmes will be used by the proposed 
Gender and Climate Change Cell.  
93. Mainstreaming of CCA into the national social protection programme involves ensuring that climate change 
risks are taken into account, something that is not currently  done. This involves not just targeting beneficiaries but 
also the type of social protection support that is provided, how it is delivered, who does it and so many other questions. 
It also requires long- term intervention, not just one off workshops and tra ining including changing mind- sets, gathering 
political momentum, demonstrating by example, knowledge generation and the like.
 Department of Women Affairs 
(DWA) will lead the knowledge sharing process - currently managing large social protection programmes -  to the 
social protection reform process during the NSSS12 implementation to integrating fully climate change and a gender 
perspective into safety nets projects nationwide.  
94. The Cell will be capacitated to support MoWCA  in carrying out climate adaptive programmes, compile lessons, 
and raise issues for policy planning. MoWCA  will ensure continuity of the cell with finance and human resources 
beyond the project period. After the initial use of GCF resources to set up the Cell and capacities within in, the GoB  
will assume costs related to this cell so that its operations continue well into the future after the GCF resources are 
used.  Technical support will also be provided to MoWCA as well as other national entities to be able to manage GCF 
financing including r eporting which will also be beneficial for Bangladesh’s direct access aspirations.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
95. MoWCA is the sponsor of the project. MoWCA is a GoB Ministry mandated to develop and implement policies 
and programmes to establish and preserve legal and social rights of women and children. MoWCA has an annual 
budget of roughly US$ 200 million.  It works towards empowerment of women and girls, prevention of violence against 
women, and ensuring safety and security for women in the workplace. MoWCA is also responsible for the co -
                                                             
12 Bangladesh’s National Social Security System (NSSS) is complex, comprising of 142 social safety net programmes managed by 23 implementing 
ministries/divisions.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 61 
 
 C 
ordination and monitoring of development activities related to women (Women in Development – WID) in the different 
Ministries.  
 
96. With a mission statement of establishing the rights of women and children and involving women in all mainstream 
development activities through women empowerment, the ministry delivers  on six major functions: (i) Formulation 
and implementation of the National  Women’s Advancement Policy and National Child Policy; (ii) Initiation of 
programmes for the welfare and development of women and children; (iii) Establishment and preservation of legal 
and social rights of women and children; (iv) Initiation of programmes  for the empowerment of women including the 
creation of employment opportunities for women; (v) Formulation of law for eradication of violence against women and children; and (vi) Coordination and monitoring of the activities of different ministries relati ng to women’s 
advancement through the Focal Points of Women in Development (WID). The allocation for MoWCA  in the national 
budget has increased over time but is yet not sufficient to effectively implement its full mandate.  
 97. The programme of MoWCA is implemented by the Department for Women’s Affairs (DWA ) which is led by a 
Director General. DWA implements the VGD programme through its district and sub- district offices with support from 
a Union
13 VGD women’s selection committee and a Sub- district VGD Implementation Committee14. Starting in 1972, 
this social safety net aims to address the marginalization of the vulnerable poor, focusing on underprivileged women’s 
food security, nutrition and capacity development. Currently, it prov ides assistance to 750,000 vulnerable ultra- poor 
women across all 64 districts of Bangladesh, which makes it the largest programme of its kind exclusively targeting 
women (Ahmed et al., 2004). The Government has committed to increase coverage of the two sc hemes to 3.2 million 
women in the VWB by 2015/16. The World Food Programme (WFP) in 2012 established a capacity -support unit in 
the MoWCA to support the Vulnerable Group Development (VGD) programme. The initiative aims to strengthen 
policies and programme design for effective implementation as well as to enhance systems, tools and staff capacities. 
WFP also supports MoWCA with implementing the Investment Component of VGD (ICVGD), which adds business 
development and a cash grant for productive investments, i mproved quality of training and implementation as well as 
a focus on nutrition15. 
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
Not applicable  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
98. There are no applicable licenses or permits for the implementation of the project. In addition, there are no tax 
implications or regulations applicable for resilient livelihood support, community -based early warning system, 
community -based disaster prepare dness measures and small equipment. As MoWCA is the Executing Entity, GoB ’s 
rules and regulations will be applied.  Following Public Procurement Regulation of the Government of Bangladesh 
Value Added Tax and Income Tax will be applicable for the project. UN DP enjoys VAT and Tax exemptions which 
will be applicable for the part of the procurement plan implemented by UNDP. However, insurance will be applicable 
for all major project assets including project vehicles, ICT equipment and staff recruited for the project under UNDP  
rules and procedures . According to tax regulation, women who earn under BDT 275000 are tax exempt. The 
proposed project does not anticipate any transactions  at the individual level beyond this tax threshold.  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
99. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement  (SBAA)  between UNDP and the Government of Bangladesh, the Country 
Programme Action Pl an (CPAP), and as policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP (see 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining- a-Project.aspx ).  
 
100. The national executing entity -  also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner/Executing Entity’ in 
UNDP terminology -  is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures, including the NIM Guidelines. These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, 
environmental and social safeguards, and other performance standards. In legal terms, this is ensured through the 
                                                             
13 A Union is the lowest local government ad ministrative structure of Bangladesh led by elected representatives.   
14 The Union committee prepares a list which then goes up the chain of command: to the Upazila and then to the district VGD comm ittee chair (who 
is the District Commissioner) and to the Relief and Rehabilitation Directorate. The process of selecting VGD cardholders is widely recognized to be 
sensitive, but it is also closely but informally scrutinized by the community as well as officially by all the relevant commi ttees, NGO partners and 
monitors from WFP and the ministries. Generally there is little controversy about who gets selected into the programme – although there is always 
concern about who gets left out (see del  Ninno, 2000 and Ahmed et al., 2004).  
15 https://www.wfp.org/countries/bangladesh/operations


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 61 
 
 C 
national government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance  Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP 
project document which will be signed by the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity to govern the use of the funds.  
The SBAA was signed with the Government of Bangladesh in 1986.  
 
101. The (national) Implementing Partner/E xecuting Entity  for this project is the Department for Women’s 
Affairs (DWA) of the Ministry of Women and Children Affairs (MoWCA)  which is accountable to UNDP for managing 
the project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achi eving project outcomes, and for the 
effective use of resources  made available by UNDP .   
 
102. The management arrangements for this project are summarized below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Project Board  
Senior Beneficiary  
Department of Women Affairs DG -
DWA; Representative from ERD 
(NDA); and other ministries and 
Civil Society Members  Executive  
Secretary MoWCA  
 Senior Supplier  
UNDP  
Project Assurance  
UNDP  National Project Director   
(Appointed by DWA ) 
Head of Climate Resilient Livelihood Cell  
Project Manager  
(Recruited by UNDP and report ing 
to UNDP  and DWA ) 
Programme Team  
Livelihood Specialist, DRR 
Specialist , WASH Specialist,    
Social Protection  Specialist  Monitoring and 
Knowledge Mgt. Team  
M&E Expert, Research 
Officers, MIS, Reporting  Technical Support Team  
Policy and Comms 
Specialist, Adult Learning 
Expert, Gender  & Social 
Development  Expert, 
Comms Officers  
 Operation s Team  
Finance and Admin 
Expert, Audit Expert, 
Finance Officers, ICT 
Consultant  
Field Implementation  
District and Sub -district Officials from DWA, District Project M&E Officers, Technical Associates and NGO Partnership


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 61 
 
 C 
 
Fund Channeling Mechanism for GCF Project –  Bangladesh  
 
 
Governance Arrangements 
103. UNDP’s overall role  as an Accredited Entity is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its 
Headquarter s, Regional  and Country Office units.  This role includes: (i) project preparation oversight; (ii) project 
implementation oversight and supervision, including financial management; and (iii) project completion and 
evaluation oversight.  It also includes oversight roles in relation to reporting and knowledge- management.  The 
‘project assurance ’ function of UNDP is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent 
project over sight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management milestones are 
managed and completed. Project assurance has to be independent of the Project Manager; therefore, the Project 
Board cannot  delegate any of its assurance respons ibilities to the Project Manager. A UNDP Programme Officer, or 
M&E Officer, typically holds the Project Assurance role on behalf of UNDP  at the country level, with support from, in 
this case, the Global Environmental F inance Unit (responsible for managing GCF resources) at the HQ and Regional 
level. The ‘senior supplier’ role of UNDP is to represent the interests of the parties which provide funding and/or 
technical expertise to the project (designing, developing, facil itating, procuring, implementing) , which in this case is 
the Green Climate Fund. The senior supplier’s primary function within the Board is to provide guidance regarding the 
technical feasibility of the project. The senior supplier ’s role must have the aut hority to commit or acquire supplier 
resources required.  
 
104. The project will be governed by a Project Board. The Board will consist of a group of representatives responsible 
for making consensus -based strategic and management decisions for the project. It w ill oversee the project 
implementation; review compliance with GoB , UNDP  and GCF requirements; and ensure implementation of the 
management plan for the risks identified. The Board will be comprised of:  
• An Executive (role represented by National Implementing Partner) that holds the project ownership and chairs 
the Board. The Executive will be Secretary who is the Chief Administrator of the Ministry/MoWCA ; 
• A Senior Supplier representative providing guidance regarding the technical feasibility of th e project, compliance 
with donor requirements, and rules pertaining to use of project resources. This role will be fulfilled by UNDP in its 
capacity as GCF IA;  
• A Senior Beneficiary representative (role represented by DWA) who ensures the realization of pr oject benefits 
from the perspective of project beneficiaries ; and


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 61 
 
 C 
• The National Project Director (deputized from MoWCA), who is responsible for overall direction, strategic 
guidance, and timely delivery of project outputs.  
 
105. The Board will also include additional membership including representatives from relevant GoB  ministries, Civil 
Society Organizations, Development Partners and the Bangladesh National Designated Authority  to the Green 
Climate Fund. The Board will meet once every six months  and/or  upon a call by the National Project Director.  
Management Arrangements  
106. Using established practice under NIM, GoB  will designate a National Project Director (NPD) who will be a 
Senior Official from the DWA/MoWCA . The NPD will  provid e up to 50% of his/her time, and be responsible for the 
overall direction, strategic guidance, and timely delivery of project outputs. The DWA will appoint part time additional 
Deputy and Assistant NPDs from its Senior Officials to assist the NPD in the im plementation. These positions are not 
remunerated by GCF resources but are Government financed positions.  
 
107. UNDP , on behalf of the MoWCA,  will recruit a Project Manager (PM) who will be responsible for day -to-day 
operations and the management of a team of professionals and technical staff ( who will also be recruited by UNDP 
to implement the project ). This arrangement has been in place with a high degree of effectiveness in approximately 
30 of UNDP’s ongoing projects in Bangladesh.  The PM will implement the project with the support of four purposive 
teams, as outlined in the organogram. The Programme Team  will be responsible for development and implementation 
of the livelihood component of the project. The Technical Support Team  will work on (i) development of programme 
standards, (ii) provide technical guidance to the implementation team, (iii) implement policy research, dialogue and 
advocacy com ponent of the project, and (iv) monitor and report on the social and environmental s afeguard plan. The 
Monitoring Team  will manage project’s Management Information System (MIS) and monitor the progress against 
agreed programme standards and project’s indicators. The operations Team  will manage finance, general 
administration, internal aud iting and risk management functions of the project. UNDP will play Project Assurance 
Role in line with the requirements outlined in the AMA . This includes management of funds, programme quality 
assurance, fiduciary risk management, timely delivery of financial and programme reports to GCF  and other 
requirements as per the AMA .  
 
108. The MoWCA will enter into specific “letter of agreement” with relevant agencies for the implementation of the 
project. High volume procurement will be done by the project following government’s public procurement regulation 
2010. All other goods and services will be procured by UNDP in accordance with its procurement policy. UNDP will 
manage the funds from GCF, and will disburse quarterly in advance against agreed work plans, to a pr oject account 
managed by the MoWCA.  The MoWCA will deliver reporting, auditing and M&E requirements of the government  to 
UNDP, in line with UNDP requirements . 
 
Field -level execution  
109. At the district and sub- district level, the officials of the DWA will supervise the day -to-day implementation of the 
project activities supported by project staff. The project will enter into partnership agreements with competent NGOs 
selected through a Call for Proposal mechanism approved by the Board. Implementation will be done in close 
collaboration with the local government and district and sub -district level Women Committee.  
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
See Annex X.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 61 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
110. Climate change impacts disproportionately affect  the extreme poor , especially women and girls. The proposed 
activities  are interlinked and aim to overcome barriers that have been aggravated by climate change impacts: 1) high 
levels of salinity impacting negatively drinking water supply, 2) poor households –  especially women- headed households 
– pushed further into extreme poverty by climate change impact s to their assets and livelihoods, and 3) Budget 
constraint s in MoWCA  limiting the inclusion of climate- informed social protection programmes.   Without GCF 
involvement to complement ongoing efforts and address interconnected gaps, GoB cannot take adequate steps to help 
vulnerable communities, especially women and girls, to adapt to climate- related disaster risks and impacts.  This type of 
support is not possible with any of the other financing sources that are currently operational including the LDCF and 
SCCF as both funds do not provide financing at the scale required for the interventions proposed here. GCF resources 
will allow GoB to scale up  existing efforts for transformative reach and impact across the country  targeting primarily 
women and girls . GCF involvement is critical to:  
 
111. Expand water  drinking supply.   Climate change and water contamination have significantly impacted access to 
safe drinking water, particularly in the S outhwestern region of Bangladesh.  Increased salinity  is reducing access to safe 
drinking water  now and is expected to worsen for the foreseeable future. The increased occurrences of natural hazards 
such as cyclonic storm induced saline inundation have also adversely affected the surface and groundwater on which a 
significant proportion of poor and extremely poor households are dependent for their livelihoods. Many households in 
Southwestern Bangladesh also rely on tube wells to source drinking water.  In most cases , these tube well s have arsenic 
concentrations higher than the WHO standard. Unfortunately, these compounding factors  have resulted in a population 
highly exposed to arsenic , reduced  access to table water due to salinity but with limited means or incentives for seeking 
safe water alternatives.   
 
112. GCF resources will ensure year round access to safe drinking water for the selected six  districts affected by severe 
salinity in southern Bangladesh by installing 1, 350 rainwater harvesting tanks (605,000 liter per tank) at 450 locations 
(approximately 1.815 million liters/site). 1,250,000 vulnerable people in six districts with limited access to drinking water 
will be provided with safe drinking water.   Water capture and retention from the 1,350 rainwater harvesting tanks will 
fulfill the total daily water requirements for 1,250,000 people. GCF resources will have a tangible impact by overcoming 
barriers that prevent the use of Bangladesh’s water resources in a sustai nable manner and by securing safe drinking 
water for the most  vulnerable communities.  
 
113. Impact highly vulnerable population. GCF involvement will facilitate direct support on climate change adaptation 
for 40,000 vulnerable extreme poor women and 17 ,000 adolescent girls living in six vulnerable districts in Southern 
Bangladesh. These women, girls and their families, assuming an average household size of 4  people, constitutes  a total 
direct and indirect beneficiary cohort of approximately 260,000 peop le who will be supported to pursue livelihoods 
training and other supplementary activities  aimed at enhancing their adaptive capacity . In addition, a community early 
warning system will benefit 1.27 million people from early warning dissemination and disaster preparedness measures. 
The provision of early warning services to the villagers will also indirectly benefit  anoth er 2.0 million people.   
 
114. Scale up investment in social protection programmes.  GCF resources  will catalyze change in the architecture 
of social protection programmes in Bangladesh to integrate climate- resilient initiatives with  adaptation interventions. 
Through the results of the proposed project, GCF resources  would play a critical role to leverage and expand the support 
and eventually showcase systems that not only deal with the immediate survival needs of the most vulnerable women 
of a severely climate change affected country, but can help them break the cycle of poverty and achieve climat e resilient 
livelihoods.  The experiences gained from this pioneer ing adaptive social protection intervention, at scale,  with GCF 
resources will ultimately contribute in the reform process of the NSSS in Bangladesh so that climate change risks are 
systemati cally taken into account . The resultant multiplier impact is therefore very large.   
 
115. GCF finance will help to adjust ongoing social protection programmes that will have additional knock on multiplier 
benefits. GCF resources will result in additional economic, human development and social value without crowding out 
the government’s investment that is financed with domestic resources. On the contrary, the project has the potential to 
expand domestic support and crowd in private sector investm ent, including directing and/or redirecting private household 
investments towards climate resilient practices .


---
*Page 33*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 61 
 
 
 
 D 
116. The GCF resources will benefit communities by improving their  adaptive capacity in southern Bangladesh thereby 
reducing their overall vulnerability to climate change risks. Effective implementation of the project will provide important 
evidence to the Government of Bangladesh  of the benefits of  incorporating publicly funded investment for adaptation 
into SP expenditures. In this way, the GCF contribution will institutionalize adaptation into key government social 
protection programmes , effectively extending the results of the project  far into the future.  
D.2. Exit Strategy   
Overall Exit Strategy:  
• The project results  - including the introduction of new approaches to integrating social protection and adaptive 
capacity development, and support to vulnerable women - have multiplier benefits  which will extend beyond the life 
cycle of this proposal.  
• Direct beneficiaries; women, girls and their families will enjoy immediate and long term improvements as a result of 
the project approach and activities . This will provide recipients with a solid foothold to further strengthen resilience 
and reduce their vulnerability to climate- related extrem e events and other economic, social and environmental 
shocks (Target 1.5, SDG 1 target: End Poverty in all its forms) ; 
• Extending the water drinking supply to cover 1.25 million  beneficiaries with minimal M&O costs will be paramount to 
improve the health, l ivelihoods and income generating activities for  all benefici aries in the six  districts;  
• The Climate Resilient Livelihood Cell (Climate Cell) in MoWCA /DWA will absorb the lessons, methodology and 
experience from this project to support  MoWCA  and other Ministries’ programmes  in integrating adaptive livelihood 
models in beyond the project period;  and 
• MoWCA will integrate adaptive capacity programming into social protection programmes  and will contribute in 
strengthen the reform process during N SSS implementation period that will foster political and national budgetary 
commitments especially when Government is committed to promoting women’s development, poverty reduction and 
social protection.  
  
117. After project completion, the resilient graduation model and the assessment of the attributes of the sustainable 
water solutions will be proven,  foundational  component s of a national climate adaptation strategy. The project will provide 
evidence- based results at scale that can then be used to demonstrate the impacts of resilient interventions in terms of 
increasing adaptive capacity of women and girls. Return on investment  (ROI)  will also be analyzed in order to help future 
government and private finance to replicate and expand these interventions. Given the extremely low costs per 
beneficiary of the water solution, it is expected that this project will be replicated in other vulnerable areas of southern Bangladesh, thereby transform ing the GoB’s approach to sustainable drinking water. The project will work closely  with 
other UN agencies and NGOs to continue advocating for investment in resilient pathways through social safety net 
programme which will eventually contribute in the social protection reform process . 
 
Activity Specific Exit Strategy:  
Livelihood exit strategy:  
• In the last year of each 24- month cycle, the project will introduce the beneficiary graduates to the existing microcredit 
providers and the programmes offering livelihood support so that they can take their livelihood options  to a higher 
level.  
• Adolescent girls who will benefit from this initiative  will be given support for placement into jobs that are a ligned with 
the skillset, replicating the UCEP model which is widely used in Bangladesh. The project will be linked with the Bangladesh Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) curriculum in Bangladesh so that targeted 
beneficiaries  can becom e a part of the TVET program. The participants will be linked with the existing social 
protection programs of the GoB and also the social protection reform process so that they can obtain employment 
and related support in the public sector works programs i ncluding the formal and informal private sectors.  
• The beneficiaries who would be able to develop small enterprises will be introduced to the SME Foundation and 
have access to attractive incentives designed for women entrepreneurs including state- sponsored financial institutes  
for small and medium enterprises.   
 
Water -related interventions exit strategy:


---
*Page 34*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 61 
 
 
 
 D 
• The operation and maintenance of the rainwater harvesting tanks is minimal when compared  to the benefits of 
supplying drinking water free of charge all year for 1.25 M people. Since the M&O is extremely small in contrast to 
for example, desalination, the beneficiaries will be able to bear the costs of maintaining the tanks.   
 
Early Warning Ex it Strategy  
• The women’s volunteer group will be made a part of the national Cyclone Preparedness Program (CPP) so that they 
will be in the roster of the CPP and be able to benefit from the training and equipment provided under the volunteer 
management policy of CPP.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
118. The project will enhance the adaptive capacity  and resilience of vulnerable women and adolescent girls through 
support ing social organizations to receive and deliver early warning information. The project will establish community -
based women and youth volunteer teams to reach approximately 3.27 million people directly and indirectly . In addition, 
project will support beneficiaries to develop disaster preparedness plan that will help to reduce loss of household assets 
and livelihoods.   
 
119. Knowledge generation and synthesis of lessons learned to be included in other social protection programmes in 
Bangladesh will be carried out by strengthening the capacity of the Climate Change Cell within DWA  and MoWCA . 
The cell will gather lessons and policy evidence using a tracking system based on the individual  profiles.  This cell will 
share data, knowledge and lessons to the MIS of Social Protection of the Cabinet Division in a systematic manner.  An 
independent impact evaluation will be conducted by an independent third- party to capture how inputs improve the  
adaptive capacity of the beneficiaries after support has been provided to pursue  climate -resilient livelihood s. Overall, 
the project will increase Bangladesh’s knowledge base on climate change impact on women and girls, and enhance 
the capacity of the government to make use of this knowledge in policy and programme development.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual   
Lifetime   
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by 
gender  (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  Direct: 1.25 M (water) ; & 5 7,000 
(livelihoods support)  and 1.27 million 
(early warning)  
Indirect: 260,000 ( family members of 
direct beneficiaries of the climate 
resilient livelihoods support  activities ) 
and 2.0 m (early warning benefits by 
indirect dissemination)  
Percentage (%) Water interventions will target 100% of 
the total population of target project 
Upazila in six target districts . 
Livelihoods support  will target 30% of the 
total extreme poor women and girls 
population of 119 target unions of six  
coastal districts , which is 6.53% of the 
total population of the project locations . 
Methodology used for calculating the indicators above: 
120. Current water interventions have relied upon the  installation of small (2,000 liter) rainwater tanks on structure s 
along with desalination, groundwater extraction and obtaining water from sand pond filters. T he homes of the proposed 
beneficiaries of climate resilient livelihoods support  are incapable of  collecting the required volumes of water to provide 
adequate drinking water supplies. The y are forced to collect drinking water that  is usually well below World Health 
Organization water quality standards or through desalination which results in high economic and environmental costs 
and is thus out of reach of the proposed beneficiaries. The proposed approach of installing high volume rainwater 
harvesting tanks is highly transformative for Bangladesh. It will provide drinking water security, beyond what was 
previously possible.  Direct beneficiaries were calculated on the basis of people with limited water supply in the target 
six districts and budget calculations integrating unit costs per RWH tank and the daily water requirement per person.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
Safe drinking water will be provided indirectly to the total population of target project Upazila in six target districts - 
approximately 3 M.  
  
121. The number of beneficiaries of output  2 were calculated based on the national poverty database. According to 
the HIES 2010 database, 365, 915 women and girls living in extreme poverty in the selected areas of six districts. The 
average gender ratio per household is 50:50 and household size is 4.5. This means  162,628 extreme poor households 
have eligible women and gir l beneficiar ies. On average , 30% of extreme poor households  do not receive any support 
from the Government. Based on Government’s Vulnerability Group development programme criteria and based on the 
poverty and climate exposure conditions in six  targets districts identified as most vulnerable to climate impacts MoWCA 
has drawn from current gender and evaluation indices and frameworks (including the Women’s Empowerment in 
Agriculture Index (WEAI), the W+ Standard) to calculate direct and indirect beneficia ries. 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
122. Currently social protection programmes respond to needs made more acute by climate change impacts, 
however these programmes are operating without a deliberate recognition of, and/or a climate change adaptation 
strategy.  This has resulted in significant and ongoing challenges and costs (human, environmental  and economic) in 
those geographical districts most exposed to climate- induced shocks. As a result some of the programme results have 
not been sustained, and some of the poorest and most vulnerable sections of the community, particularly women need further assistance.  
 123. The project will empower women, as well as the community at large, to advocate and participate in local 
government priority setting - which has the potential to transform the local and then the national development planning 
process.  The Project has been designed on the basis of a theory of change that is based on the concept that the 
following five innovative elements are essential for beneficiary women and adolescent girls:   
i. It is important that each individual has  a livelihood adaptation profile taking into account  feasible options (economic 
and climate specific) and including a plan for disaster preparedness  ; 
ii. Based on the identified options,  support needs to provide to women and girls  to adjust and practice their planned 
activities ; 
iii. Due to increased water stress and disasters , women and adolescent girls need sustainable long term water 
security and access to sanitation. This is important for the health and wellbeing of people as well as for laying the 
foundations for pursuing  adapte d livelihood options . The rationale being that if people have unmet  basic needs, 
their preoccupation will be on securing those basic needs rather than investing in options that will pave the way for future we ll-being for themselves and their children. Short term needs will dominate over long- term investments 
to the overall detriment of well -being and prosperity ; 
iv. Access to early warning and capacity to respond to a range of disasters for women including evacuat ion, food 
security, community resource management planning; and  
v. Enhanced capacity of the government to integrate climate change interventions into social protection 
programmes.  
In numerical terms this transformation can be summarized as:  
• Development of adaptive li velihoods of 40,000 women and 17,000 adolescent girls in six districts ; 
• Expand safe drinking water supply for 1.25 million people in six  districts ; and  
• Provision of early warning services direct access to 1. 27 million people and,  indirectly to 2.0 million people.  
 
The Project is designed on the basis of a theory of change as described below.   
• A major barrier for beneficiary women in emerging out  of poverty is that they are vulnerable to fall into  further 
depths of poverty due to climate induced extreme events and associated impacts. The gains made through current 
livelihoods are depleted due to the prevalence of climatic shocks. Current s ocial protection programmes  rarely 
account for climate change risks . As a resul t, they are partially  ineffective in sustaining  intended results in poverty 
reduction. Climatic shocks also  have multiplier  impact s on the health and livelihood of women and girls  given the 
limitations in  access to safe water and sanitation.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
• In order to b reak out of this cycle, i t is important that individual s have the relevant knowledge and employability 
skills so that they can practice livelihood options that are adaptive and feasible (economically and climate specific) . 
It is also necessary to take into account the disaster risks in the particular climate hotspot s. Past experience 
suggests that o nce livelihood support is designed based on a particular individual’s needs , capacity and climate 
adaptive options, (which may call for an  adjustment of current ventures or invol ve in new options) it will likely result 
in more resilient  outcomes . Women should then be able to sustain the ir livelihood practice during or after disaster 
situations and have a reasonable level of continued earning and security ; 
• Adolescent  girls are often subject to  child marriage and early pregnancy . These adverse impacts  can be protected 
through skills and support for livelihood which in the long- run will also play a critical role in  adapting to climat e 
change induced shocks and emergence out of the poverty trap;  
• Water security is essential to maintain family health, livelihood. It is also necessary for personal hygiene, which is 
critical for  continuation of livelihood activities, wellbeing and protection from long term adverse health effects  
particularly for the poorest . The current approach is transformative for Bangladesh and will provide ongoing safe 
water for many years;  
• Women’s and community’s access to early warning and capacity to respond to disasters including evacuation, 
food security, community resource management planning are essential elements of climate resilience and 
protection from further poverty. The development of women and girls focused community based early warning 
dissemination is a very innovative step in the overall EWS in Bangladesh. This will help   link disaster risk reduction 
to the longer term climate adaptation; a crucial step as rising sea surface temperatures  increase the likelihood of 
cyclonic events in the Bay of Bengal. The gender responsive communit y based early warning system will be 
address  GFCS ’s call for greater synergy between producers and users of information, including developing 
demand for weather and climate services ; and  
• Enhanc ing the capacity of the government to manage climate adaptive transformed social protection programmes 
will help sustain the gains made from the investments on the poverty focused or social protection programmes . It 
will subsequently contribute to the ongoing  social protection reform process through NSSS . 
 
The theory of change of the project is illustrated in the following diagram.  
 
 
 
124. The lessons from other projects highlight that the higher  the capacity of individual s in climate hotspots, the lower  
the risk during and after disasters. Increasing the adaptive capacity of the community and institutions has also been


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
emphasized. Based on the above lessons and theory  of change , the project has been designed to bring in a 
transformative change in the livelihood practice of women and adolescent girls as well as the delivery of social 
protection programmes. It is expected that through  the three components of the project , women, gi rls and their entire 
community will become more prepared for disasters, have knowledge and capacity to operate climate resilient 
livelihood options and the Government will have a model of climate inclusive social protection programme which will 
inform strategic inputs to the national policies (especially the NSSS ). 
 
125. Appropriate material, financial and training support has been packaged with innovative and climate- smart 
methods to enable women to adjust to and pursue their planned activities while protecting their livelihoods and asset s 
from disasters.  With anticipated increased water stress es of various forms, support to provide safe water has been 
integrated as a core element of the project . Women’s role and community’s access to early warning and capacity to 
respond to disasters including evacuation, food security, community resource management planning has also been 
designed.  All these features will enhance and strengthen the adaptive capacity of the beneficiaries, the community and 
the government to manag e and reduce the exposure to climate risks.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
126. The Project will establish systems for tracking and documenting impacts, information sharing and cross -learning 
from field experience as the key to knowledge development , codification and dissemination. The important step will be 
to identify and strengthen connections between sites of knowledge- creation and knowledge application - within the 
project and externally  such as Cabinet Division, General Economic Divi sion and other key ministries and reputed 
research organizations including: PPRC,  ICCCA , and CPD . Measures will be put in place to ensure that technical 
inputs, knowledge resources and up- to-date information on gender focused climate change adaptive liveli hood issues 
are made available to DWA, MoWCA , and development partners and externally as required. Lessons from field 
experience will be presented  to different stakeholders in the form of a cohesive narrative grounded in  evidence and the 
project’s Theory of Change. A public profile of the project will be created which will describe contributions towards 
gender equality, climate change adaptation and poverty  reductions  in Bangladesh and internationally. This will also 
include an elaboration on:  
 
• The individual livelihood profiles of 40,000 women and 17 ,000 girls will provide a basis for planning not only the 
livelihood options but will provide knowledge about viable diversified adaptive options and the baseline for 
evaluating project impacts. It is ex pected that this information will provide GoB  with significant baselines 
information to improve their approached to vulnerable women and the impacts of climate change;  
• The capacity building tools and compilation of adaptive technology for different communi ties will also provide a 
basis for knowledge on technological options suitable for different climate conditions;  
• Regular collection of data, assessments and lessons will provide management information as well as generating knowledge for the development practitioners at home and abroad;  
• Adaptive tool kits will consolidate  all relevant management tools and guidelines for managers and implementers . 
This will not only help those who are implementing  this project but others as well who will plan and implement 
similar programmes;  
• A policy paper will provide the policy makers with evidence and lessons as well as enabling them to decide upon 
the integration, replication and up- scaling of experience in other programmes; and 
• The project will have a website to disseminate experiences and lessons.  
 
127. The project will have a strong Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) component headed by an international 
MEL expert (procured competitively) together with a team of a national staff that will undertake periodic assessment s 
and conduct impact evaluation. The monitoring and learning component will provide feedback to the project staff and 
the concerned stakeholders in GoB /MoWCA, UNDP Bangladesh, GCF and external agencies. During the first year of  
the operation, when baseline studies will be carried out, the MEL unit will develop a knowledge management and 
dissemination strategy which will seek to include partnerships with reputed academic and research institutions.  
 
128. The lessons of the project will be shared to influence the development practices at local, regional and national 
levels. In particular, it will feed in the ongoing social projection reform process. The project will organize lessons learned workshop with beneficiaries and local stakeholders in each sub- district at t he end of each 24 -month cycle. This 
workshop will be able to create an incentive for local governments and other local stakeholders to integrate climate


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
change into local development initiative and specifically for women development initiatives. Similarly,  the project will 
organize lessons learned workshop at district level. The lessons of the project will be distilled into micro- narratives of 
the climate inclusive women development. The project will organize four national events on the lessons of the project:  
two at the end of two 24-month cycle, one after the mid- term evaluation of the project and one at the end of project 
impact assessment. Lessons will help to influence the adaptive social protection approach into National Social Security 
Strategy. Lessons of the project will also be shared at different Asia and Pacific regional conferences on climate change 
adaptation and women development initiatives. This will provide incentives for other Asia and pacific countries to 
develop more women centered climat e change adaptation programmes  as well as gender sensitive adaptation 
initiatives. The project lessons will be also be shared in the COP side events, various international conferences, events 
and platforms of gender and climate change networks, community based adaptation conferences an d other events 
organized by GCF. The lessons will be helpful in making evidence based climate finance decisions for climate change 
adaptation.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
129. Social protection particularly targeting women has been identified as a major means of poverty reduction and 
also for climate change adaptation. This project provides an opportunity to develop an evidence base for an effective 
model at the national level. The model will not only be applicable to social protection policies but also to human 
development policies and broader poverty reduction initiatives. The project will help to build confidence among policy 
makers for an adaptive social protection model whic h will be gradually rolled out to similar government schemes.  
 
130. The real time monitoring and evaluation, social audit on the ground, knowledge management (including online 
and technical based) information management system and an Impact Evaluation M&E framework for the project will 
be managed and implemented by the DWA . This will help the DWA and MoWCA to better understand how to include 
climate change adaptation into any other social protection programme targeting women. The M&E and knowledge 
management process will create an incentive for DWA to include climate change into all other women development 
programmes. The learning will be disseminated in national and international forum and gender and climate change 
network for global lessons and policy decisions regarding climate change adaptation investment for most vulnerable 
women and girls in highly climate vulnerable nations. The lessons will also create an incentive at local and national 
level to mainstream climate change into other social safety net programmes.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
131. The evidence gathered is expected to contribute  in the amendment of  GoB’s NSSS. Further, the project plans 
to utilize its lessons to inform the Women’s Development Policy which currently does not include adaptive livelihood 
as an option. At the end of the project period the GoB will be in the process of developing its Eighth Five Year Plan 
(EFYP). It is expected that EFYP will take the lessons from the project in developing its poverty reduction, social 
protection and women’s development priorities and approaches.  
 
132. The Project Board is expected to re- enforce the role of existi ng Climate Change Focal Point within DWA, to 
inform the policy makers about climate resilient livelihood of the women and girls and establish a Climate Change Cell. 
This cell will then become a key catalyst to mainstream climate change into other women dev elopment programme s 
of the DWA and MoWCA. This cell is expected to provide information, knowledge, lessons to key policy makers in 
transforming women development investment of government towards climate resilient women development in 
Bangladesh.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
Environmental benefits:  
133. The project’s main target is to support adaptive livelihoods and to expand the drinking water supply  for poor, 
vulnerable women and adolescent girls and their families . These interventions enable important human development 
aspects for extreme poor women and adolescent girls in tidal flood and sea level rise prone areas in Bangladesh.  
Investing in human development offers high sustainable development potential and increased adaptive capacity of women and girls to meet the challenges. It has very low environmental impacts as no infrastr ucture (except for the pre-
fabricated rainwater harvesting tanks ) will be installed.  Minor environmental impact might occur if the adaptive 
livelihoods over -extract natural resources, but livelihood training will include appropriate environmental awareness and


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
environmental protection measures.  The Environmental and Social Risk assessment  has tak en all risks into account 
and environmental and social risks management plan has been developed for this project.  
 
134. The project has significant environmental benefits particularly in relation to drinking water. The main source of 
drinking water currently within the six districts is groundwater extraction. There is insufficient information on the quality 
and quantity of groundwater aquifers. Further more, current research indicates  that groundwater aquifers are becoming 
increasingly saline, and as such, the use of reverse osmosis and desalination is required to provide good quality 
drinking water. However, this type of solution  has a significant economic, environmental and social cost due to the high 
energy demands to produce drinking water , the environmental costs of further polluting groundwater aquifers  (from 
brine discharge),  and moreover , the likely social cost of requiring poor beneficiaries  (particularly those who will be the 
recipients of support in pursuing climate resilient livelihoods)  to pay for drinking water.  
 
135. Among the alternatives considered, t he proposed solution with GCF financing is extremely transformative. Given 
the high rainfall of south western Bangladesh and the low accessibility to safe clean drinking water, even that which is 
supplied by desalination, the proposed project will provide safe and secure drinking water over the long term that is not 
only highly economically viable, but more importantly, will have almost no environmental and social costs. The only environmental  impacts associated with the project will be during construction. More importantly, any overflow water will 
be injected into the groundwater, thus improving or at a minimum, maintaining the quality of the groundwater aquifers. 
As highlighted above, the proposed solution is a win- win-win economically, environmentally and socially and is 
completely transformative for Bangladesh that has relied upon small (2,000 liter) rainwater harvesting tanks.  
 
Social and gender benefits: 
136. The project has been structured to focus mainly on women and adolescent girls. Although men and adolescent 
boys are not part of the main beneficiaries’ for the livelihoods support , the project recognizes and has put emphasis 
on gender relations at the hous ehold and community levels. The project aims at empowering women though the 
proposed interventions,  that will increase women’s agency, voice in and decision making capacity within their 
households and communities.   
 
137. The project  will produce co -benefits in women’s empowerment, girls’ education and health, poverty reduction 
and disaster risk reduction at local level  that will spill over and benefit men as well . In Bangladesh a tendency to 
demand an increased role for adolescent gi rls in domestic spheres during tidal floods, storm surges and droughts has 
been observed. This challenges their continued education and increases the tendency towards early marriage.  The 
programme will lessen these tendencies.  
 138. Importantly, the development of the rainwater harvesting tanks will provide free safe drinking water to not only 
extremely poor and vulnerable people but to the broader population. This will lessen the environmental impact on local 
areas through the release of brine and more importantly, reduc e sickness from drinking unsafe water. This will result 
in an increase in productivity through a reduction in illness -related downtime.  
 
Economic benefits:  
139. The proposed livelihood enhancement support  including t raining will provide with skills and input for women to 
start or expand new ventures according to their preferences  and means. The main objective of the pr oject is for 40,000 
women and 17,000 adolescent girls to graduate from extreme poverty by providing t he means to pursue sustainable, 
climate resilient  livelihoods  options . In addition, the project will strengthen adaptation for the long term  by establishing 
a women- centered and community -based early warning.  In addition, by expanding drinking water suppl ies all year 
round to 6  districts (1.25 M people) without a fee, it will have an important impact not only on their health and livelihoods, 
but on the income generation and savings.  Grievance Redress Mechanism has been developed for the project more 
broadl y which will increase transparency in all aspects of the project.  
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
140. The World Risk Report 201 5 identif ied Bangladesh as the sixth  most natural disaster prone country among 173 
countries in the world, mainly due to the unfortunate combination of extreme exposure and high vulnerability. Findings 
show that Bangladesh scored 32% against exposure, 64% against vulnerability, 43% susceptibility, 87% against lack of coping capabilities, and finally 61% against lack of adaptive capabilities. The bottom -line is that Bangladesh is a 
high-risk country and should be treated accordingly.  
 141. Relative to men, women in Bangladesh, as in many other countries , experience far more severe impacts due to 
a variety of factors including but not exclusively, society’s inequality in the form of unequal power, lack of information and lack of influence in decision making (Alam, K 2013). The patriarchal nature of the targeted communities, and entrenched gender -specific roles for women as care givers, mean that it is common that women cannot avoid being 
exposed to hazardous living conditions. Studies that reflect on conditions that are found in the targeted regions suggest 
three major implications of climate change on women: (i) Direct impacts such as biodiversity degradation
16, food 
insecurity17and increasing disasters18; (ii) Impacts caused by responses to climate change that do not consider the 
particular needs of  women; and (iii) Limited capacity of women to influence climate change related decision making 
thus making them less likely to benefit from climate change adaptation services.  
 
Targeting vulnerable women and girls in climate hotspots  
142. Water logging in the targeted districts is pervasive. It disrupts land- based productive systems, which in turn 
aggravates women’s propensity for malnutrition in affected areas due largely to gender -based intra- household food 
distribution. There are many instances where it leads to  the isolation of  women in inaccessible enclaves, sometimes 
for several months a year. Prolonged exposure to contaminated water  and/or unusable land causes severe skin 
diseases and gynecological problems for women. Collection of fuel and potable water become extremely time 
consuming and hazardous. Female headed households are common in water -logging affected areas. In the absence 
of land based productive systems and with the incidence of acute poverty, women often face limited options  to provide 
for their families.  
 143. The continuing and expanding shortage of safe drinking water is likely to become more pronounced, especially 
in the coastal districts . During the dry season, salinity becomes more acute and the lack of suitable drinking w ater 
affects many communities. Women and adolescent girls are usually required to obtain drinking water from distant 
sources, up to 5 to 6 kilometers each day in some south western districts . Young girls often sacrifice their academic 
activities to fulfil l these responsibilities. The loss of an academic year for an adolescent girl student often translates 
into an early arranged marriage. Even during their pregnancy women are forced to fetch water irrespective of the distance between the source and their dwe llings. Premature birth, abortion and still birth are reported in alarmingly 
high numbers in these areas.   
144. During coastal flooding, sanitation and hygiene become critical and especially problematic for pregnant women. 
In the absence of freshwater, adolescent girls and women cannot maintain hygienic reproductive health care and often 
report perinea rashes and urinary tract infections.  The spread of diarrheal diseases, cholera and dengue fever as an 
aftermath of a coastal flood event often leads to loss of employment. Walking on the embankments or road sides 
exposes both adult and young women to sexual harassment and assault by men. Wom en cannot send their children 
to schools during prolonged water -logging. Males often leave their families in search of employment, leaving the 
responsibility of caring for other family members on the shoulders of women.  The number of women headed 
households in coastal/tidal flood affected areas is increasing as the youth and men leave in search of employment 
opportunities elsewhere. In case of tidal /coastal floods, food insecurity and sanitation are considered to be major issues 
for the affected women. Following the cyclone and sea and rain flood ing of 1991, the death rate was almost five times 
higher  for women as for men. Warning information was transmitted by men to men in public spaces, but rarely 
communicated to the rest of the family and, as many women were not allowed to leave the house without a male 
relative, they perished waiting for their relatives to return home and take them to a safe place. Moreov er, as in many 
                                                             
16 In Bangladesh, there has been an increase in the salinity affected agricultural land by 22% since 1973 (SDRI, 2009).   
17 Only 3.4% women headed households in Bangladesh coast own farmland compared to their male counterpart (25%) in the coast of B angladesh.  
18 The frequency of cyclones during November and May over the North Indian Ocean has increased twofold in the past 122 years. Using the Bay of 
Bengal in a hydrodynamic model, the World Bank estimates that cyclone- exposed areas in Bangladesh will increase by 26% and the affected population 
will grow as high as 122% by 2050.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
other Asian countries, most Bengali women have never learned to swim which significantly reduces their survival 
chances in case of coastal flooding.  
 
145. The contexts of vulnerability to climate change are somewhat different for women, since the y have reduced 
financial means and decision- making power than their male counterparts to respond to climate- driven stresses. 
Moreover, being the household managers, women have to bear the burden of meeting the needs of the family, even 
when fighting agains t adversities. Most climate change issues, policies and programs are not gender neutral. In light 
of this, several areas deserve attention, specifically: gender specific resource- use patterns; gender specific effects of 
climate change; gender related patterns of vulnerability; women’s capacity to cope with climate change; gender and decision -making on climate change; and gender aspects of mitigation and adaptation.  
 
146. Women’s roles in communities are not formally recognized or accounted for in mitigation, adaptation and relief 
efforts. Women’s knowledge about ecosystems and their strategies, experiences and skills for coping with natural 
disasters and water shortages, are often ignored. Strategies and policies to cope with climate change often neglect the 
gend er dimensions of climate change and the current gender -climate change agenda. Women are poorly represented 
in the planning and decision- making processes for  climate change policies, limiting their capacity to engage in political 
decisions that can address  their specific needs and vulnerabilities.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
147. Climate change adaptation and interventions that GCF will finance will lead to the strengthening of  institutional 
capacity within the DWA , the Local Government institutions involved in selecting the recipients for each cycle, and draw 
on the lived experiences of women managing the day -to-day effects of climate change.  
 148. Bangladesh has a population of 156 million people, with approximately one third living below the poverty line. 
The poverty rate is highest in rural areas, at 36% compared with 28% in urban centers.  Two thirds of Bangladesh is 
less than 5 meters above sea level, making it one of the most climate change disas ter-prone countries in the world. 
Severe tidal flooding and salinity intrusion in coastal areas can cause significant damage to crops and property, and 
an adverse impact on rural livelihoods. Further, coastal inundation including tidal/coastal flooding can result in dramatic 
changes to both the landscape more generally, but more importantly, to the productively of that land. Climate change seems likely to add to the destruction by tidal floods  and cyclonic events which have resulted in significant impacts to 
the six districts . Poor people are hit hardest because they are more densely concentrated in badly constructed housing 
and on land that is prone to hazards. If these levels of poverty and economic inequality continue or increase, levels of 
conflict and insecurity will rise and the indirect social implications for women will be especially high.  
 
149. In the last five years, the GoB  has allocated an annual average of 160 billion Taka (2.05b USD) and 198.4 billion 
Taka (2.55b USD) in FY 2013- 14 in social safety net expenditures. This allocation includes 1.7% of GDP and 8.9% of 
National Budget (2013- 14 FY).  This ranges from cash transf ers to a range of food security programmes that target 
poor and vulnerable people. While the safety nets provide a critical lifeline, the programmes generally do not include adaption and resilience dimensions. That said, the reality is that a portion of the social safety net budget already addresses climate sensitive concerns . This opens up an opportunity to strategically target GCF funds towards 
embedding climate sensitivity as a matter of course into the social safety net budget.  
 150. This is further confirmed by a Climate Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (CPEIR)
19 study which 
identified the climate sensitivity of budgets by the schemes that U Ps (Union Councils) and Pourashavas (Municipality 
Councils) implement, and the funds associated with these schemes.  From all the schemes and projects set out in UP 
and Pourashavas annual budget reports, LGSP/LGSP LIC, ADP, FFW, 40 days’ work schemes and donor funded 
projects are found relevant to climate change though not deliberate for climate change at local level. Bangladesh’s 
CPEIR  outlines the scope to increase the climate sensitive expenditures in social safety net programmes. The public 
expenditure review for climate change has identified that typically local government institutions spent 14% of their 
budget for climate purposes.  
 
                                                             
19 
http://www.unpei.org/sites/default/files/e_library_documents/Bangladesh_Climate_Public_Expenditure_and_Institutional_Review_20
12_0.pdf


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
151. The GoB, in its bid to raise the overall economic development level of the country, has to address issues of food, 
water and health security for all its population in the face of climate change.  As noted in sections C.1 and D.2 of this 
proposal, the GoB  is committed to tackling climate change, gender sensitive development as well as social security in 
its overall policy framework. This project is strongly aligned with national policies including: the Bangladesh National 
Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) and Bangladesh Climate Change Strategies and Action Plan (BCCSAP) were 
formulated in 2005 and 2008, and subsequently revised in 2009. Furthermore, the Climate Change Gender Action Plan 
(ccGAP)20, National Plan for Disaster Management (NPDM), and Sixth Five Year Plan (SFYP) of GOB  boldly articulate 
the country’s commitment to addressing climate change and equitable development, while the National Plan for 
Disaster Management (NPDM) 2008- 2015 addres ses Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and climate change adaptation 
(CCA) comprehensively in all development plans, programmes and policies . The forthcoming Seventh Five Year Plan 
(2016- 20)21 put emphasis on Accelerating Growth, Empowering Every Citizen. The dr aft plan recognizes that poor 
people’s choices are extremely limited because of lack of assets and income, and that the priority objective of 7th Plan 
is to reduce poverty. Strategic goals include employment generation, skills development, and reducing vul nerability.  
 
152. The NSSS aims to modernize the Government’s fragmented social protection programmes into a single, high-
quality system that protects all deserving citizens particularly the poor and vulnerable throughout the lifecycle from birth 
to death. Upholding the provision of the national Constitution on social security for citizens (Article 15- d), NSSS is 
envisioned to build social safety measures to make the country free from hunger and poverty.  
 153. In order to achieve a synchronized and effective soci al protection, the implementation of the NSSS will play a 
major role in eliminating leakages, improving targeting, increasing the average value of the transfers, lowering the risks 
faced by the poor and vulnerable population, reducing poverty, helping reduce income inequality and building social 
capital. The social protection budget will increase and the programme will address women as a distinct target group.  
 
154. This robust reform process is planned to encompass about one- eighth of all Government spending and one-
fiftieth of gross domestic product, and reform around 100+ social protections programmes under an effective 
coordinat ion mechanism of 20+ ministries/divisions  of the country.  
 
155. The vision of the 8
th Plan on gender equality is “a country where men and women will have equal opportunities 
and rights and women will be recognized as equal contributors in economic, social and political development”. The 
framework for women’s empowerment and gender equality comprises of four areas of strategic objectives:  
• improve women’s human capabilities ; 
• increase women’s economic gains ; 
• enhance women’s voice and agency ; and  
• create an enabling environment for women’s advancement . 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
156. UNDP is one of the world’s largest brokers of climate change grants for developing countries, with a current 
portfolio of $1.34 billion in mitigation and adaptation grant -financed projects in over 140 countries, supported by co-
financing of $6.7 billion. I n Bangladesh, UNDP has a strong track record of delivering results in partnership with the 
government. It has worked closely with the GoB for the last four decades in supporting its development efforts. We 
have jointly collaborated in various programmes and projects in the areas of disaster risk management, climate change, 
poverty reduction, better governance and environmental management with technical and capacity building support. 
UNDP has focused on capacity building, policy and community interventions, targeting the poorest and most 
                                                             
20 The specific objectives of ccGAP that the programme addresses are “Introduce innovative agriculture and aquaculture technologies for female 
farmers and entrepreneurs”, Enhance women’s knowledge and access to financial instruments”, ensure women’s involvem ent in efficient water 
management”, and “improve social security/protection of women, adolescent, and children pre, during and post -disaster and emergency situation” 
under Priority Sector I.  
21 Presentation by Prof Shamsul Alam, Member, General Economics Di vision, 9 July 2015


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
marginalized women, men, girls and boys.  The UNDP Bangladesh country programme (2012 -2016), the second largest 
in the Asia and the Pacific region has been prepared jointly with the government to meet its development priorities.  
UNDP currently manages 30 programmes with GoB  using funds committed by bilateral, multilateral and global funds 
such as Global Environment Facility (GCF) with an annual average delivery of USD 70 million.  
 
157. UNDP has a reputation for its high transparenc y and strong accountability leading to stakeholder trust and 
confidence.  At the global level, UNDP ranked as the most transparent aid organization by the 2014 Aid Transparency 
Index 22.  In Bangladesh, in the latest Partnership Survey, 100% of donor and government partners considered UNDP 
an important and valued development partner. UNDP is well recognized for being flexible and agile, able to respond 
quickly to changing development demands and disburse resources in a cost effective, efficient and timely manner.  
UNDP has in place a robust accountability framework, in line with international standards, which assures  quality, and 
manages  fiduciary risks and transactions costs at the highest levels.   
 158. The proposed project is built upon UNDP Bangladesh’s extensive track record in implementing climate change 
adaptation, social protection and disaster risk management work. UNDP has been implementing the world ’s largest 
disaster management programme, the comprehensive disaster management programme (CDMP) in Bangladesh with 13 ministries, which has a budget of US$ 78 million. The CDMP has contributed GoB ’s effort to make a paradigm shift 
from a disaster response centric approach to a more comprehensive management of disaster and climate change risk. 
UNDP supported over 50 million people with various adaptive livelihood activities. UNDP has been supporting government in formulat ing key national polices and strategies including:  National Disaster Management Plan, National 
Social Security Strategy, National Adaptation Plan, Seventh Five Year Plans etc.  
 
159. The project will be executed by the MoWCA through the DWA . The MoWCA is engaged in the formulation and 
implementation of policies and programmes related to the welfare and development of women and children. The 
MoWCA coordinates development activities related to women (Women in Development –  WID) of different Mi nistries. 
Overall, the MoWCA works for the establishment and preservation of legal and social rights of women and children . 
Ministry has significant knowledge and capacity in implementing social development programme for the poor and 
marginalized women and girls. The current annual budget of MoWCA is roughly US$ 200 million.  The programme has 
been implemented through DWA  that manages district and sub- districts offices throughout the country. UNDP has 
experience working with MoWCA  on violence against women programme, which have made a measurable progress 
in the lives of women and girls and received  a high rating as per the final programme evaluation.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
160. The project has been designed in full consultation with MoF (NDA), MoWCA and relevant stakeholders. 
Comments from MoWCA and stakeholders consulted were analyzed and included to the extent possible. The final 
project document was presented in a multi -stakeholder consultation meeting organized by MoF (NDA), DWA, MoWCA 
and UNDP. WFP, EU, UNWOMEN, DFID, ICCCAD, Action Aid, and other Government and Civil Society Organizations 
provided their feedback on the project proposal. Those comments were addressed and plac ed before MoWCA for their 
final approval which endorsed the final proposal and confirmed co-finance.  
 
161. Four consultations with women, adolescent girls and members of the targeted communit ies were carried out. 
Local government representatives, and local NGOs also participated in discussions on the barriers, challenges and 
adaptation gaps. The consultations included discussions on alternative strategies to solve key barriers faced by local 
commu nities targeted by this proposed programme. The theory of change and the design of the component and 
activities of this proposed initiative is based on these local level consultations. Each consultation took place over a 
period of three days in order to pr ovide ample time for communities to discuss critical aspects of the challenges they 
face and explore how an initiative  such as the one proposed could provide the most impactful support. The current 
proposal incorporates the feedback from these consultation (See Annex VII). The project, through the Project 
Management Unit established within MoWCA will engage further with relevant st akeholders (target communities, 
NGOs, CBOs, local government) to ensure stakeholder input throughout the implementation period f or the proposed 
activities.  
 
                                                             
22 Publish What You Fund's 2013 Aid Transparency Index placed UNDP fourth overall out of 67 major donors evaluated worldwide.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Adequacy of financing structure:  
162. The public good nature of the investments of this project means  that the private sector will not have incentives 
to invest as there is no attractive proposition for revenue generation and cost recovery at scale that will cover the initial  
investment. Left to the market, this type of programme will therefore not receive private funding. Hence, in order to 
overcome this market failure, the provisions of these investments can only be realized through the grant resources. 
While there are non- profit NGOs that op erate within Bangladesh  and invest in small scale development projects, it is 
difficult to envisage them having the technical, financial or logistical resources required to implement the wide scale 
proposals outlined in this project. As described earlier i n the proposal and feasibility report, targeted households in this 
project go through a cycle of poverty as a result of climate impacts and losses. While microcredit has a role in helping 
these vulnerable households, social safety net as financial assistan ce to extreme poor women is essential and needs 
to be strengthened. This project will seek to strengthen the social protection programme through a number of 
interventions at the household, community and national level. Activities such as training targeted households in 
alternative livelihoods and early warning system kits can only be provided by grants as the financial instrument. Please 
refer to the economic analysis  for the economic internal rate of return per intervention were assessed.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness:  
163. The proposed activities will build on the existing effort of the MoWCA  to provide financial assistance  and training 
to thousands of women below the poverty line across the various regions of Bangladesh. This effort of supplementing 
ongoing social protection programmes [such as Strengthening Women’s Ability for Productive New Resources 
(SWAPNO)  – a follow up intervention of REOPA ] is more cost -effective as it will ensure that all the funds provided by 
GCF will be allocated to measures that ex plicitly address climate change adaptation. In addition, the expansion of the 
safe water supply to 1.25 M people year -round  with no cost by collecting rainwater is  the most cost -effective option. It 
has the  potential to direct ly benefi t health, livelihoods , income negation and ultimately, reducing poverty levels. Overall, 
a higher level of impact on household wellbeing is expected in the target districts, which could not be achieved in the 
absence of the project.  
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments  (mitigation only)  
164. MoWCA confirms US$ 7.84 million equivalent  co-finance in the form of cash  to this project. A letter of co -finance 
confirmation is attached in Annex IV.  The political commitment of the government coupled with the livelihood support 
in itself will provide continued human development and economic return on the lives of the beneficiaries beyond the project period. A well tested model has opportunity to leverage financing from other sources as the government and 
the development partners involved in poverty reduction initiatives will gain confidence in investing in the climate 
adaptation efforts of vulnerable groups.  
E.6.3. Financial viability   
165. The public good nature of this project’s outputs doesn’t entail revenue generation or cost recovery from the 
project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries during the project duration. Hence, a financial analysis of this project isn’t 
deemed pertinent.   
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
166. Bangladesh has invested human and financial resources in both mitigation and adaptation priorities and in the 
course of time, continues to improve in programmatic design and practice. Through its ongoing support of the Go B’s 
development initiatives, the UN DP has also gained a wealth of experience, particularly relevant to addressing the needs 
and priorities of rural women and other marginalized communities in the country.  The collaborative relations between 
the UNDP and the MoWCA  bring valuable country ownership and perspective to this proposal.  
 167. The Local Disaster Risk Reduction Fund (LDRRF) of the Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme 
(CDMP)
23 has been successful in identifying risks faced by vulnerable communities through Community Risk 
Assessments ( CRA) which involve  climate change sensitive (risk informed) micro -planning at the local level, that are 
                                                             
23CDMP – UNDP (2010 -2014) supported by the EU and other development partners.


---
*Page 46*
---

EXPEC
TED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 61 E 
then translated into a Risk Reduction Action Plan (RRAP). Crucially however, the LDPs do not yet incorporate the 
CRA and RRAP in the comprehensive long- term development planning process. Consequently, there is an opportunity 
to scale up and build upon the successful methodologies of the LDRRF, further improve them and demonstrate the 
benefits of integrating climate risks into social protection programmes. Importantly, LDRRF lessons also demonstrate 
that a demand driven local climate change action targeting most vulnerable is feasible24. The SWAPNO project in 
close partnership with Local Government Division successfully focus es on increasing the income of destitute women 
by providing employment and future employability , maintaining/rehabilitating public assets for the benefit of rural 
communities and strengthening Local Government Institutions for better response to pro- poor services. It also 
addresses the problem of lack of regular or sufficient income by providing the targeted beneficiaries with year -round 
employment through maintenance and rehabilitation of public assets with a development package consisting of a wide 
scope of li fe skills training and networking and other opportunities. So that Economic growth is achieved in a more 
inclusive manner, with economic opportunities reaching rural poor women, and vulnerable groups are protected 
against shocks . 
168. Typically the schemes and projects of LGIs, while small in size, focus on community level infrastructure 
development. Lessons learned from previous interventions also suggest that local government financing does not 
directly address the climate change adaptation needs of the most vulnerable households. Hence, in addition climate resilient grants, a dedicated financial mechanism to cater to  vulnerable household level adaptation will be implemented.  
169. T
he lessons garnered through the implementation of different projects dealing with climate change and disaster 
management include:  
•Capacity building of  women beneficiaries include life skills training on  leadership development, rights and
ent
itlements, primary health care, vulnerability, risk & resilience and nutrition, networking and negotiation and
business development etc. which are crucial . Similarly for  adolescents both GEMS and life skill based trainings
are very important to impart.  The higher  the capacity of the individual in climate hotspots, the lower  the risk during
and post disasters.  Efforts should aim at increasing both the adaptive capacity of the individual as well as t he
c
ommunity ;
•Capacity building of the institutions working on climate change adaptation programmes is equally important ,
particularly is sues like improved management skills in pro poor and gender sensitive planning and management;
Enhanced understanding and capacity on supervision, monitoring, record keeping, reporting and conflictresolution of climate change and social safety works; follow -up and counselling for sustainable livelihoods for poor
women; transparency, capacity and responsiveness to manage fiduciary risks etc. ;
•The capacity building makes community members  confident and optimistic about  adaptation to and cope with
disaster by providing them with resources and knowledge;
•Apart from NGOs and GoB  responses , each community needs to be capable in terms of resources (materials and
money) to address their immediate emergency needs. Therefore to minimize or reduce the disaster risk local
resource mobilization is necessary. Incentives and motivations for local communal savings towards emergencyplans and locally managed community funds for resilience and maintenance of community assets is alsoimportant ;
•Ensuring the participation of women, girls and youth and persons with disabilities (PWDs) in planning a
nd
i
mplementation i s critical. Adolescents can play important and active role in family preparedness if they are aware
and prepared for DRR and adaptation;
•Adaptive economic opportunities should be introduced to provide individuals with year round employment and
earning opportunities. Climate change effects on agriculture, livestock and other sources of livelihoods should becommunicated to the community to increase awareness and livelihood adaptability ;
•Livelihood support to the vulnerable women and their families’ needs to be followed- up further to  maintain
economic growth and sustain the endeavors. Follow -up activities to ensure retention of the assets given and t heir
productive use in future by beneficiaries should continue. The motivation and awareness raising activities should
be continued with updated information even beyond project period ;
24Documenting Good Practices and Capturing Learning of the LDRRF Projects, Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme(CDMP) March 2010


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 61 
 
 
 E 
• A better coordination of GoB-NGOs and local government is important to manage an adaptive programme. There 
should be continued efforts for awareness, community empowerment and knowledge sharing and networking with 
govt. and non govt. organizations ; 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing,  disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
Not applicable  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)


---
*Page 48*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 61 
 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
170. The project relies on grant finance as (a) the proposed interventions will benefit extreme poor and climate 
vulnerable women and girls and their families (b) the interventions are largely public goods; and (c) does not generate 
revenue that lends itself to providing reflows that would warrant other financial instruments to be used.  
 
171. The economic appraisal  of the proposed project , conducted during the design phase was divided in 3 sections 
based on the nature of the proposed interventions:  
 
(a) Adaptive livelihood  - The key benefit of this intervention is to support extreme poor women and girls to generate 
more income. The net present value (NPV) of this component ranges between $7.3 million and $61.7 million, 
and the internal rate of return between 14.4%  and 42.4%. (Please refer to Annex XII).  
(b) Rainwater collection system  - 1,250,000 million people will benefit from accessing clean water in six saline 
prone districts. The net present value (NPV) of this component ranges between - $1.0 million and $99.2 mill ion, 
and the internal rate of return between 9.6% and 37.4%. (Please refer to Annex XII).  
 (c) Integrated Climate Change Adaptation & Disaster preparedness  – The project will support and provide capacity 
to 300 community -based women volunteer groups who wi ll then provide access to early warning information 
to villagers in times of extreme weather events. The net present value (NPV) of this intervention ranges between $3.3 million and $13.9 million, and the internal rate of return between 36% and 94% dependi ng on the scenario  
that is used. (Please refer to Annex XII  for details).  
 
172. Individually, each component of this project delivers positive net present values even under a range (sensitivity) 
of conservative assumptions pertaining to the impacts (benefits) of the interventions. The overall project is therefore 
deemed to be extremel y attractive from a cost -benefit perspective.  
 
The details of the economic analysis are presented in Annex XII of this proposal.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
173. The main  two interventions of the  project  include the  1) development of a MoWCA financing scheme  targeting 
extreme poor women and adolescent girls to develop climate- resilient livelihoods ; and 2) expansion of drinking water 
supply to 1.25 M people all year around by installing large volume rainwater harvesting tanks.  The livelihood options to 
be selected will be simple to suit the local conditions  and without the need for  high level s of technology. Environmental 
and social risks have been assessed for the rainwater harvesting tanks  and are estimated as extremely low. Please 
refer to section G for mitigation actions.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
174. This project has completed the UNDP ’s Social and Environmental Screening Procedure and is deemed a 
Category  B project. As such,  an Environment and Social Management Plan ( SESP , ESMP and IPPF  including  the 
development of a Grievance Redress Mechanism ) are included under  Annex VI. This  screening was undertaken to 
ensure this project complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards. UNDP’s Social and Environmental 
Standards were reviewed by the GCF accreditation panel and deemed sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit low and 
medium  risk projects. The overall social and environmental risk category for this project is low as highlighted below. 
Specific project risks are listed in Section G below. Appropriate mitigation measures are included within the following 
section.  
 
Environmental  Impacts  
175. No major physical infrastructure or large scale production processes are planned, the displacement of people 
and related environmental degradation are avoided.  
 
176. As highlighted above, the project will include the construction of prefabricated rain water harvesting tanks that 
will be located at existing government and other buildings. The six districts where the rainwater harvesting system will 
be established receives approximately 2,000mm of rain annually. Given climate projects, this is likely to i ncrease given 
Bangladesh’s proximity to the coast and moreover its tropical environment.


---
*Page 49*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 61 F 
177. The construction of the rainwater tanks will require extremely small scale earth works for the development of the 
pad to place the rainwater tank on. Each tank will require a pad of  approximately 20 meters in diameter for each tank.  
Extremely small scale earth works will be required for the installation of the tanks. Given the design of the tanks and 
flexibility around the configuration of the three tanks at each building, any sensitive areas will be avoided, although it 
should be acknowledged that the GoB  buildings  have already resulted in changes from the original environment during 
construction. The other activities associated with the installation of the tanks will include the placement of guttering to 
collect and transport rainwater to the tanks; first flush diverters to ensure cleaning drinking water is collected in the tanks and piping to link the tanks together as  well as to access existing wells to allow groundwater recharge. All fittings 
etc. will be prefabricated to reduce waste.  
178. T
he only environmental impact could be the need to occasionally change the sterilization and purification 
systems associated with the rainwater harvesting tanks. However, given existing technology, and the use of UV 
sterilization and purification, ongoing impacts are considered unlikely except for the potential change of filter. This is in  
contrast to the high waste of desalinations plants that result in significant numbers of used filters and also the production of brine.  
179. B
eneficiary women and girls will pursue a divers e set  of livelihood options through support for adaptation 
measures including  skill building. The project will ensure that the current exploitation of natural resources is significantly 
reduced, particularly with respect to water , therefore balancing out livelihoods based on natural resources like 
mangrove reeds and palm fronds for weaving and roofing, or various processing of fish for food and other uses, with those that are not intrinsically tied to any  natural sensitive environments.  The project will therefore determine an optimal 
choice of livelihood options depending on the local context; biodiversity considerations, climate adaptability, and links 
to producer clusters and local market. An indicative list is presented as a footnote
25. The long- term ecological and 
stewardship incentives will be weighed against the immediate term need to earn cas h. 
180. P
roject staff will be trained to screen the process of selecting optimal climate adaptive livelihoods. For example, 
although crab- fattening is a relatively lucrative small business it cannot be recommended as a livelihood option 
because, it has been found to be environmentally damaging (causes loss of biodiversity). Concerns of this nature will 
be dealt with in detail in the awareness raising and incentivizing training sessions organized for women and girls and 
will be integrated into their adaptation and contingency planning outcomes.  
181. Pa
st social protection programmes evaluations have shown that poor households most vulnerable to climate 
change effects had successfully adopted various adaptation measures . “Now, non- beneficiaries are very eager to be 
the beneficiaries of the project. The people have become more interested to new adaptation ways and means, as they 
brought in more income and enhanced their social status ” (Advancing Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation 
(ACCCA) Analysis and Evaluation of the Pilot Action, UNITAR Report 2010). Gender, empowerment and cultural 
sensitivity around different livelihood options such as duck -rearing, charu making, hydroponics, mat weaving, and goat 
rearing have made substantial impacts (at the level of 5- 10 in the scale of 10 being the highest point of achievement).  
S
ocial Impacts  
182. The project is likely to produce relatively few manageable negative social risks, compared to its significant positive 
impacts. These risks are within the control of the project. Importantly, no people will be displaced or relocated. The 
project will be implemented in some locations inhabited by various marginalized groups, including ethnic minorities who have distinct lifestyle and livelihood activities. There are extremely poor Hindu families living in all these areas – all of 
these minority groups are known to be subjected to discrimination and repression by a section of vested interest groups belonging to the majority community.  
183. S
exual and gender based violence is another risk which these women and adolescent beneficiaries are likely to 
face quite frequently. Project will ensure justice to the victims through an effective online GRS and close partnership support from legal aid agencies.  
25Horticulture/homestead gardening, Livestock and poultry, Aquaculture, Cash grant, Small business and enterprise, Water supply, Sanitation, Cook 
stove and biomass, links to markets, food processing, savings and plinth raising, skills development on vocational trade


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 61 
 
 
 F 
184. The Adaptation Support Mechanism  reach will  always  be lower than the number of eligible women in a location. 
Therefore, the major risk is beneficiary selection bias that may exclude these socially marginalized people. This will be 
mitigated by officially gazetted selection criteria, utilization of participatory methodologies, a robust mechanism to 
address complaints and grievances, regularly monitored by the project, drawing gui dance from the Project Board. 
Community driven planning and construction creates transparency and accountability to those most incentivized to 
demand accountability: the beneficiaries themselves.  
 
185. Further, UNDP has institutionalized an informal and localized conflict management system in Bangladesh through 
Village Courts, which can potentially be applied in addressing grievanc es related to exclusion and complaints in 
implementing the project.   
 
Gender considerations  
186. The project’s design, methodological approach and theory of change has been aligned closely with the 
framework of the GCF’s  and UNDP’s  Gender Policy and Action Plan.  The project identifies and targets  primarily  women 
and girls whose specific livelihoods and overall socio- economic security are deeply dependent upon the natural 
environment.  While men are not direct or immediate stakeholder s, the project recognizes gender relations at the 
household and community levels, and seeks to further empower women at all decision making levels in relation to men. 
By focusing on building and supporting women’s adaptive capacities and gender empowerment , the project expects to 
improve women’s negotiation and decision making choices from a base of climate sensitive knowledge  and also have 
the ability to control her own assets and income. The activities proposed in the project have been designed with through 
consultation with women and girls, and the project will be implemented with woman’s own experiences, knowledge, and 
innovations.  
 
187. The project’s livelihoods approach considers complex immediate and long term considerations of adapting to 
climate change. It addresses priorities and needs as defined and articulated by girls and women (including on- going 
skills development and a holistic  approach to the intersecting and cross -cutting aspects of their livelihood adaptive 
capacities) at the household and at the community levels. An Adaptive Social Protection (ASP) approach that combines elements of Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) and Social Protection (SP), and that 
furthermore, targets women and constitutes a multi -layered investment that tackles the systemic and compounded 
aspects of poverty, climate shocks, livelihood security and gender equality.  
 
188. Furthermore, the project will facilitate collaborative learning and development among women and men where 
women would otherwise face barriers to engagement in decisions around preparing for and managing climate risks and disasters. The improved abilities of the beneficiaries in accessing or securing community and other resources will further 
influence gender dynamics at the household and community levels, with ultimate results being that women will be able 
to claim higher levels of productive assets, human capabilities and protection from shocks. In this way the project 
contributes to reducing the gender gap of climate change-
exacerbated social, economic and environmental 
vulnerabilities, this is in accordance with the objectives of the Fund. Through the liv elihoods  and capacity building 
activities for women, girls and men, the project may also reduce the risks for women to experience violence by enhancing protective factors such as ownership of productive assets, awareness of rights and agency and increased 
voice in household decision making for adult women and staying in school for adolescent girls.    
 
189. The project will adapt available MEL methodologies and tools including (i) Gender Disaggregated Analysis of 
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation toolkit, and (ii) Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI) to monitor 
gender equality and equity gains. The project anticipates defining and selecting measurable indicators drawing from the Women’s World Banking Gender Performance Indicators and the W+ (formerl y Women’s Carbon Indicators) in line 
with the GCF’s indicative indicators.  The indicators included in the logical framework include qualitative and quantitative 
gender -based result indicators at impact, and outcome and output levels.  
 
Grievance considerati ons 
190. 
The project has developed a complaint’s register along with a two tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism 
consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: Overview and Guidance (2014) and World Bank Group 
Safeguards Policies. The Grievance Redress Mechanism has further been designed in consideration of the specific 
local context and draws on existing processes and procedures for the resolution of complaints and grievances in


---
*Page 51*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 61 
 
 
 F 
Bangladesh. The Grievance Redress Mechanism established goals and objectives along with eligibility requirements 
to make a complaint and/or grievance. It has been designed that all parties will act in good faith throughout the process 
and more importantly, th at is will be arbitrary in nature in trying to achieve mutually acceptable resolutions for all parties. 
The Grievance Redress Mechanism also provides for the covering of costs for legitimate complaints or grievances so as individuals and/or groups are not disadvantaged by bring complaints to the attention of the Ministry and UNDP. 
Finally, the Grievance Redress Mechanism allows individuals and/or groups to also file a complaint with the Social and Environmental Compliance Unit within the Office of Anticorruption and Integrity within the UNDP should they have any 
concerns as to corruption, unethical behavior or where they believe their complaint or grievance has not been 
adequately addressed.  
 191. Below a summary of findings of the UNDP safeguards management inst ruments applied to appraise the project:  
 
Social and Environmental Screening Procedure -  SESP [Annex VI (a)]  
192. The project is designed to be implemented in six districts in Southern Bangladesh that have been severely 
impacted by climate change. This is a gender focused project that will deliver financial and skill training support to 
women and adolescent girls to implement climate- resilient livelihoods in a highly hierarchical social structure. The 
project is aimed to support at extreme poor households where women happen to be doubly marginalized and unequal.  
 
193. The clear objective of the project is thus to provide means and skills from the most disadvantaged families. The 
leading role assigned to women and girls and specific actions and awareness raising com ponents would work to remove 
many gender specific disadvantages like, poor health, malnutrition, lack of income among others.  In addition, the project 
does not have any components that will result in adverse impact to the environment. Quite the reverse, the project will be transformative by reducing the continued heavy reliance on saline groundwater that is already under significant 
stress from sea level rise and increased salinity. Moreover, the project moves away from energy intensive desalination 
project s that have adverse environmental impacts.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Plan [Annex VI (b)]  
194. The Environmental and Social Management Plan is a management tool used to assist in minimizing the impact 
to the environment and reach a set of environmental objectives. To ensure the environmental objectives of the projects 
are met, the ESMP will be used by the contractor to structure and control the environmental management safeguards that are required to avoid or mitigate adverse effects on the environment . The ESMP has established control/mitigation 
activities strategies relevant to the environmental and social objectives of the project.  
 195. Relevant information from the ESMP is related to the land requirements for water tanks. All water tanks are 
proposed to  be constructed on land currently owned by the Government of Bangladesh. As such, there is no 
requirement for any form of land acquisition.  As part of UNDP’s due diligence, an analysis and consultations were 
undertaken as to the likelihood of any of the pr oject’s activities involving indigenous people and/or ethnic minorities. 
There are a total of 1,170 ethnic minority households within the project area that will have access to the various 
components of the project. An Indigenous People’s Planning Framework  has been prepared for the project as a 
separate document (see Annex VI (c) of the GCF Submission).  
 Indigenous People’s Planning Framework –  IPPF [Annex VI (c)] 
196. The Indigenous People’s Planning Framework has been prepared to guide the formulation of project 
components, ensuring equal distribution of project benefits between Indigenous Peoples and Ethnic Minorities and non-
Indigenous Peoples/Ethnic Minorities who are affected by the Project. In addition, the project relies in two mechanisms 
to ensure proper  participation of eligible women and girls indistinct of their ethical background: 1) a stringent selection 
criteria based in the national context and socio- economic profile of the population to be targeted that was developed by 
MowCA’s DWA and 2) A Complaints Register and Grievance Redress Mechanism has been structured to address any complaints from residents from the target area, beneficiaries of the project and ethnic minorities living in the area and/or 
benefiting from the project.  
 
197. 
Field data was collected in 118 Unions of the six districts. Indigenous Peoples/Ethnic Minorities living in the area 
are mainly the fishermen, farmers, daily wage laborers, small business holders, housewives and students. In 
Shyamnagar and Taltali, the sur vey team interviewed Indigenous Peoples/Ethnic Minorities who identified themselves


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 61 
 
 
 F 
as Mahato, Munda and Rakhain. Details of the consultations are included in the IPPF.  All consultations were undertaken 
based on Free, Prior and Informed Consent. No one was  consulted unless they had fully and openly agreed to the 
consultations. As the project will not have any impacts on indigenous peoples’ lands and natural resources, nor will 
involve relocation from their land and the project will have not impacts on their  cultural heritage, FPIC while undertaken 
is deemed not to be necessarily sought.  
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
198. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here: https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial -Rules -and-Regulations_E.pdf  
 
199. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures available at https://info.undp.org/global/ popp/frm/Pages/introduction.aspx  
 
200. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section 
of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement 
standar ds and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP.  
See here: https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx  
 
201. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/documents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Imp
lementation%20by%20the%20Government%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx&action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1  
 
202. The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) which are available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ Pages/default.aspx.  The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by 
UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations.  
 203. The national executing entity MoWCA -  also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP 
terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s signature 
of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds.  Both of these documents require compliance.   
 204. Prior to signature of the proj ect document, all national Implementing Partners like MoWCA need to have 
undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP to assess capacities to implement the project.  During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and qualit y assurance in accordance with its policies 
and procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation (FAA) to be agreed with the GCF.  This may include, but is not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation 
and participation in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project 
level or at i mplementing partner level on the resources received from UNDP.  
 
205. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on- site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and 
special audits. During micro- assessment, there can weaknesses identified for which actions are required to addresses 
the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will mean that the level of assur ance activities 
will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have to be reviewed if necessary.  All details are available here:
https://undg.org/wp- content/uploads/2015/02/2014- UNDG -HACT -Framework -
English -FINAL.pdf . 
 
206. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific require ments agreed in the AMA currently being negotiated with the GCF.  In UNDP scheduled audits


---
*Page 53*
---

AP
PRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 61 F 
are performed during the programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the implementing 
partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to 
the implementing partner were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled 
audit can consist of a financial audit or an internal control audit.  Further details can be provided upon request.   
207
. All GCF resources will be provided to the implementing partner, less any agreed cost recovery amount.  Under 
UNDP’s national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the implementing partner 
(executing entity) for the implementation of agreed and approved programme activities, in accordance with UNDP standard policies and the NIM Guidelines. The implementing partner reports back expenditure via a financial report on 
quarterly basis to UNDP.  Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA as and when it is agreed.
 
208. A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document signature) 
is provided in Annex XIII.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 61 
 
 
 G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Extraction of resources from sensitive and protected 
natural sites . Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
MoWCA’s financial support system  to beneficiaries will consider site specific environmental sensitivity, and sources of 
inputs for livelihood. In addition, the livelihoods training component for beneficiaries will also include elements raising 
awareness of environmental impacts. Project monitoring will include UNDP’s safeguard standards and associated 
indicators for analysis and reporting. The Project Board will oversee how the project’s safeguard plan is implemented 
and followed through.  The mitigation steps will significantly lower the probability of risk and the risk reduction level will 
be high.    
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Poor management of rainwater water harvesting tanks.  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
There is an extremely low risk that rainwater harvesting tanks may not be adequately maintained. It is assumed that 
the only maintenance requirements will be the replacement of any broken fittings and to ensure that all pipework is kept free from leaves. The first flush diverters will ensure public safety along with the proposed sterilization and 
purific ation process of water. Importantly, all tanks will be tied to the ground, to reduce impacts to them during 
significant climate events.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
There might have pilferage and beneficiary targeting in 
the financial support to livelihoods , especially  
beneficiary selection bias that may exclude socially 
marginalized people such as minorities.  
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
209. The project design has carefully considered all social, financial, operational and environmental risks. The 
environmental risks are low, as neither the project nor beneficiaries will implement any major infrastructure works. 
Financial risk may arise at the procurement and beneficiary selection stage, and the project design includes adequate 
safeguard measures to minimize this risk. The major operational risk, at medium probability, is the reduction of coverage of beneficiaries due to currency exchange loss or domestic inflation.  
 
210. Awareness of these risks is well integrated in the project design, and resources have been allocated to mitigate 
them. The environmental risk will be mitigated by following the principles of environmental sustainability and standards for biodiversity conservation. Stringent safeguard measures will be in place in the Sundarbans area, following GoB ’s 
guidelines. For the financial risk, the project will include representatives from UNDP and NDA in major procurement 
stages; undertake audits by the Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate of the Auditor General Office; and employ 
UNDP’s additional audit mechanisms. Coverage risk will be mitigated by careful forecasting of price and exchange 
rate and building- in of appropriate contingencies. The beneficiary selecti on risk will be mitigated by introducing officially 
gazette selection criteria, utilization of participatory methodologies and a complaints and robust grievance address 
mechanism regularly monitored by the project, and drawing guidance from the project boa rd and steering committee.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 61 
 
 
 G 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
MoWCA is managing several social protection programmes targeting women which are evaluated and monitored 
regularly, therefore the likelihood of this risk occurring in this project is low. However, in order to ensure continued 
mitigation of this risk, the following measures will be utilized: officially gazetted selection criteria, the use of participatory 
methodologies, establishment of a robust complaints and grievance address mechanism regularly monitored by t he 
project, and guidance drawn from the project board and steering committee. Proper communication at local level, 
engaging Local Government Institutions in social mobilization, and engaging main counterparts into project consultation process will reduce a ny social conflict. Further, UNDP has institutionalized an informal and localized 
conflict management system in Bangladesh through Village Courts, which can potentially be applied in addressing 
grievances related to exclusion and complaints in implementing the project. The mitigation steps will significantly lower 
the probability of risk and the risk reduction level will be high.  
 
Internal Control Framework for the Adaptive Livelihood Component will be developed in consultation with primary stakeholders. Moreover, a participatory monitoring and evaluation (social audit) will be conducted by primary beneficiary groups, where the issue of pilferage and biases will be monitored and assessed.  
 
Specific selection criteria have been established to remove any disc rimination and/or bias.  F urther, as highlighted 
above, a two tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: 
Overview and Guidance (2014) and World Bank Group Safeguards Policies. The Grievance Redress Mechanism has 
further been designed in consideration of the specific local context and draws on existing processes and procedures 
for the resolution of complaints and grievances in Ban gladesh.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Distribution of financial assistance  may decrease 
women beneficiaries’ safety, especially in the 
Sundarbans areas where crime is already high.  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Receiving direct financial assistance may represent a risk  to the beneficiaries. With the adoption of appropriate security 
measures by the programme participants and staff, this problem can be successfully mitigated. MoWCA  will transfer 
financial support to beneficiaries  through the local branches of nationalized commercial banks (NCBs).  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Non transparent selection against women from poorest 
household including ethnic and religious minorities .  
 Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will promote  that minority communities are well represented in decision making. An Indigenous People’s 
Planning Framework  [See Annex  VI (c) ] has been developed to make sure that ethnic minorities not only participate 
but benefit from the project.  Organizations – working with minorities will be engaged in the selection committee of 
beneficiaries. In addition, motivational work to bring inter -communal harmony will be introduced, particularl y in the 
areas where such tension exists. The mitigation steps will significantly lower the probability of risk and the risk reduction 
level will be high.  
 
Specific selection criteria have been established to remove any discrimination and/or bias.  Further , a two tiered 
Grievance Redress Mechanism consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: Overview and 
Guidance (2014) and World Bank Group Safeguards Policies. The Grievance Redress Mechanism has further been 
designed in consideration of the s pecific local context and draws on existing processes and procedures for the 
resolution of complaints and grievances in Bangladesh.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 61 
 
 
 G 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Fiduciary risk at procurement, beneficiary selection 
stage.  Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
MoWCA as implementing partner will have the overall responsibility for ensuring successful mitigation for this risk.  
This risk will be mitigated by the inclusion of representatives from UNDP and NDA in the major procurement processes  
as well as  regular audit by Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate of the Auditor General Office. Further, UNDP will 
employ its own audit mechanisms, whi ch include Independent Third Party Monitoring and Office of Audit and 
Investigation. UNDP internal control framework which consists of checks and balances at different levels and is fully 
in line with international standards will be utilized.  Spot checks and other missions will be undertaken to assess and 
reduce fiduciary risks (in addition to the regular audits). The project will introduce and gradually upscale a social audit 
mechanism which will allow beneficiaries to review the project and g ive critical feedback, which the board will review 
periodically. The mitigation steps will significantly lower the probability of risk and the risk reduction level will be high . 
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Possible delays in project implementation due to major 
disaster, political unrest and delay in the selection of 
beneficiaries through consultative process.  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This will be mitigated by adopting UNDP’s business continuity plan, decentralized offices, and coordinated planning 
with local government and strong oversight by the Project Board. The mitigation steps will significantly lower the 
probability of risk and the risk reduction level will be high.  
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Coverage of beneficiaries may be reduced in the event 
of high local inflation and major fall in exchange rate 
(US$ to Bangladeshi Taka).  Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will monitor exchange and inflation trends that might affect planned coverage of beneficiaries. In case of 
this financial situation, the project will adjust its resources in order to reduce impact on the coverage and quality of 
investment. Wher e possible, UNDP and MoWCA will mobilize additional resources to offset the exchange loss. These 
mitigation steps will lower the probability of risk. The risk reduction level will be high.  
 
The project has factored in 0.5% of gain/loss from exchange rate in the project budget.  Add itionally, to mitigate risks 
caused by exchange rate loss at operational level, UNDP has in place requirement to report on project expenditures 
on a quarterly basis, in addition to year -end reporting. That said, actual project ex penditures will be reported within 
three months. This will close the gap of difference in exchange rate fluctuation at the point of actual disbursement and 
at the point of reporting.  
Selected Risk Factor 9   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
MoWCA experience in water -related projects  and 
implementing RWH tanks is limited.  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 57*
---

R
ISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 61 G 
The oversight structure of the project includes a specific Technical Quality Assurance Committee will include 
representatives from UNDP, DWA, DPHE, DDM, DoE, IPH, BUET and 1 ONG. This committee will provide technical 
oversight for the rolling out and installation of the RWH tanks assuring that all technical aspects are considered from 
different Ministries.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 61 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level26 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development  The project enhances GoB ’s capacity to address climate change impacts from a)  social 
protection standpoint focusing in supporting 50,000 women and girls to graduate from 
extreme poverty  and b) by expanding the water drinking supply to 1.2 M people.   
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term  
(if 
applica
ble) Final  
Fund -level impacts  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions  Total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
disaggregated by gender;   
Project reports: 
annual reports; 
mid-term and 
final 
evaluations ; 
project MIS 
Database  
 
 
 Total 3.2 
M 
population 
in targeted 
six districts 
have 
limited 
means to 
address poverty 
issues and 
climate 
change 
impacts.  
  Project 
interventions 
will benefit 
directly:  
- 57,000 
women and 
adolescent 
girls,  
- 1.25 M 
people 
(secure water 
supply)  
 
-direct access 
to early 
warning 
information to 
1.27 million 
people and indirectly 2 M 
representing 
50% 
of the 
total 
population of 
target districts.  
 The women and girls 
beneficiaries are willing 
to use the project 
facilities in transforming 
their life and livelihoods.  
 
GoB continues its 
support in improving 
national level early 
warning system as they 
invested in last 10 
years.  
 
Local Government 
remain helpful and 
persistent in improving the life and livelihoods 
of climate vulnerable 
women and girls.  
 
Macro level policy and 
programme support 
continues for other non-
climatic human 
development aspects 
for women.  
  
                                                             
26 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at  the 
following li nk (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 59*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 61 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure to 
climate risks  7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public -sector 
services of Fund- supported 
tools, instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability.  
% of women in 6 high risk 
districts having access to 
timely early warning 
information with advisory 
for women.  Questionnaire -
based surveys 
(QBS)/ 
Interviews) at 
the beginning, 
mid-term and 
end of th e 
project.  
Impact 
assessment at 
the end of the 
project.  Currently 
none of the 
social 
protection 
programm
es 
managed 
by MoWCA 
integrate 
support to 
promote 
climate-
resilient 
livelihoods 
in the face 
of climate 
change 
impacts.  After the 
end of the 
project, 1.25 
M will 
benefit 
directly from 
safe drinking 
water that 
will increase 
resilience at 
the 
household 
and 
community 
level.  
40,000 
women and 
17,000 girls 
directly 
benefit  from 
support to 
pursue 
resilient 
livelihoods.  Lessons from 
supporting  climate 
resilien t livelihoods is 
captured for 
knowledge.  
Enhanced climate 
inclusive livelihoods 
practice; sustained 
water supply, and 
capacity building will  
increase resilience and 
adaptive capacity of 
target women.  
Project/programme outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Climate- Resilient Drinking
Water Supply for Women and 
Girls Expanded  % of beneficiaries having 
access to safe drinking 
water for livelihoods and  
hygienic sanitation 
(disaggregated by gender) . (a) Baseline and 
Endline; (b) Longitudinal Monitoring Report, (c) Mid Term Review; Project 
Evaluation 
Report and Impact  Current 
price/litre 
restrict 
access for 
safe 
drinking 
water from 
HH, 
especially 
from 
women -
headed 
households 
living under 
the 
extreme 
poverty 
line.  700,000 
people will 
benefit 
directly from 
safe drinking 
water  that 
will be used 
partially for 
hygienic 
sanitation.  1.25 M will 
benefit 
directly from 
safe drinking 
water  No major disaster 
occurred in the project 
locations that may 
delay the installation of 
the water harvesting 
tanks.  
Sufficient rainfall can 
be collected to help 
achieve water security.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 61 
 
 
 H 
2. Adaptive Livelihoods of Women 
and Girls Supported  % of beneficiaries practicing 
climate resilient livelihoods 
(disaggregated by gender).  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Percentage of population 
(and relative disaggregation 
of women and men) 
adopting climate -resilient 
livelihood practices /options 
by sector (fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.)  (a) Baseline and 
Endline; (b) 
Longitudinal 
Monitoring 
Report, (c) Mid Term Review; 
Project 
Evaluation 
Report and 
Impact 
Assessment Report.   
 
 
(a) Baseline and 
Endline; (b) 
Longitudinal Monitoring Report, (c) Mid 
Term Review; 
Project 
Evaluation 
Report and Impact Assessment 
Report.
 Prevalent 
salinity in 
shallow 
and 
groundwat
er wate r 
and 
associated 
cost to 
desalinate 
water 
proven  to 
be majors 
barriers to 
support 
livelihoods.  
Currently 
no social 
protection 
programme 
supporting 
women to 
pursue 
climate-
resilient 
livelihoods 
in the 
target 6 
districts.  
 20,000 
women and 
17,000 
adolescent 
girls directly 
benefit from 
support to 
pursue  
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the 
first 24-
month cycle, 
20,000 
women and 
17,000 
adolescent 
girls directly 
benefit from 
support to 
pursue  
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods.  40,000 
women and 
17,000 girls 
directly 
benefit from 
support  to 
pursue  
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2% of the 
total 
population in 
selected 6 
districts are 
pursuing 
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods.  Contextual non -
climatic factors beyond 
project’s control may 
limit to achieve 
resilient livelihood for 
100% beneficiaries.  
 
3. Institutional capacity within 
MOWCA to monitor, evaluate and 
report on adaptive social 
protection strengthened  Number of government staff 
(local, regional, and 
national) and partner NGOS  
who effectively apply new 
skills to monitor, evaluate 
and report on adaptive 
social protection 
(disaggregated by gender).  (a) Baseline and 
Endline; (b) Longitudinal 
Monitoring 
Report, (c) Mid Term Review; 
Project 
Evaluation 
Report and 
Impact Assessment Report.  Currently 
none of the 
social 
protection 
programme
s managed 
by MoWCA 
integrate 
climate-
resilient 
livelihoods 
training to 
address 
climate 
change 
impacts.  
 20,000 
women and 
17,000 
adolescent 
girls directly 
benefit from 
support to 
pursue  
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods.  40,000 
women and 
17,000 girls 
directly 
benefit from 
support to 
pursue  
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods.  
 
A Climate 
Change Unit 
created 
under 
MoWCA to 
inform 
ongoing and 
future 
adaptive 
social 
protection 
programmes
. 
 MoWCA/DWA 
succe ssfully establish 
mechanisms for 
cooperation and joint 
work with NGOs.  
 
Willingness by other 
relevant Ministries  to 
incorporate adaptation 
considerations into 
social protection 
programmes.  
 
Lessons learned are 
identified and analyzed 
in a timely manner, 
supporting the 
effective sharing of 
knowledge.  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 61 
 
 
 H 
1.1   Social Mobilization for 
Community Level Rain Water 
Harvesting Management.  Women -led process to develop an inclusive 
water management strategy that will include 
engagement with community leaders, 
associations, and CBOs (farmers, fishermen, and 
women associations) and other civil- based 
organizations with local credibility to identify best strategy to install and manage the water 
tanks.  
  
1.1.1. Establish at least f ive 
social platforms/open 
spaces (one for each district 
in the project area) for 
discussions around the 
installation and 
management of the water 
harvesting tanks.  
1.1.2 Define, jointly with 
local community members, 
an inclusive water 
management strategy.  
1.1.3 Design and delivery a 
general public awareness 
campaign on the water 
management strategy.  Define, jointly with local community 
members, an inclusive water 
management strategy.  
 
1.2   Year round access to 
sustainable and environment 
friendly safe and fresh drinking 
water (1350 large scale rain water tanks).  To underpin the safe, fresh and clean water and 
sanitation needs of girls and women at household 
and communal levels, appropriate technical, 
material and financial support for ensuring year -
round su stained access is integrated with 
women’s livelihood approach. This includes 
additional water supply through water harvesting 
technologies at the community levels for women 
and their families.  1.2.1 Procure and install the 
water tanks.  
1.2.2 Train the user s on 
maintenance of the water 
tanks.  
1.2.3 Develop sustainable 
M&O plan.  Installation, maintenance and 
sustaining rainwater harvesting tanks in 
5 selected districts.  
2.1   On -farm and off -farm 
climate adaptive livelihoods of 
40,000 extreme poor women.  Women are supported with skills, capacity 
development and appropriate technologies in 
their adaptive livelihood selections and 
diversification of current livelihood activities.  
MoWCA will provide financial assistance  for 
women to pursue climate resilient l ivelihoods  on 
the basis of a planned adaptive capacity skills 
development.  
*Activity 2.1 and Activity 2.2 will be jointly implemented as to provide support  to pursue  
climate livelihoods  (including  training ) to women 
and adolescent girls. For this reason inputs for these two activities will be complementary and 
are not duplicated in the inputs column.  2.1.1. Call for Proposal  
Selection of PNGOs  
2.1.2. Selection of target 
beneficiaries  
2.1.3 Household and 
Community Livelihood Risk 
and Adaptation Assessment 
(Household Profiling) 
including expenditures for 
the pursuit of climate 
resilient livelihoods . 
2.1.4. MoWCA t ransfer s 
financial support for pre -
identified planned 
expenditures through agent 
banking in monthly 
stipends.  
2.1.5. Monitoring (and 
evaluating) the use of 
resources  in improving their 
livelihoods.  Provide financial assistance  to make 
livelihoods options  of targeted 
recipients climate adaptive.  
Provide practical means of skills and 
capacity building . 
2.2. Skills on climate resilient off -
farm livelihoods (vocational, trades and green technologies) 
for 1 7,000 adolescent girls.  Adolescent girls are supported with skills, 
capacity development and appropriate technologies in their adaptive livelihood 
selections and diversification of current 
livelihood activities.  
MoWCA will finance costs for  adolescent girls to 
acquire skills for climate resilient livelihoods on 
the basis of a planned adaptive capacity skills 
development.  2.2.1 Skill and Capacity 
Needs Assessment  
2.2.2. Selection of Skill and 
Capacity Areas for each 
beneficiary  
2.2.3. Development of 
Learning Materials  
2.2.4. Selection of Trainers  
2.2.5. Training of Trainers  
2.2.6. Provide appropriate 
skill training and capacity 
building support  Provide practical means of skills and 
capacity building.  
Generate and integrate climate 
information into learning cycle of 
livelihood practices.


---
*Page 62*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 61 H 
2.3   Establish, capacitate and 
equip women early warning volunteer team in 357 wards.  Bangladesh has well established community 
early warning (EW) volunteer system which includes volunteers of both gender, but which does not otherwise take into account gender considerations in volunteer management, equipment distribution training or message  
delivery. The project will work with the Cyclone 
Preparedness Programme to increase the 
number of women volunteers and ensure that they have access to training opportunities and equipment necessary to perform their role. The project does not seek to generate early warning 
information rather plan to invest on 
dissemination mechanism that ensure timely delivery of EW information, making sure that the information is relevant to the livelihood with clear advice on what to do and make sure that women understand the warning for action. The 
project will form 300 community based women 
volunteer groups. They group will provide direct access to EW to 1.27  million people that may 
reach another 2.0  million by other means of 
communication.  2.3.1 Community Risk and 
Capac ity Assessment for 
EW 
2.3.2 Develop women and 
youth volunteer groups  
2.3.3 Train the volunteers 
groups  
2.3.4 Equip the trained 
volunteers with essential 
equipment  
2.3.5 Mock drills for uses of 
the community early 
warning system  
2.3.6 Monitor and supervise 
the social mobilization 
function of volunteer 
groups.  Provide support to train, equip and 
mobilize the women and youth 
volunteers for early warning.  
3.1   Institutional capacity to 
monitor, evaluate and report 
climate change adaptation.  The project will establish real time efficiency and 
longitudinal impact monitoring mechanisms for gathering lessons and policy evidence. It will set randomized control trials (RCT) to assess actions to pursue climate resilient livelihoods by 
beneficiary women and adolescent girls.  In 
addition, the project will provide risk 
management information to all grants recipients throughout both 24 -month cycles.  
 The project will also organize high level policy 
dialogue to support the development of a policy environm ent for adaptive social protection. The 
project will seize policy influence opportunities over time, including the 8th Five Year Plan, Vision paper beyond 2021 and implementation 
of the National Social Security Strategy. The 
lessons will be shared through partnering with national and international knowledge institutions.  3.1.1 Develop a Grievance 
Management System, 
uniform financial reporting 
format for NGOs and ICT 
based on the disbursement 
and monitoring mechanism.  
3.1.2. Risk management 
information provision to 
grants recipients 
throughout both 24 -month 
cycles.  
3.1.3 . Documentation of 
the good practices and 
learning based on RCT.  
3.1.4 . Development of 
Climate Adaptive Social 
Protection Tool kit and 
Guideline  
3.1.5 . Lessons learned 
workshops in different 
stages of the project.  
3.1.6  Lessons sharing 
events  Provide risk management information 
to all grants recipients and support in 
capturing, documenting and sharing 
lessons and knowledge generated from 
the project to replicate a climate 
adaptive social pro tection model.  
3.2   Establishing a Gender and Climate Change Cell in the Department of Women’s Affairs.  Effort by GoB  ministries to integrate climate 
change into their policy and planning are constrained by sustained external support and lack of policy evidence and research. To address this, the project plans to establish a Climate Change Cell within DWA. The cell will p lay a 
number of roles: (1) Lead the knowledge management component of the project; (ii) make available lessons from the project to the policy makers; (iii) take forward activities after the project.  3.2.1 Proposal for a climate 
change cell in 
DWA/MoWCA  
3.2.2 Capacity Needs 
Assessment of the Cell  
3.2.3  Provide support in full 
functional aspects of the 
cell 
3.2.4 Develop a sustaining 
model of the cell.  Provide institutional capacity building 
support in establishing climate change 
cell in DWA/MoWCA


---
*Page 63*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 61 H 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the  UNDP POPP  and the UNDP Evaluation 
Policy .  
O
versight and monitoring responsibilities:  
211. The primary responsibility for day -today project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Manager. 
The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The Project 
Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, 
including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.   
212. T
he UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP . Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be provided 
by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.   
213. A
 project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to: (a) re -orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project implementation; (b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and communication lines  and conflict resolution mechanisms; (c) review the results framework and discuss reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; (d) review financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; (e) plan and schedule Project Board 
meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than 
one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board.    
214. T
he Project Manager, the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective 
input to the annual Project Implementation Report (PIR) for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager 
will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well in advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR. The annual PIR 
will be shared with the project board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding 
management response will serve as the final project report package.    
215. A
n independent mid- term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the 
project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center
. The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP 
Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report will be available in English.  
A
dditional GCF evaluation requirements: 
216. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of 
the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates and 
guidance available on  the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final TE report will be cleared by the UNDP Country 
Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be 
available in English.   
217. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office 
evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the public


---
*Page 64*
---

RE
SULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 61 H 
UNDP Evaluation Resource Cent re (ERC) ( http://erc.undp.org ). Once uploaded to the ERC, the UNDP Independent 
Evaluation Office will undertake a quality assessment and validate the findings and ratings in the TE report, and rate the 
quality of the TE report.   
218. T
he UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations.  
219. A
 detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project document.  
220. UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period in accordance with the AMA and 
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). UNDP has country presence and capacity to perform such functions. In the event of any additional post -implementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the 
GCF Secretariat in the final year of the project and will prepare a post -implementation monitoring plan and budget for 
approval by the GCF Board as necessary.


---
*Page 65*
---

AN
NEXES 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 61 I
*Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
doc
uments.  
I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL  
☒ NDA  No -objection Letter Annex I  
☒ F
easibility Study Annex II  
☐ I
ntegrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format) Annex III  
Not Applicable for this project  
☒ C
onfirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment Annex IV  
☒ T
erm Sheet Annex V  
☒ Social and Environmental Screening Template Annex VI (a)  
☒        Environmental and Social Management Plan  Annex VI (b) 
☒        Indigenous People's Planning Framework (IPPF)   Annex VI (c ) 
☒ A ppraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations Annex VII  
☒ E valuation Report of the baseline project Annex VIII  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme Annex IX  
☒ T imetable of project/programme implementation Annex X  
 ☐ P roject/programme confirmation Annex XI  Forthcoming when AMA between UNDP and GCF is agreed  
A
dditional Information  
☒  E conomic Analysis Annex XII (a), Annex XII (b)  
☒ A dditional Background Details Annex XIII  
 ☒ R esponses to GCF comments on Funding Proposal  Annex XIV  
 ☒ A dditional Supporting Documents Annex XV


---
*Page 66*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.0 5 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 67*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.05 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Enhancing Women and Girls Adaptive Capacity to Climate Change 
in Bangladesh  
Accredited entity  UNDP  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Social and Environmental Screening Template (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -11-13 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Bengali  
Link to disclosure  http://www.bd.undp.org /content/bangladesh/en/home/presscenter/articles/2
016/11/12/public -disclosure -environmental -and-social -management -plan -for-
the-proposed -green -climate -fund -project.html  
The ES MP below contains an impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the 
requirements of  PS1 for a category B project.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -11-13 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Bengali  
Link to disclosure  http://www.bd.undp.org/content/bangladesh/en/home/pr esscenter/articles/2
016/11/12/public -disclosure -environmental -and-social -management -plan -for-
the-proposed -green -climate -fund -project.html  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  n/a 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Indigenous People Planning Framework  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -11-13 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Bengali  
Link to disclosure  http://www.bd.undp.org/content/banglade sh/en/home/presscenter/articles/2
016/11/12/public -disclosure -environmental -and-social -management -plan -for-
the-proposed -green -climate -fund -project.html  
________