=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20161124130811+09'00'
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/ModDate: D:20161124155258+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum I 
Funding proposal package for FP 028 GCF/B.1 5/13/Add. 01 
24 November  2016  Meeting of the Board  
13 – 15 Decem ber 2016  
Apia, Samoa  
Provisional agenda item 16(e) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ Business loan programme for GHG emissions
reduction ” submitted by XacBank LLC ;
b)No-objection letter s issued by the national desig nated authorities  or focal point s; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national  
designated authority(i es) or focal p oint(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund , the funding proposal titled “Business loan 
programme for GHG emissions reduction ” submitted by XacBank LLC  is being circulated 
on a limited distribution basis only to Board Memb ers and Alternate Board Members  to 
ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive 
information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.15/13/Add.01  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal summary submitted by the accredited entity         1 
No-objection letter s issued by t he national designated authorities  or focal point s  58 
 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure         60


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/ Program  Title:  MSME Business Loan Program for GHG Emission 
Reduction  
Country/Region:  Mongolia  
Accredited Entity:  XacBank LLC  
Date of Submission:  November 4th, 2016


---
*Page 4*
---

Contents  
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAM  SUMMARY  
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
Section I  ANNEX ES 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited
entity. For all other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities
have discretion in how they wish to present the information. Accredited entities can eith er directly
incorporate information into this proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with
cross -reference to other project documents such  as project appraisal document.
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed
50.
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAM  SUMMARY  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 57 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Program  Information  
A.1.1. Project / program  title Business Loan Program for GHG Emission 
Reduction  
A.1.2. Project or program  programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region Mongolia  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Nature Conservation Fund, Ministry of Environment 
and Tourism  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  XacBank  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☒  Direct  ☐  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity: XacBank  
Beneficiary: MSMEs (target 50% women -led) 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD)  ☒  Micro (≤10)  
☐  Medium (50<x≤250) ☒  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☒  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  November 4th, 2016  
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Tuul Galzagd, Director of Eco Banking Department  
Organization  XacBank  
Email address  Tuul.G@xacbank.mn  
Telephone number  +976 -7577 -1888 (ext. 701)  
Mailing address  XacBank HQ Bldg, Ulaanbaatar -14200, Post Branch 
20A, PO Box -72, MONGOLIA  
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply) 
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ Low emission transport 
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.) 
☒ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies 
and supply chain management, etc.)   
☒ Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment 
and management, etc.)  
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply 
sources and supply chain management, relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, 
etc.) 
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security


---
*Page 6*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAM  SUMMARY  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 57 A 
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☐ 
A.2.  Project / Program  Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
The proposed Business Loan Program for GHG  Emissions Reduction will be  a $60 million facility  aimed at 
promoting the use of energy efficient and renewable energy solutions in the Mongolian MSME market. 
MSME’s make up more than 90% of the businesses in Mongolia, the majority of which are currently using 
extremely outdated and inefficient equipment, processes and buildings  (privately -held buildings only ). The 
program ’s main objective is to  promote both the use and production of EE/RE products  in the domestic 
market . For more description on the specific types of eligible sub -projects, see the table titled “MSME 
Eligibility” in section C.3. Of the total $6 0 million program, $20 million would be funded from the GCF, which 
allows XacBank to improve its lending terms (long er loan tenor and lower interest rate) through blending with 
its current EE/RE funds, including the GCPF GHG emission reduction program, which this program will be 
an extension of.  
Currently, XacBank has roughly 200 active corporate clients, more than 3,400 active SME clients  (of 22,000 
SMEs that have conducted business with the Bank over the years) , and many more micro -sized clients at 
hand. As a result of this program,  a paradigm shift can be achieved as  many of these entities, as well as the 
rest of the roughly 60,000 registered MSMEs in Mongolia, will reap the benefits of a low cost, high efficiency 
loan product. Furthermore, as XacBank is the  national  implementing entity, the level of country ownership  is 
extremely high, including working in concert with the NDA and engaging local stakeholders to ensure that 
the program will continue to align with Mongolia’s INDCs, NAMAs, as well as other relevant legislation, such 
as the Green Development Policy of Mon golia.  
Additionally, the program will look to support women -led MSMEs as much as possible by offering more 
concessional loan terms to such entities. The definition of women -led MSMEs can be found in the Gender 
Action Plan as attached  in annex 8 . By the en d of the third year of the program, the facility ’s portfolio  will be 
made up of at least 50% women -led MSMEs.  
By implementing this pr ogram, it is estimated that the Bank would be able to finance projects to reduce  
carbon emissions by more than 1. 2 million tons over its lifespan of 8  years.   
A.3. Project/ Program  Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  The Bank does not need its Board approval for this program  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  31/1/2017  
Estimated implementation start and end 
date Start: 2017  
End:  2025 
All GCF funds will be fully repaid to GCF on the agreed date  
Project/ program  lifespan  8 years


---
*Page 7*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 57 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Program  
The program will provide XacBank with a US$ 20 million  credit  facility  for energy efficiency (EE) and 
renewable e nergy  (RE) projects. In addition to the funds received from the GCF, XacBank will blend with its 
existing EE/RE facilities to create a US$6 0 million facility. As the MSME pilot program has been capped at 
US$20 million per project/program, as well as being simplified to a credi t facility  from the GCF side,  that is 
the financial instrument available for XacBank’s first GCF co -financed program.  
Compon
ent Sub-
component (if 
applicable)  Amount 
(for 
entire 
project)  Currency Local 
currency  GCF 
funding 
amount  Currency of 
disbursement  to 
recipient  
1. Loans 60 million 
USD ($)  60 million 
USD 
equivalent 
MNT  20 Mongolian 
National Tugrik 
(MNT)  
Total project financing  60 60 million 
USD 
equivalent 
MNT  20 Mongolian 
National Tugrik 
(MNT)  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  60 million 
USD ($)  
(b) GCF 
financing  to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  20 million 
USD ($)  As outlined  in the 
Term  Sheet  As outlined in the 
Term Sheet  
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  20 million 
USD ($)  
(c) Co -
financing  to 
recipient  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority


---
*Page 8*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 57 B 
Senior 
Loans  
Senior 
Loans  
Senior 
Loans  20 
15 
5 million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) GCPF  
EBRD  
DWM n/a 
n/a 
n/a n/a 
n/a 
n/a pari passu  
pari passu  
pari passu  
Lead financing institution: GCPF, GCF equally shared. Please see Financial Model included in 
annex 2 for further details regar ding co -financing institutions and pricing information.  Although 
the co -financing funders come with different tenors, XacBank’s GHG Emission Reduction 
program is an on -going program, and as it has in the past, XacBank will continue to attract 
continuous sources of funding t o perpetuate this program. Terms have already been discussed 
with the GCPF to extend the program beyond the original term of 2017. As such, the blending 
component of the MSME program will be sustainable and continuous . 
Please see annex 3 for relevant co ntractual agreements with co -funding entities.  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and 
AE For the  financing of the program , the GCF will enter into an agreement with XacBank , which 
will regulate the terms and conditio ns described in the term sheet and any necessary 
deviations from the AMA (currently under negotiation). In accordance  with the AMA, XacBank 
shall administer the funds disbursed by the GCF . 
B.3. Financial Market s Overview (if applicable)  
Financial barriers are one of the primary reasons for the Mongolian market to not adopt new, energy efficient 
or renewable energy solutions. Currently, many Mongolian businesses or individuals operate heavily under 
the short -term cost savings method, and a s such, usually opt to purchase/implement the cheapest possible 
solution, while not giving much thought to the long term cost potential of these cheaper, sub -par products or 
the cost saving potential of high quality, energy efficiency or renewable energy s olutions. To compound this 
problem, the Mongolian market has extremely high financing costs, which come wit h relatively short loan 
tenors, and other mitigating factors such as grace periods, guarantees, and equity investments are not  
adequately available. The lack of available and accessible commercial finance on offer by local banks 
impedes the ability of MSMEs to invest in energy efficiency and renewable energy solutions.  
Overview of available market rates  
Typically, most commercial banks in Mongolia offer loans in the local currency, Mongolian National Tugrik 
(MNT) as well as U.S. Dollars (USD), however, as the Mongolian economy has been in recession since early 
2015, and the foreign exchange risk continues to rise due to the depreciation of the MNT, most banks, 
including XacBank, have opted to offer loans in MNT only since late 2015. As XacBank plans to disburse the 
loans in this program in MNTs, the below information of available market rates only take into consideration the 
available MNT loans to th e consumers of Mongolia.


---
*Page 9*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 57 B 
The low -interest rate government loans are distributed through commercial banks . The market interest rates 
for obtaining a loan vary widely, from low to extremely high. Loan rates typically available to the average 
MSME looking to  implement EE/RE solutions tend to land on the high side, which is the biggest barrier for 
most of them , followed by general awareness of the possibility of such a solution ’s availableness . As such, 
the program aims to offer rates on the lower side of the spectrum of available, non -government subsidized 
rates to promote and catalyze EE/RE projects and awareness in the market. Doing so will not cause a 
disruption in the market, but rather will incentivize many MSMEs to pursue EE/RE solutions from both the 
market and demand side.  
XacBank’s own EE/RE business loan program offers  rates between  18.0% and 19.2%  per annum in MNT . 
These rates are comparably lower than the average business loan, which are usually above 20.2%. The 
reason that XacBank has been able to  offer lower than market rates on these types of loans is that we are 
constantly looking for ways to offer more competitive products by finding concessional sources of funding 
from outside of Mongolia in order to offer better interest rates and longer loan  tenors. In the past, we have 
worked with international partners such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 
and the Global Climate Partnership Fund (GCPF) to implement programs aimed at EE/RE solutions.  
However, even with these partners, XacBank  haven’t been able to meet the market demand for the ideal 
EE/RE product that sufficiently incentivizes a critical mass of Mongolian MSMEs to adopt environmentally 
friendly and energy efficient solutions into their everyday business as of yet. XacBank received US$20 million 
from the GCPF  in 2013  and also US$15 million from the EBRD (MonSEFF)  in 2014  to establish its own 
Business Loan Program for GHG Emission Reductions (to which this GCF program will be an extension of) . 
Still, as can be seen, the interest rate and loan tenor for both  these products are not a marked improvement 
over other loans available on the Mongo lian commercial banking market due to the fact that these funds were 
given to X acBank at relatively high co sts, the breakdown of which can be found in the financial model 
included in  annex 2.


---
*Page 10*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 57 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
National  
Regulatory  
In order to  achieve the Mongolian government’s stated goal of a 14% reduction in total national GHG 
emissions, the INDC outlined a number of policies across the energy, industrial, agricultural, and waste 
sectors. The MSME program falls under the following INDC goal:  “increase the share of renewable electricity 
capacity to 30% of total electricity generation capacity, from 7.62% in 2014.”    For information on other 
national priorities, such as INDCs, NAMAs, etc. see section E.5.  
With regards to the Mongolian national  context, the MSME program is entering the market at precisely the 
right time. Energy usage regulations that have been in debate for years have finally been passed and are 
beginning to be implemented. Primary among these regulations is the Energy Conservat ion Law. The law 
mandates that large energy users in Mongolia reduce energy consumption by 15%, as  audited by experts . 
For more information on this regulation, see E.2.4.  
Political  
In mid -2016, Mongolia held national elections and the incumbent Mongolian Democratic Party was 
overwhelming replaced by the Mongolian Peoples’ Party. The incoming government has pledged to 
introduce more consistent and favorable policies to encourage forei gn investment. Other than this, there is 
no material political difference that will effect this proposal.  
Economic  
Mongolia is currently in the midst of an economic crisis with ballooning government debt and a rapi dly 
depreciating local currency.  Thus, it is a difficult climate to convince businesses to invest in anything that 
costs more than the market -minimum .  However , in the recession, saving costs has become ever more 
important  and companies are looking to cut their budget. Thus , it is the right tim e for the entry of our program 
to support entrepreneurs  in the cutting of costs to increase profits.  The government has raised Central Bank 
interest rates 5 points to 15%. With hard monetary policy in place and forecasted to continue into the near 
future, future cheaper sources of funding will become even more crucial to MSMEs wishing to obtain a loan 
from commercial banks.  
Sub-National/Municipal  
Rural and non -capital city MSME outreach are crucial components of this proposal, as many energy -
intensive MSMEs are based outside the city. That being said, the key geographic focus of the program 
remains Ulaanbaatar (UB), home to half the Mongolia popula tion and the base of the overwhelming majority 
of Mongolian MSMEs. Thus, it is relevant to discuss the context of Ulaanbaatar municipality and how this 
context strategically supports the entry of the XacBank MSME program. In 2013, Mongolian parliament 
pass ed the Green Development Strategic Plan (GDSP) for Ulaanbaatar 2020 . The GDSP highlights air 
pollution as the primary environmental challenge faced by Ulaanbaatar, writing “ as long as we are dependent 
on burning coal with old technology we will have air pollution.” The GDSP proposes the mitigation measure 
of increasing efficient utilization of energy, which includes as a sub -clause “promote use of energy efficient 
technologie s in the private sector.” The MSME program would directly support the Ulaanbaatar government 
in achieving their greening goals by removing market barriers to investing in energy efficient solutions. 
Another stated priority is increasing the supply of clean  energy in the Mongolian market. By supporting both 
energy efficient and renewable energy technologies, the MSME program also helps the municipal


---
*Page 11*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 57 C 
government achieve this second priority. For more information on the GDSP, see: 
https://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GreenDevelopmentStrategicActionPlanforUlaanbaatar2020.pdf  
Mongolian Private Sector  
As mentioned above, business conditions are  particularly difficult in Mongolia at this time.  However, this is 
good news for the MSME program, as the program helps businesses struggling to achieve profits through 
added revenue cut costs by receiving favorable financing terms. While organic investmen t in RE and EE 
might otherwise be slow, the above described Energy Conservation Law has mandated such investments. 
The combination of these elements bodes well for the MSME program project pipeline.  Private sector 
entities need  to comply with new regulati ons during a time when they are particularly concerned about their 
bottom line and government interest rates are rising.  
XacBank  
XacBank is primed to launch this women -centered MSME program. The Eco Banking Department  has 
added staff and capacity in orde r to ensure smooth and effective implementation. Capturing the women -led 
MSME market has been a strategic priority of XacBank since the 2014 IFC study (referred to throughout this 
Funding Proposal). In addition, XacBank has demonstrated the ability to impl ement similar programs to the 
one here proposed.  See section E.5.2 for more information on XacBank’s relevant past experience.  
C.2. Project  / Program  Objective  against Baseline  
Electricity and Fuel Mix 
There are five types of fuel used for the national electricity generation  in Mongolia : coal (lignite), wind, hydro, 
diesel, and imported electricity1. The share of the overall electricity generated from 2013 to 2015 by the type 
of fuel used is shown in Table 1 and Figure 1  of Annex 10: Calculation of Emission Factor of Mongolia2. 
Majority of the total electricity supply is provided from lignite accounting for 90% in 2015. The amount of 
electricity fr om wind and hydro po wer plants was 0.11 TWh (2% of total) in 2013, 0.18 TWh (3% of total) in 
2014 and 0.22 TWh (4% of total) in 2015.  
The Mongolian national grid is composed of five interconnected electricity systems (Figure 2  in Annex 10): 
CES, WES, AUES, EES, and SES. The n ational grid imports electricity from Russia and China (6% of all 
electricity supplied in 2015). Electricity from China is also supplied to the Oyu Tolgoi area in the southern 
region and areas in the southern, western and eastern region. However, these are as are not connected to 
the Southern Energy System, Western Energy System, or Eastern Energy System. Therefore, these areas 
and their electricity imports from China are excluded from the calculation of the national grid emission factor.  
Calculation of Emis sion Factor 
XacBank will use the latest available calculation on emission factor of Mongolia. Currently, the latest study 
on emission factor of Mongolia was completed by the Institute of Global Environmental Strategies (IGES) in 
March 2016. It calculated the Central grid emission factor of Mongolia for  the period of  2010 -2012 at 
1.129tCO2/MWh3.  
1 National Dispatching Center, Ministry of Energy Mongolia, 2016   
2 IGES, Calculating the Conservative Emission Factor of Mongolia, Sep 2016  
3 IGES Climate Policy and Market Mechanism Status Report, March 2016


---
*Page 12*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 57 C 
XacBank will use this data for projects to be connected to the Central grid. For other projects to be 
connected to other grids, XacBank will use standardized baseline, developed by UNFCCC in collaboration 
with the IGES  as part of Regional Collaboration Cen ter. The draft of this standardized baseline has been 
calculated, pending approval from t he Government of Mongolia . If the approval is complete within 2016, the 
standardized emission factor of Mongolia is scheduled to be officially published in April 2017.    
IGES has also calculated emission factor for solar PV projects as part of Joint Crediting Mechanism  in Sep 
2016 . Such available calculations will be used for applicable  PV projects. For other projects, standardized 
baseline will be used. Sources of GHG Emissions  
The energy  sector is the most significant source of CO2 emissions in Mongolia. The contribution of different 
sectors to solid fuel mainly includes energy, manufacturing, transport, agricultural and other industries. The 
following table illustrates energy and carbon intensity in Mongolia  
Table 3.1 Energy and carbon intensity of Mongolia 
Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) 
(billion 2005 USD)  Total Primary 
Energy Supply 
(million toe)  Emissions 
from fuel 
combustion 
(million tCO2)  Energy 
Intensity 
(TPES/GDP)  Carbon 
Intensity 
(CO2/GDP  
5.1 5.2 18.7 1.0 3.6 
Source: Internationa l Energy Agency 2015  
When comparing GHG emission to other countries, Mongolia’s total GHG emission level is low. But GHG 
production is high per capita when compared to other developing countries. This can  be attributed to 
Mongolia’s extremely cold climate, the widespread use of fossil fuels for energy, and low efficiency of fuel 
and energy use.  
Energy Sector  
In terms of emissions, the  energy sector accounted for  51.9%  of all GHG emissions , and the second l argest 
GHG emission is the agricultural sector, accounting for 36.6% in 201 2. The contribution of emission from 
each sector is illustrated in the following table.  
Table 3.2 CO2 emissions from solid fuel 
Year  Sector  
Energy 
Industries  Manufacturing 
Industries  Transport  Commercial  Residential  Agriculture  Other  
2012  6,751.67  624.90  47.11  12.34  702.17  4.15 629.15


---
*Page 13*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 57 C 
Projecti ons of GHG emission between 2006  and 2030 have been estimated in Mongolia’s Second National 
Communication in 2010 in the following table.  
Table 3.2  
Sector  GHG emissions on Gg Co2 -eq. Average annual growth rate %  
2006  2010  2015  2025  2025  2030  2006 -
2015  2015 -
2020  2020 -
2030  2006 -
2030  
Energy  10,2
20 14,03
3 20,23
3 25,93
0 32,79
6 41,81
5 10.89  5.63 6.13 12.88  
Industr
y 891 1,354  1,602  1,836  2,065  2,318  8.87 2.92 2.63 6.67 
Agricul
ture 6,46
2 6,405  6,573  6,657  6,762  6,867  0.19 0.26 0.32 0.26 
LULUC
F -
2,08
3 -1,932  -1,785  -1,420  -1,000  -680 -1.59 2.84 4.07 -2.81 
Waste  138 158 183 209 254 294 3.62 2.84 4.07 4.71 
Source: MNET, UNEP  
Total GHG emissions are projected to increase 3.25 times from 2006 to 2030. Generally, energy 
consumption is expected to increase rapidly due to economic and population growth. GHG emission in 
energy sectors from 2006 to 2030 are expected to increase by 4 times.  
Technology Needs Assessment /Available EE and RE Technologies  
An extensive Technology Needs Assessment  (TNA) report was conducted for the climate change mitigation 
activities in Mo ngolia in 2013 by United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the UNEP -Risoe 
Centre in collaboration with the Regional Centre Asian Institute of Technology. It analyzed key mitigation 
technologies in priority sectors of Mongolia such as large scale Hyd ro-power plants; Wind parks, Super 
critical coal fired power plants; energy efficient lighting; and improvement of insulation of panel apartment 
buildings. Barrier Analysis and Enabling Framework accesses the barriers and measures identified for all 
techno logies  with Action Plan and Project Idea for each technology. In addition, the report analyzed the 
financial feasibility of these projects, the local certification system, and other crucial technological information 
for the purposes of this program.  
Top pr iority technologies were selected based on the costs and benefit of technologies in consideration of 
national social, environmental and economic development priorities as well as weighted score from 
stakeholder consultation as shown below:  
Technology Prior itization for: Projects:  
Energy industries/supply 
subsector:  - Large hydropower plant;  
- Wind turbines (onshore, large scale);  
- Pulverized coal combustion technologies.


---
*Page 14*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 57 C 
Residential and commercial 
subsector  Efficient lighting and improved insulation of panel apartment buildings  
Barrier Analysis  
Mongolia faces challenges in mobilizing its full potential to achieve energy efficiency in these sectors. Barrier 
analysis in the UNEP’s TNA considers financial, economic and technical challenges faced by different 
prioritized technologies in the energy industry sub -sector. The most common barriers include the following:  
Type of Common Barriers:  Barriers:  
Economic and financial 
barriers  inappr opriate financial incentives; high cost of capital; high transaction cost; 
lack or inadequate access to financial resources and uncertain macro -
economic environment.  
Policy, legal and regulatory 
barriers  lack of long -term political commitment and uncertai n government policies 
(political risks for investors); lack of government control for implementation of 
laws and regulations; government or utility monopoly of energy sector.  
Market and network 
barriers  underdeveloped competition, insufficient coordination between relevant 
ministries and other stakeholders.  
The priorities of barriers are different in many cases in selected specific technologies. For example, for the 
large scale HPP technology, policy -related barriers have first priorities. Reg arding the wind park, barriers of 
the highest priority are system constraints (capacity limits of the grid system).  The major barriers are shown 
in detail as follows:  
Price barriers: new EE and RE technologies are high cost therefor e does not make investin g in
newer technologies appealing. Also on top of paying high amount upfront for EE and RE
technologies, interest rates for loans are high at financial institutions.
Technical  knowledge  barriers  for assessment of loan risks : Majority of the financial insti tution does
not have EE or RE  loan programs , therefor e lacks the knowledge, experience, and expertise in
providing energy efficiency loan. These financial institutions often don’t know the opportunities and
know -hows of energy costs saving, energy audits, and performing feasibility studies.
Lack of knowledge  on available loans, EE and RE benefits and technologies : potential borrowers are
not aware of  EE and RE  loan program , for example how the loan is process ed at a bank. Also
potential customers don’t know  the positive impact of new EE and RE  investment towards the
environment.
Addition al barriers for renewable energy technology: renewable carry additional barriers vis -à-vis
energy efficiency upgrades. The primary barrier is the additional costs of installing renewable
technology (e.g. re -wiring, land flattening for solar), compared to the direct one -to-one replacement of
energy efficiency technologies. In addition, the perceived risk of renewable is higher, even though the
eventual cost savings are likely lower, due to dependency on natural elements.
With all of these energy usage and greenhouse gas ba rrier contributing in the energy and carbon intensity in 
Mongolia, XacBank sees potential and opportunity in making a positive impact to these barriers. At the same 
time, the bank will be supporting the sustainable energy market in public and private secto rs through our 
program.  
The objective of  XacBank’s program are:


---
*Page 15*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 57 C 
1.Providing commercially feasible financing and climate resilience financing
The program will provide efficient and effective financing mechanism f or energy efficiency and 
renewable projects  through our business models, which are designed to create incentive for our current 
and potential customers. With GCF participation, the MSME program would be able to offer interest rates 
that make investment in EE and RE technology more feasible as well as support the new but growing 
domestic EE and RE producers, suppliers, and service providers that also fall under the category of 
MSMEs.  
2.Increase women’s access to climate finance by bolstering their economic empowerment
The program’s gender -mainstreamed  approach hopes to simultaneously support the ventures of women -
led MSMEs, and reward MSMEs that employ women at top positions, while correcting historic market 
gaps in the financial services industry’s ability to serve the needs of female customers.  
3.Show expertise and skill in the fiel d
With our current and ongoing learning experience in the sustainable financing field, the Bank will provide 
an experienced service to our customers . Such expertise includes support in energy audits, monitoring 
services, poss ible eligible projects, as well as financial guidance.  
4.Raising awareness about sustainability in general
The bank will launch its program by engaging with relevant stakeholders, creating public awareness 
about sustainable energy and climate resilience pr ojects. This would not only create demand for our 
program, but it would also engage with stakeholders, create potential customers, and increase public 
knowledge in general.  
C.3. Project / Program  Description  
Project Description  
The proposed Business Loan Prog ram for GHG Emissions Reduction  will provide XacBank with a 20 million 
USD revolving facility for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects dedicated to MSME lending in the 
Mongolian market. Additionally, the program will promote gender equa l access to the funding by making sure 
that women -led MSMEs are a core focus of the loan activities. The program aims to define women -led 
MSMES as satisfying either of the following conditions:  
a)Firms with  51% or more ownership by women; or
b)Firms with at le ast 30% women on the Board of Directors or in senior management positions; or
c)At least 40% women employment.
As such, by the end of the third year of the program (the initial final drawdown period suggested by the 
GCF), the facility ’s portfolio  will be ma de up of at least 50% women -led MSMEs.  
The loan facility is aimed at the MSME. It aims to install energy efficient processes and equipment within 
existing/new factories, with businesses as end -users of energy efficient product. In addition, producers, 
traders, retailers and installation service providers of energy efficient and renewable energy products would 
also be eligible for the loan, thereby incentivizing the production and use of such products within Mongolia.  
The facility would also support the MSME loan market from demand side. It would promote energy efficient 
and renewable energy product use and energy efficient business practices with loan incentives.


---
*Page 16*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 57 C 
Many of the businesses operating in Mongolia are utilizing old and inefficient infrastructure. The climate 
impact potential for each loan is large. XacBank has seen demand for its energy efficient and renewable 
loan products in the past, but the interest r ate is too high for many potential customers at current rates. 
Although XacBank offers their energy efficiency and renewable energy loan products at lower than market 
rates, they are still not concessional enough to incentivize the majority of the market.  
GCF financing would increase the number of businesses receiving energy efficiency and renewable energy 
loans and make a large climate impact. XacBank would utilize GCF financing to improve its lending t erms 
(longer tenors, lower rates ) and increase the disbursal of energy efficiency and renewable energy loans to 
Mongolian MSMEs .  
The Business Loan Prog ram for GHG Emissions Reduction  will be an expansion of the currently existing  
program  that XacBank has been running since 2013, and wil l have an ever stronger positive impact on local 
MSMEs, including further market development; develop institutional capacity for local MSMEs through 
knowledge and process sharing ; encouragement of the deployment of new technologies in Mongolia, a 
developin g country; regional impact (as the program  is open to all 21 aimags in Mongolia, throughout which 
XacBank has an active presence  with its 86 branches ); targets micro -sized as well as women -led enterprises 
and in a developing and vulnerable country (Mongoli a). More in -depth detail regarding the existing program 
can be found in section C.4.   
Developing the institutional capacities of local MSMEs is a crucial tenant of the proposed program. 
Knowledge of what constitutes energy efficiency, or renewable energy,  or “green” -ness, is lacking in 
Mongolia beyond the basic concept of individual -use solar cells or hybrid cars. Past experience has 
demonstrated that MSMEs are initially interested in green lending programs due to the lower rates, but often 
do not know wha t eligible projects include, and why they make sense for their bottom line. Thus, the program 
will educate business -owners about what it means to be green, how to become green, and why it makes 
sense for them from a business -standpoint to institute these c hanges. In this  way, beyond access to the 
favorable rates, participation in the program and even an initial meeting regarding program participation will 
strengthen institutional capacity of Mongolian MSMEs.  
XacBank’s own institutional capacity will be dev eloped to allow the AE to evaluate the institutional capacity 
of MSMEs and deliver evaluations about the most cost -effective way to increase energy -efficiency through 
the program.  
Main Objectives  
Enable increased energy efficiency and renewable energy amongst end -user SMEs
Stimulate supply and demand for energy efficient and renewable energy products by enabling activity
amongst producers, traders, installation service providers and users.
Gender action plan  
The MSME program will aim to promote gender equality in the implementation of the program . For this, 
gender disaggregated data will be assessed  against the appropriate indicator to measure enhanced access 
for women to loans.  The program aims to define wome n-led MSMES as satisfying one  of the following 
conditions:  
a)Firms with 51% or more ownership by women;
b)Firms with at least 30% women on the Board of Directors or in senior management positions; or


---
*Page 17*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 57 C 
c)At least 40% women employment.
XacBank has prepared an overall Gender Action Plan, which includes specific activities, expected outputs, 
outcomes and impacts as well as monitoring indicators. Resources will be allocated to integrate these into 
the implementation of the program. Further details regarding gender considerations can be found in the 
Gender Action Plan attached in the annex  8 of this document.  
Anticipated Outcomes  
Currently, XacBank has roughly 200 active corporate clients, more than 22,000 SME clients (of which 3,400 
are active clients ), and many more micro -sized clients at hand. As a result of the GHG emission reduction 
program, many of these entities, as well as the rest of the roughly 60,000 registered SMEs in Mongolia, will 
reap the benefits of a low cost, high eff iciency loan product.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Program  Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
XacBank overview  
Since its founding in 2001, XacBank has created sustainable growth in the banking and financial sector of 
Mongolia, with continuously expanding operations. Through this expansion, XacBank has remained true to 
its original vision of “People, Planet, Profit”  and aims to represent the interests of all its clients, from 
mainstream customers to traditionally marginalized Mongolians, such as those in the ger district.  
The Bank has an extensive reach throughout the project’s host country of Mongolia. It comprise s 86 
branches, units and business service centers throughout the nation. XacBank employs 1,700 specialized 
personnel and more than 1,800 merchants who swiftly serve more than 700 thousand customers with 
complex financial services using latest state -of-art technology. XacBank’s audited yearly financial statements 
and annual reports for every year since 2001 are readily available on the website at 
http://www.xacbank.mn/en/96/about -xacbank/report/annual -report . XacBank is hailed as a model for 
corporate responsibility and social -impact driven business in Mongolia.  
As of September 30th, 2016:  
Capital Adequacy Ratio : 18.65%  
Credit Rating : B3 (Moody’s)  
XacBank relevant experience  
As the project sponsor, XacBank brings a wealth of past management experience on similar projects in 
similar areas. XacBank is the market leader in providing business loans for energy efficiency and renewable 
energy solutions with a SME portfolio of about US$15 million.  
Beginning in 2009, XacBank started distributing consumption loans under the “Energy Efficient Product 
Distribution Program”, which was financed by the Millennium Challenge Account, the World Bank’s “Clean 
Air Project”, and the government o f Mongolia’s special “Clean Air Fund”. These financiers combined to allow 
for a subsidy that let residents of the Ger Residential Area to purchase energy efficient stoves, ger blankets, 
vestibules and to energy efficient houses at a largely discounted pric e, which is crucial, as this segment of 
the population is economically challenged, and don’t have access to basic amenities including running water, 
central heating, or a sewage system. This project allowed about 80% of the 185,000 households in the area


---
*Page 18*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 57 C 
to purchase one or more of the products through XacBank product centers, which helps to reduce the 
massive amounts of pollution produced from burning low quality coal in old, traditional inefficient stoves to 
endure the 8 month long heating season of Ulaanb aatar, during which the temperatures can drop as low as -
40C during some of those months.  
Then, starting in 2012, XacBank began disbursing energy efficient housing and mortgage loans. In 2013, 
XacBank implemented the Business Loan for GHG Emission Reduction program, and through this program, 
the Bank began disbursing loans to SMEs for energy ef ficient and renewable energy product producers, 
traders, installation service providers, and end users based on the requirement that they are able to produce 
a 20% increase in energy efficiency or reduction in emissions.  
Finally, in 2015, the bank introd uced two new products. The first being an expansion to the GHG reduction 
program, a facility called MonSEFF – Mongolian Sustainable Energy Financing Facility, in cooperation with 
EBRD, to further support energy efficiency and renewable energy projects for end users, which requires a 
15% increase in energy efficiency cases, and all renewable energy projects are qualified. One major benefit 
of MonSEFF is the complementary technical advisory provided to the client and the bank through an 
international team of energy experts and engineers that help evaluate the projects. The second product was 
Green Car Loans, which allows Mongolians to gain access to better than market loan rates to purchase 
hybrid cars.  
As a result of these projects, XacBank is a trusted name  in the SME business community with already -
established direct lines of communication. These prior SME loan program s have laid the ground work for this 
larger -scale project and given XacBank valuable project management and monitoring capabilities.  
Curren tly, the MonSEFF loan terms are 18% annual interest rate (in local currency) with a maximum loan 
term of five years, with a total facility size of US$15 million. Another source of funding dedicated to EE/RE 
projects have a 19.2% annual interest rate (local currency), also with a maximum loan term of five years, 
with a total facility size of US$20 million. In the upcoming month s, XacBank is set to receive U$5  million in 
funding another source of funding for EE/RE projects at similar rates as the previously mentioned two 
facilities.  
Although these facilities provide lower -than-market rates and longer loan terms, they still have the same 
collateral requirements (no guarantee funding) and they are still deemed too expensive for most clients of 
the bank. The reason being that they are all made available to the Bank in USD, which is then converted to 
MNT (Mongolian National Tugrik). The final interest rates of these facilities include costs such as currency 
risk, operational and overhead costs, risk costs, currency swap fees, etc. However, the Bank does not stand 
to make a profit margin on its EE/RE loans.  
XacBank plans to combine e xisting sources of funding that the Bank uses for its current GHG emission 
reduction program with GCF funding to do blending and lending through the expanded GHG emission 
reduction program. As mentioned elsewhere in this concept note, the main need for GCF  funding stems from 
the demand for lower interest rates, longer loan terms, and lower collateral requirements for loans. By 
combining the GCF funding with the currently existing funding, the Bank would be able to accomplish all of 
those goals.  
C.5. Market  Overview  (if applicable)


---
*Page 19*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 57 C 
Historical and forecasted market for the product  
A 2013 report for XacBank conducted by the Asia Development Bank (attached to this application) found that 
the market size of the high priority investment opportunities for EE and RE in SMEs has been conservatively 
estimated to be USD 296 million, with an estimated carbon emission reduction potential of over 230,000  tons 
of CO2 equivalent per annum. Additional low -priority investment opportunities also exist in areas such as 
cashmer e production and poultry farming. The report’s market predictions are summarized in the below table:  
The ADB report includes significant findings on the projected energy market: “As the economy continues to
grow, demand for electricity and heat in Mong olia has grown significantly too. Mongolia is already facing power 
shortages, with peak power demand in the country amounting to over 1000 MW whereas available supply 
capacity is only 836 MW. In order to bridge this demand -supply mismatch, the country alre ady imports 120 -
140 MW of power from Russia every year. This dependence has undesirable political implications for Mongolia. 
However, power and heat demand in the country is expected to grow significantly over the next few years, 
given the rapid growth in power demand in Ulaanbaatar and in the mining region of South Gobi. ADB estimates 
that power demand in Mongolia, in the medium growth scenario, will more than triple between 2011 and 2020 
(from 774 MW to 2404 MW), driven primarily by an over 900 MW increas e in power demand from the two large 
mines (Tavan Tolgoi and Oyu Tolgoi) that are currently under development in the mining region of South Gobi. 
In the low (CAGR 9.3%) and high (CAGR 10.5%) growth scenarios estimated in the ADB report, total power 
demand  by 2030 is 4073 MW and 4961 MW respectively.”  
Current Market Challenges  
Despite more favorable  terms and high demand for SMEs’ energy efficient projects, the loans are still 
considered too expensive for a majority of MSMEs and corporates in Mongolia. The current concessional 
loans vary from 18% -19.2% per year (in local currency), depending on the f acility that the EE loan is coming 
from, which is below a normal business loan that XacBank offers, which range from 21% -29% per year (in 
local currency). The lower interest rate is still not enough to entice many customers to take an EE loan 
during the pr olonged economic down turn that Mongolia has experienced since early 2015. XacBank’s 
market research for a similar SME loan through the MonSEFF program demonstrated that SMEs were 
interested in the program and had high potential to fully leverage the loan for improved energy efficiency; 
however, the high rates deterred these prospective program  recipients.  
In addition to high rates, the loans require large collateral requirements. Even if willing to burden the high 
interest rates, most Mongolian SMEs do no t own the assets needed to back a loan. XacBank would like to 
utilize GCF financing to improve its lending terms (lower interest rates, longer loan terms, lower collateral 
requirements) and increase the disbursal of energy efficiency and renewable energy l oans to Mongolian 
companies. Collateral requirements are very high for customers. There are tax benefits for some EE 
products, but there are no other incentives to support the use of EE/RE solutions. With GCF funding, 
Investment OpportunityPrimary Target 
Market Segment(s)Estimated
Market SizeEstimated Carbon Emission
Reduction Potential
1Demand-side energy efficiency in 
commercial buildingsSMEs USD 42 Million14,400 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
2Energy efficiency in pre-cast panel 
residential buildings in UlaanbaatarHouseholds USD 8.8 Million38,500 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
3Rooftop solar in commercial buildings in 
UlaanbaatarSMEs USD 200 Million150,000 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
4Mining sector - diesel hybridization and 
replacement by solarSmall and medium 
sized mines USD 32 Million10,500 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
5Renewable energy in agriculture sector - 
biogas potential in dairy and chicken 
farmsSMEs USD 21 Million56,500 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
Investment OpportunityPrimary Target 
Market Segment(s)Estimated 
Market SizeEstimated Carbon Emission
Reduction Potential
1Demand-side energy efficiency in 
commercial buildingsSMEs USD 42 Million14,400 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
2Energy efficiency in pre-cast panel
residential buildings in UlaanbaatarHouseholds USD 8.8 Million38,500 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
3Rooftop solar in commercial buildings in 
UlaanbaatarSMEs USD 200 Million150,000 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
4Mining sector - diesel hybridization and 
replacement by solarSmall and medium 
sized mines USD 32 Million10,500 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum
5Renewable energy in agriculture sector - 
biogas potential in dairy and chicken 
farmsSMEs USD 21 Million56,500 tCO2 equivalent per 
annum


---
*Page 20*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 57 C 
XacBank could improve its loan terms b y blending it with its currently existing sources of funding and be able 
to provide a cheaper, longer, and more flexible loan product to incentivize Mongolia MSMEs and corporates 
to pursue EE/RE solutions.  
Despite rapid growth in banking and financial ser vices sector in Mongolia and a growing awareness among 
businesses, government institutions and the general population about the importance of clean energy and 
energy efficiency to the country’s economy, financing challenges remain, especially in making fin ancing 
available to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) at terms that are required for making clean energy and 
energy efficiency projects financially viable. A major constraint is the low availability of long -term capital for 
banks, which is critical for t hem to provide long -term loans to infrastructure projects, including energy efficiency 
and clean energy projects.4  
Hence, the relatively lower access to finance for SMEs is a major gap in Mongolia’s financial sector, which 
can be termed as the ‘missing mi ddle’. According to the World Bank Enterprise Survey,5 more than 30% of 
firms in Mongolia identified access to finance as the biggest constraint to their growth, when compared to the 
East Asia and Pacific regional average of 17%. This is further confirmed by the fact that 47% of all loans in 
2011 were made to large enterprises, 28% to households and retail borrowers but only 9% to SMEs.6 
Access to finance to SMEs is further constrained if the borrowing requirement is for sunrise sectors such as 
clean energy  and energy efficiency, due to perceived risks by banks and lack of technical capacity within 
both banks and SMEs to develop, assess and evaluate such project proposals.7 
Key competitors, market shares, customer base 
Though demand for this product is high amongst SMEs, there is almost no competition in the market. 
XacBank is currently the only provider of energy efficiency loans in Mongolia, with a US$15 million SME loan 
portfolio in this field.  As mentioned above, th ough lower than regular interest rates, the rates on EE/RE 
loans are still quite high. The current customer base of XacBank includes 200 active corporate clients, more 
than 3,400 active SME clients, and many more micro -sized clients; though many of these c lients are not able 
to take advantage of the EE/RE loans due to the existing limitations. However, it is anticipated that with 
lower collateral requirements and cheaper and longer term loans, a much larger portion of the Bank’s clients 
would be able to par take in the program , as well attract new clientele who are interested in doing the same.  
As EE is still a new idea to Mongolian businesses, there is a huge pool of potential for this market to develop 
further, especially in the SME/corporate sector. On A ugust 18th, 2016, Mongol Bank (the country’s central 
bank) raised its benchmark interest rate by 4.5 percentage points to 15%, in an effort to stabilize the MNT, 
which had seen a decline in value for a record 24 straight days at that point. As a result, lo an conditions will 
continue to toughen, mainly through further increased interest rates. With the hard monetary policy in place 
and forecasted to continue in the near future, cheaper sources of funding will become even more crucial to 
entities wishing to o btain a loan from commercial banks. Upon securing GCF funds, XacBank will be able to 
provide EE/RE loans at an even more attractive position, considering the recent benchmark rate hike.  
In addition to diversifying through better loan terms, the target en tities of this loan facility would be broader 
than they have been. As of now, the main beneficiaries of the GHG program are the energy end -users 
themselves, as that portion of the market is eligible to receive MonSEFF financing, which has the most 
4 ADB report  
5 http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/  
6 Source: Bank of Mongol ia 
7 ADB report


---
*Page 21*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 57 C 
concessi onal rates available at XacBank. As the Bank cannot lower the interest rates sufficiently to entice all 
segments of the market, this is a big barrier to further development of the EE/RE loan market. Through 
blending with GCF funds and being able to provide  lower interest rates with longer loan terms and lower 
collateral requirements, XacBank would be able to expand its EE/RE loan services to all market segments, 
including producers, traders, installation service providers, etc.   
Currently, the only compet itor is Khan Bank, which recently became a partner institution of MonSEFF to 
provide the same EE loans that XacBank has been providing since 2015.  However, they have only 
disbursed two loans and the loan conditions are largely the same as the current XacB ank EE loans.  
Pricing structure  
XacBank’s loan policy states that the Bank shall only disburse loans in the same currency as the business’s 
income is in. Therefore, if a company’s income is in USD, then they are eligible for USD loans, and the same 
applie s for MNT income businesses. As nearly all of Mongolian business’ incomes are in MNT, the Bank 
carries the brunt of the currency exchange risk because the Bank receives large sources of funding in USD, 
and then converts it to MNT  with a currency swap with the Bank of Mongolia (BoM), Mongolia’s central bank,  
in order to disburse in MNT, which represents a large cost to the Bank and in turn, the customer.  
For this pilot MSME program from the GCF, part of the requirements are that each program/project is 
capped at US$20 million, and it is also stipulated that the GCF cannot be the single largest financier of the 
program. As such, XacBank will drawdown the GCF’s US$20 million, convert the dollars into MNT with a 
swap with the BoM, then blend with its already e xisting EE/RE facilities. The program’s pricing structure is 
included in the financial model attached in the annex  2.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
Regulation  
XacBank acquired its commercial banking license on December 28th, 2001. A copy of said license can b e 
made available if necessary. XacBank do es not need to obtain any additional licenses or permits to carry  out 
the proposed activities in this program.   
Taxation  
As the GCF is an international entity, XacBank is not requir ed to pay any withholding tax upon r eceiving 
funding from the GCF.  
Insurance  
XacBank holds the following insurance policies:  
Corporate Liability Insurance
Bankers Blanket Bond and Electronic & Computer Crime Insurance Policy
Directors & Officers Liability  Insurance
Comprehensive Crime Insurance
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements


---
*Page 22*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 57 C 
XacBank (AE) will be the executing entity of this program. As such, XacBank will manage the facility and 
have overall responsibility for the program, and will provide the necessary governance and oversight over 
the Facility.  
Sub-loans will be distributed through traditional channels at XacBank branches upon receiving the facility.  
XacBank will publicize this program as a new line of MSME loans, which must be u sed for products that 
achieve 20% reduction in energy usage or 20% reduction in CO2 emissions (15% for end -users)  
The process of distributing Eco Business loans follows normal bank disbursal procedures with additional 
steps to ensure the 20% CO2 reductio n is achieved. These steps are as follows:  
1)Loan officer interviews potential borrower to assess the potential project based on XacBank “5 -C”
analysis:
a.Customer behavior /CHARACTER/: determine business structure, management, employee
background, experience, productivity, credit history and purpose of loan etc;
b.Business environment /CONDITION/: explore the business, premise, equipment,
product/service and determine the micro element or consumers, suppliers, competitors, legal
environment and other impacting factors and reveal their potential impact on loan repayment;
c.Loan repayment capacity/ CAPACITY/: analyze loan repayment resources, short and long
term objectives of the business, business plan, and determine the loan efficiency of the
business;
d.Capital for risk coverage capacity/ CAPITAL/:   based on the financial analyses define the real
value of the legal entity and study the equity fund, secondary investment (loan from the
shareholders) and debts held by related companies
e.Collateral asset /COLLA TERAL/: define the collateral asset type, quality, structure,
ownership/occupancy, liquidity, adequacy and insurance. These elements shall be regulated
by the “Procedure on Collateral Requirements”
f.For business loans more than 50 million MNT  (25k USD) , the loan officer will conduct a
Environmental and Social Responsibility evaluation.
g.For Eco Business loans, the borrower will present an ISO or MNS (Mongolian National
standard) certificate to demonstrate the products/technology’s energy efficiency. If there  is no
such certificate, the borrower will present laboratory test results for the energy or CO2
savings for each product. The loan officer will submit these verification documents to the Eco
Banking Department  and Eco Banking Department  specialists will e valuate the anticipated
energy savings and CO2 reductions against the baseline scenario. Based upon this analysis,
the specialists will verify whether the borrower’s project meets the additional criteria
necessary to qualify for the SME business loan for G HG emission reduction program and
rates.
2)The above mentioned 5C process covers all necessary due diligence measures, including AML and
KYC measures, such as where the organization’s income, original capital, investors, shareholders,
etc. all originate from . For new clients, during the process of completing the loan proposal, the loan
officer utilizes the Bank’s internal AML software, Flex Terra, to check against the Bank’s sanction list
(provided by Mongolia’s central bank) as well as watch list, which is a  list of high -risk clients compiled
by XacBank. For existing clients, all information related to KYC has already been obtained, and is
kept in a register for reference.
3)Loan officer conducts an on -site visit to verify information obtained during the inter view process.
Information on customer behavior, debt coverage capacity, and collateral assets are obtained and
verified via interviews with third parties.


---
*Page 23*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 57 C 
4)Following the interview and in -person site visit, the loan applicant and loan officer prepare a loan
proposal which includes:
a.Description of the project or the activity for which the loan will be used;
b.Monthly cash flow projections
c.1-3 year balance sheets
d.Repayment schedules;
e.Financial reports;
f.Loan officer’s opinion on potential risks for repayment and ways to decrease risks
5)Loan proposa ls for amounts greater than 300 million MNT (150k USD)  will be assessed by one of
XacBank’s Credit Risk analysts at corporate headquarters. The credit risk analyst will provide an
independent assessment regarding loan ri sks.
6)The loan proposals are then reviewed by ei ther the small (less than 150k USD) or large (over 150k
USD) Credit Committee. After receiving approval from the Credit Committee, the loan is disbursed
via the relevant branch.
7)Following the disbursal, the  credit officer conducts scheduled  monitoring (for loans more than 150k
USD) of the borrower to en sure that the loan is being used for its original GHG reduction purposes.
The monitoring will be completed with remarks as to whether the MSME is operating no rmally or
whether any risk has arisen.
8)If a necessity is seen by XacBank with regard to larger loans, then a post -evaluation will be
conducted .
Organigram of Project Structure  
Governance  Overseeing  Implementing


---
*Page 24*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 57 C 
XacBank Loan Approval Process  Eco Banking 
Department  Provide 
necessary 
governance  Determine whether 
the projects meet the 
requirements of the 
Eco Banking  
Department
Treasury 
Division  
Financial 
Management 
Department  Credit 
Department  
Credit 
Administration 
Department  Branches


---
*Page 25*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 57 C


---
*Page 26*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 57 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/ Program  Implementation  
For more details on the outputs referred to in this table, and the corresponding activities, see section H1.2  
TASK Q
1 Q
2 Q
3 Q
4 Q
5 Q
6 Q
7 Q
8 Q
9 Q
1
0 Q
1
1 Q
1
2 Q
1
3 Q
1
4 Q
1
5 Q
1
6 Q
1
7 Q
1
8 Q
1
9 Q
2
0 Q
2
1 Q
2
2 Q
2
3 Q
2
4 Q
2
5 Q
2
6 Q
2
7 Q
2
8 Q
2
9 Q
3
0 Q
3
1 Q
3
2 
Output 1 : 
Identification 
and financing of 
RE and EE 
projects  
Output 2: 
Capacity 
building  
Output 3: 
Increased 
awareness  
Output 4: Interim 
Evaluation 
report  
Output 5: 
Completion 
report  1 MONTH AFTER THE END  OF THE TENOR OR THE  EXTENDED TENOR , AS APPLICABLE  
Output 6: Final  
Evaluation 
report  2 MONTHS AFTER THE EN D OF THE TENOR OR TH E EXTENDED TENOR , AS APPLICABLE


---
*Page 27*
---

RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 57 D 
D.1. Value  Added for GCF Involvement  
GCF involvement is indeed critical for the success of the here proposed MSME program. Currently, funding 
for XacBank’s SME EE and RE  programs comes from a combination of funders  including the EBRD and the 
GCPF . While these funders are important to XacBank’s program, their funding alone is limited, as explained 
below.  As such, GCF involvement in the program would allow the MSME program to achieve the greatest 
paradigm shift, at the most appropriate rates, and wi th the primary inclusion of women -led MSMEs.  
With GCPF funding (which XacBank plans to blend for this program), XacBank is able to offer loans to all  
segments of the EE and RE supply  chain  (e.g. traders, producers, installers, etc.) . However, the rates 
available for this loan are not attractive enough to incentivize the expansion of the EE and RE market. In 
XacBank’s experience, many MSMEs are interested in participating, but the rates are simply too high 
considering the capital investment. Blending in GCF  funding would allow us to lower our rates, which is  the 
crucial market barrier that this here proposed  program seeks to address.  
Accessing GCF funds would allow us to expand the eligible MSMEs and enact a true paradigm shift by 
expanding the entire EE an d RE market.  
XacBank hopes that by accessing GCF funds, the MSME program will able to integrate a gender -
mainstreamed approach that has not been attempted in previous EE and RE programs led by the bank  with 
these funders .  With the concessional terms  available from the GCF , XacBank hopes to provide more 
favorable rates to women -led MSMEs, thereby aiding women’s economic empowerment in Mongolia 
through climate finance. The strong gender component of this program aligns with the GCF’s priorities and 
would benefit from the gender best practices resources made available by the GCF.  
D.2. Exit Strategy  
Exit Strategy  
Once the facility is provided, GCF does not need to be highly involved in program operations. The Fund's 
support is initially required to provide a more affordable source of financing to businesses, with an 
emphasis on women -led enterprises. XacBank will report on the facility disbursement to GCF periodically to 
describe how funding is being used , including financial statements (balance shee t, income statement), GCF 
loan portfolio quality report, and emission reduction report together with GCF loan portfolio.  
The GCF’s exit strategy is quite simple, as XacBank will be paying the GCF back directly, based upon the 
terms that the GCF is able to offer. Exit risk is minimal


---
*Page 28*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 57 E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance 
of the proposed project/ program  against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -
criteria and indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should 
be addressed where relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality 
made in section B.2 . 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of  the project/ program  to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
The MSME program has great potential to achieve the GCF’s mitigation objectives as outlined in the 
Investment  Framework. Many of the businesses operating in Mongolia are utilizing old, inefficient 
infrastructure, so the climate impact potential for each loan is large. XacBank has seen increased demand 
for its energy efficiency and renewable energy loan products a s awareness of the long -term financial 
benefits of energy efficient products has increased in the Mongolian business sector. For example, whereas 
previously outreach from Eco Banking to potential SME clients for EE products had to be done by Xac Bank , 
now t he common method for client finding is by SMEs reaching out to Eco Banking directly, with an existing 
knowledge of their products.  
However , the existing loan conditions are difficult to accept for many potential clients due to the high 
interest rate. Busi nesses are discouraged from making any long -term investments in their operations due to 
this initial financial barrier, particularly investments whose economic benefits are perceived as intangible, 
such as “energy savings” investments, which do not produce  tangible increased revenues, but rather 
intangible cost savings.  The GCF financing could increase the number of businesses receiving energy 
efficient loans and make a large climate impact by spurring business -driven shifts to low -emission 
sustainable dev elopment pathways. With regards to mitigation, one of the GCF indicative assessment 
factors is the degree to which the program supports the scaling -up of low emission energy in the affected 
region by addressing key barriers. The here proposed program has h igh impact potential not only because 
the field of EE and RE in Mongolia is ripe for entry, but also because the program features directly address 
the key barriers that have slowed the market expansion of EE and RE in Mongolia, namely high interest 
rates.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected  tons of carbon dioxide equivalent 
(t CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided 
(Mitigation only)  Annual  149,290  tons (average per year)  
Lifetime  1,194,324  tons 
The tCO2eq total reduced was 
calculated based on XacBank’s 
experience with the currently 
existing GHG emission reduction 
program. As the GCF MSME 
program will be an extension of this 
current program, financing mainly


---
*Page 29*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 57 E 
the same type of activities and 
same si zed enterprises .   
Expected total number of direct and
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated
by gender  (reduced vulnerability or
increased resilience);
Number of beneficiaries relative to
total population , disaggregated by
gender  (adaptation only)Total  N/A 
Percentage 
(%) N/A, this program is a mitigation 
program  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Expected total number of direct beneficiaries of the program
oAnnual USD in EE and RE loans disbursed (See financial model)
Dollar cost of 1 ton  of CO2 savings  (See financial model)  
Total: 50.24 USD
GCF cost: 16.74 USD
The above expected lifetime emission reductions savings were calculated
based on the amount of tCO2eq reduced through the leveraging of
existing dedicated funds since 2013, then projected over the life time of
the program, based on the amount of total financing of sub -projects.
Expected number of MW of low -emission energy capacity installed, generated or
rehabilitated
oTo be calculated through program duration.
For the method by which the above indicators were calculated, please see each relevant section in the above table . 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/ program  investment  
E.2.1.  Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Scale -up potential:  
Regional  
The geographic focus of the program is the geographic locus of SMEs in Mongolia -- Ulaanbaatar. However, 
the government has begun to prioritize the development of alternative urban centers such as Erdenet and 
Darkhan. Currently, these cities are largely eco nomically fueled by the presence of large mining 
corporations such as Erdenet Mining Corporation. However, a number of SMEs are in operation to support 
the growing urbanization of these areas. As these cities continue to develop and economically diversify,  the 
presence of local SMEs will increase accordingly. The program is implementable in any Mongolian area 
where SMEs exist. XacBank has branches throughout Mongolia and currently offers its EE and RE financial 
products nation -wide. For example, many hybrid  car loans have been issued outside UB. In addition, rural 
based SMEs have been recipients of business loans. The program thus has the adaptability and the AE 
has the geographic know -how and experience to easily expand the program into these new urban cent ers


---
*Page 30*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 57 E 
as well as into the remaining 21 aimags across Mongolia and into the increasingly entrepreneurial non -
urban agricultural economy.  
In the areas where the program is expanded, it would have a direct regional impact.  Mongolia is made up 
of 4 regional el ectric grids, each facing their own over -use issues. The central grid is over -used due to the 
energy demands of Ulaanbaatar. The eastern grid is over -capacity due to the energy intensity of oil 
exploration taking place in that region. The Western grid is u nable to fully provide electricity to its region, 
and thus imports energy from Russia at a high cost, and faces frequent blackouts when bills are not paid in 
time, a dangerous occurrence in a region with average winter temperatures of -30 degrees Celsius.  In 
2014, Doing Business ranked Mongolia the 76th best place to do business globally. One of the reasons 
cited for the poor ranking by the agency was the difficulty of accessing reliable electricity  (see IFC report). 
By increasing the low -emission capacity  in these regions, the program would lessen the burden on 
Mongolia’s grid system, saving local governments imported energy costs and contributing to regional 
economic development by preventing the disruption of electric blackouts and promoting a more relia ble and 
efficient electricity use system. In addition to this major regional benefit, the program would have a 
knowledge -sharing and capacity -building regional benefit. As it stands, the majority of EE and RE 
awareness and developmental activity is based i n Ulaanbaatar. However, a number of energy -intensive 
SMEs operate outside of Ulaanbaatar and have historically had more limited access to finance and energy 
related innovations due to their remote locations. With this program, the FP hopes to “spread the w ealth” so 
to speak, of climate -finance access and capacity to areas of Mongolia where there is high potential for RE 
and EE but have often been left behind by bank’s Ulaanbaatar -focus.  
In order to achieve this geographic scale -up potential, XacBank plans to re-activate previously taken steps 
in the geographic expansion of RE and EE programs targeted at SMEs.  After developing case studies 
highlighting successful clients of the program in Ulaanbaatar, the FP plans to disburse these materials to 
regional Xac Bank branches, with a particular emphasis on non -Ulaanbaatar urban centers, and non -urban 
agricultural projects. In addition to marketing materials, the Eco Banking team, based in Ulaanbaatar, plans 
to conduct regional trainings to capacity -build these oth er branches, so that they are knowledgeable about 
the program and able to offer it to eligible regional clients.  
Post-GCF replicability 
In addition to scaling -up the program across Mongolia, the FP plans to replicate the program without GCF 
participation in the ne ar future. This program has a n 8-year life span. For various reasons stated throughout 
this funding proposal, is it crucial during thes e 8 years to have GCF support, as loan rates need to be 
lowered to incentivize RE and EE investmen t. However, even after GCF support ends, the demand for 
climate finance access will persist and likely increase. The increase in interest will result from two factors, 
the first being that the cost -saving impact of RE and EE investment will begin to make a  real impact on the 
bottom line of participating SMEs. The second being that the program itself will stimulate the production of 
RE and EE products and offer them at a cheaper price to the market, thus making the ease of transitioning 
to RE and EE easier f or SMEs.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
 
SME and consumer knowledge acquisition : 
The MSME program  would strengthen local knowledge about RE and EE investment. In order to access the 
financing, firms have to achieve certain energy savings. Thus Mongolian SMEs will begin to undertake 
analysis of their energy usage and areas of improvement. Regardless of  whether these SMEs end up 
qualifying for a loan or not, the act promotion of such monitoring activities in SMEs has significant paradigm 
shift potential for best practices in EE processes.  
If successfully implemented, the program has the potential to impa ct SMEs and consumers beyond those 
directly participating in the program.  As the program expands the production and supply of energy efficient, 
it has the potential to re -price the entire supply chain of energy efficient products. By making available low -
cost initial loans, the price of energy efficient products will become more attractive throughout the market, 
and the ensuing result will be SMEs (in the case of SME -to-SME transactions) and consumers (in the case 
of SME –to-consumer transactions) increasi ngly encountering these products and educating themselves 
about the long -term savings potential in order to maximize their individual utility in the transaction.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment:  
The availability of low interest rate loans through this program creates enabling market conditions for 
energy efficient innovations. Respondents to an IFC market study on Mongolian SMEs listed acce ss to 
finance more frequently than any other obstacle when asked what the greatest business challenge they 
faced was. Indeed, for both men and women, finance -related trainings were the most frequently attended 
capacity -building activities. Innovation in th e RE and EE area has been hampered by interest rates which 
disincentivize capital investments.  The program intends to, at least partially, eliminate systematic barriers 
to the production, supply, and purchase of low carbon emitting solutions from end -users, producers, 
traders, and service providers. By re -balancing initial investment incentives to favor the change to energy 
efficient products, the program creates an environment in which the multi -faceted long -term benefits of 
energy efficient investment ar e reflected in the favorable up -front costs of said investment versus traditional 
energy products.  
 
 
Innovation :  
The availability of attractive financing options for energy efficient products will stimulate the domestic 
development of an eco -products mark et. As of now, many small producers exist, but the majority of RE and 
EE products are imported. Manufacturers have the capacity to build energy efficient products with an initial 
capital investment in re -outfitting their factories with more up -to-date, ene rgy efficient equipment and 
processes to replace the existing decades -old, Soviet era machinery currently used in the majority of such 
factories.   
Similarly, many suppliers have the capacity to expand their product streams to include energy efficient 
products and renewable energy solutions with the help of an initial investment. The SME loan program 
would foster the expansion of the existing appliance market to include these new market segments. In 
addition, over time, domestic production could lead to Mon golia -specific innovations that are uniquely 
crafted to the natural challenges and resources of Mongolia. Examples of past Mongolia -specific innovative 
products include the high -tech insulation blankets designed specifically for gers and distributed by Xac Bank 
in order to reduce the coal emissions of the ger district during the heating season by increasing insulation 
and reducing heat loss from entry ways.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
 
Regulatory  
This program is entering the market at an optimal time to have an impact on the implementation of new 
national regulations on energy usage. In November, 2015, the Mongolian parliament passed the Energy 
Conservation Law (ECL). The ECL stipulates that large energy consumers  (referred to as ‘designated 
consumers’)  (note: large energy consumers does not necessarily refer to large enterprise and can 
encompass MSMEs in energy -intensive industries)  audit their energy usage and make plans to reduce their 
energy intensity by 15% in  the course of 5 years after they have been appointed. XacBank’s  MSME 
program  will have a critical role in the implementation o f this important national priority. Many of the 
designated consumers did not budget for capital investments and as such, will be seeking the best possible 
financing rates for these new nationally -mandated investments. XacBank stands to become the de facto 
financial institution partner for the successful implementation of this law, and thus for the private -sector 
enablement of public  sector energy priorities. By helping the ECL implement by reducing investment costs 
in RE and EE, XacBank can aid the Mongolian government in demonstrating the proof of concept of the 
ECL and thus promote the passing of further energy regulations for the private sector.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Economic  
There are numerous economic benefits to this program. The first is the direct impact that low -interest SME 
loans and ensu ring increased energy efficiencies will have on the SMEs themselves. These businesses will 
save money on utility costs and therefore, production costs of all produ cts, including any energy efficient 
products. Lower production costs on the part of the producers are likely to be realized in both direct cost 
savings for the producer as well as price lowering and savings in the pocket of the consumer. Whether it is 
the producer or the consumer who receives the majority of the financial benefit, in either case the market as 
a whole is economically incentivized.  The incentive for producers to produce energy efficient goods as well 
as the incentive for consumers to purchas e energy efficient goods is greater vis -à-vis their more energy 
inefficient competition, which have, until now, enjoyed lower costs and thus lower prices.  
There are also economic benefits that extend beyond participating SMEs and their customers. More 
efficient businesses increase the availability of heat and electricity for an already overtaxed central grid 
which is subject to frequent power outages as a re sult of its limited capacity, which is further exacerbated 
by aging transmission lines and substations. Currently, the domestic grid cannot meet the power demand, 
and up to 30% of the electricity is imported from Russia to meet this demand.  
In addition, t he SME loan program will contribute to economic diversification of Mongolia and job creation. 
Mongolia’s economy is largely dependent on mineral exports, mostly to China. Fluctuations in commodity 
prices, especially for coal and copper and weaker global de mand have led to repeated boom -bust cycles.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
The loan program will serve to stimulate alternative sectors of the Mongolian economy that are more stable 
than its current commodities basis.   
 
Social  
The project has the potential for significant social devel opment improvements in the area of health and 
safety. This is true across multiple time frames. Energy inefficient products pose health risks to their 
immediate users, such as aging cook stoves, which use heat from burning raw coal, which have the 
potentia l hazard of burning the user as well as emitting deadly PM 2.5 particles which are then directly 
inhaled. Thus, in the short -term, on an employee and user health level, investment in higher efficiency and 
new appliances on the part of SMEs will improve the  health and safety of the operations workers. 
Furthermore, energy efficient factory equipment is inherently more automated and thus requires less 
manual labor and maintenance, further reducing any workplace -related injury or death risks.  
There are even gr eater gains to health and safety on a macro level. Health scientists have conservatively 
estimated that air pollution in Ulaanbaatar is the major contributor to 10% of mortality in the city 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23450113 ), with the same report writing that “air pollution represents 
a major public health risk to the residents of Ulaanbaatar.” A significant portion of this pollution is generated 
by the energy inefficient activity of the  roughly 60,000 SMEs around the city. Thus aside from improving the 
health and safety of the actual EE product users, the entire urban population of Ulaanbaatar stands to gain 
from the program in fundamental ways. In addition, the majority of this pollutio n originates from the coal 
burning in the ger districts that surround the city.  The new energy efficient products domestic market 
segment will promote the availability and lower the price of domestically -produced heating products to the 
poverty -stricken g er district end -users.  
 
Environmental  
The majority of the environmental benefits for this project are concentrated in the areas of improved air 
quality.  As has been mentioned throughout this report, air quality in Ulaanbaatar is literally death -inducing.  
Mongolia has one of the highest carbon dioxide emissions per capita in the world, at 4.33 tons8. This is 
mostly due to excessive dependence on coal for electricity and heat generation, old and inefficient 
infrastructure (characterized by high transmission  losses), old energy intensive equipment in industries, and 
traffic congestions.  
Poor air quality has an effect beyond the human dimension. The most vulnerable sectors to climate change 
are “the agricultural, livestock, land use, water resources, energy, t ourism and residential sectors”9. Melting 
of permafrost (covering 60% of Mongolia’s surface) will affect agricultural practices, water resources and 
infrastructure. The agricultural and livestock areas are expected to be severely impacted, which will in tu rn 
affect the country’s society and economy.  
                                                             
8 OECC. “ Report of the Cooperation Program on Developing the JSM Seeds in Mongolia, Feasibility Studies on Joint 
Crediting Mechanism Projects towards Environmentally Sustainable Cities in Asia”,  The Overseas Environmental 
Corporation Center , Japan , (2014): 1.  
9 Ibid


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
For example, one major reason that so many farmers and herders have been flocking to Ulaanbaatar over 
the past 10 years has been directly related to the devastating effect of a dzud , which is a severe winter th at 
occur every few years, which results in many livestock die, primarily due to starvation due to being unable 
to graze, and in other cases, directly from the cold. One -third of Mongolia’s population’s livelihoods are 
dependent largely on pastoral farming,  and harsh dzuds can and have caused economic crises and food 
shortages. As more and more of these herders move to Ulaanbaatar, settling in the ger area, the city 
becomes more and more polluted due the raw, low -grade coal being burned for heating and cooki ng 
purposes during the 8 month heating season.  
All SMEs rely on the central power grid to provide energy to their businesses.  Ulaanbaatar’s central power 
grid is coal -powered. Therefore any reduction in the energy use of SMEs directly  enhances the capaci ty of 
the central grid, allowing more users to access the central grid’s power supply.  The same can be said of 
loans to energy efficient product producers. By reducing their power supply demand through more energy 
efficient operations, the central grid wi ll be able to provide greater access to power across the city, and the 
rest of the country.     
Depending on what kind of project proposals from SMEs the facility receives, there is the possibility that 
other areas of environmental sustainability will benef it. One area in particular that has the potential to 
benefit from the facility is the status of soil quality.  
 
Gender -sensitive development impact  
Unlike many other developing countries, Mongolia has a strong presence of women in the formal workforce 
and in particular in managerial positions. A 2013 World Bank report estimates that female participation in 
the Mongolian workforce is 57%.  SMEs, which make up 98% of all Mongolian enterprises, are no 
exception to this gender -balanced development. However, des pite relatively high employment rates in 
SMEs, the Enterprise Survey of 2013 found that  only 38.9% of  SMEs  in Mongolia have a 
female  participation in ownership and that 36.6%  employ a female top manager .  
 
EE and RE development in Mongolia is perfectly sui ted to promoting gender equality.  Women are under -
employed in leadership positions. Despite having higher rates of attending finance -related training 
sessions, lower rates of outstanding loans (male -led SMEs are 53% with female -led at 49%), and higher 
rates of seeking loans from financial institutions, women -led SMEs are more often rejected for loans from 
banks. They are thus a financially -underserved segment. XacBank is perfectly suited to capture the niche 
market of women -led SMEs. Whereas XacBank has 8%  market share for male -led SMEs, the bank has 
17% market share for women -led SMEs.  
 
The program particularly focuses on the creation of an enabling environment for women -led SMEs, which in 
turn will create economic opportunity for female employees as women -led SMEs employ women at 
significantly higher rates than male led SMEs (54% versus 34%). It will do so through the setting of fund -
wide gender goals. While these gender goals are further elaborated in the attached Gender Action Plan  
(annex 8) , the primary  tenets can be summarized as follows:  
1. More than 50% of participatory MSMEs must be women -led from 3 years into the program until 
program completion  
2. An SME qualifies as women -led if it fulfills one of the three below definitions:


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
a. Greater than 50% women’s ownership  
b. At least 30% of women in the Board of Director or in senior management positions  
c. At least 40% of employees are women  
 
Based on the market findings of women and SMEs conducted by IFC, the XacBank MSME program aims to 
position itself at the interse ction of climate finance and gender -sensitive development and, in doing so, align 
itself with the GCF’s priorities as well as the market opportunity posed by women -led MSMEs.  
 
(For more information on the role of women in  Mongolian SMEs, please see the  report by the International 
Finance Corporation, from which these statistics have been drawn.)10 
 
Gender Sensitive Technologies  
Gender – sensitive technologies are those that are designed to benefit both women and men; reduces 
drudgery; is safe and secure to use; is easy to operate; is economically viable; is socially acceptable and 
empowers especially women in decision – making processes; and does not place an undue burden on the 
time, efforts and costs of the end – user. Through this here proposed program, X acBank plans to support 
MSMEs whose products not only reduce GHG but are also gender -sensitive technologies. The integration 
of gender sensitive technology into this Funding Proposal is an acknowledgement that just as women -led 
MSMEs will be targeted for s upport through this MSME program (alongside non -women led MSMEs), so is 
it important to support MSMEs (regardless of leadership) that promote gender -sensitive technological 
products. The gender situation in Mongolia is unique and different from much of the  rest of Asia. Women 
make up the majority of both the workforce and education populations in Mongolia. Therefore, it is 
important to keep in mind that the promotion of gender sensitive technologies will impact both genders. 
Currently, XacBank does not have  the capacity to conduct these assessments. However, once readiness 
support becomes available through the GCF, XacBank plans to apply for funding to capacity build on these 
capabilities in order to develop an assessment system.   
 
Benefits to the bottom of the pyramid  
The MSME program will bring about significant benefits to the bottom of the pyramid. Mongolia is a 
developing country and more than a quarter of all Mongolians live under the national poverty line (UNDP). 
By reducing the cost of capital and investment, the MSME program is encouraging the expansion of 
Mongolian businesses.  Though the owners of SMEs are certainly not the bottom of the pyramid, many of 
those they employ are, particularly in hard -labor and service sectors . Indeed it is often those at the bottom 
of the pyramid who are in charge of operating old and inefficient machinery which can pose health and 
safety risks, and thus these same employees stand to directly benefit from the social impacts of the 
program. Sti mulating the development of SMEs promises to provide jobs at progressive businesses for 
poor Mongolians.   
 
The MSME program also includes micro -sized clients.  XacBank has its roots in aiding the economic 
development of micro -sized businesses.  Micro -enterprises remain an active customer base of XacBank 
                                                             
10 http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/d85f65804697b853a598bd9916182e35/Women+SME -Mongolia -
Final.pdf?MOD=AJPERES


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
and are served via the retail banking department. Indeed, most Mongolian enterprises fall under the micro 
classification, with 90% of registered enterprises employing fewer than 9 individuals. The FP plans to track 
the clients served by the program using disaggregated data along a number of lines: gender, sector, and 
size, in order to ensure we are available to larger, more successful MSMEs as well as newer, or smaller 
MSMEs, that are often run by new busine sspeople at a lower socio -economic status and yet face higher 
costs and smaller loan sizes.  
 
The MSME program recognizes the connection between micro -sized clients and formalization. A study by 
the International Labor Organization in Mongolia found that 68% of micro -enterprises  were not registered . 
The program intends to prioritize access to climate finance from informal SMEs, which, according to the IFC 
study, make up a large portion of all active Mongolian SMEs. Drawing on the findings of a 2015 study 
regarding formalization of Mongolian MSMEs conducted by the International Labor Organization, XacBank 
sees great potential in this sector.11 Informal businesses often borrow capital from other informal networks 
at sky -high and unreliable rates.  In addition,  the FP plans to produce materials to provide information on 
how to formalize a business and distribute said materials across all branch locations, including ger -district 
branches. Many of  XacBank’s  individual clients access the bank for consumer services,  but not for 
business services due to the fact that their businesses are informal. There is high potential for cross -selling 
with these existing customers, by providing them with information on how to formalize their businesses and 
what they stand to gain in accessing this program through such actions.  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
 
N/A this is a mitigation program  
 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
 
 
Vulnerability of the country  
Mongolia is at high risk from climate change. The key impacts of climate change in Mongolia as explicated 
in the INDC of Mongolia are:  
 70% of pastoral land degraded; biodiversity compromised  
 Increased risk of winter dzud  (heavy snow, cold fronts, storms); death of livestock; economically 
forced urban migration, exacerbating the challenges of urban settlements  
 Declining water resources, with 12% of rivers , 21% of lakes, and 15% of springs having already 
been depleted, destroyed, or dried up.  
 Intensification of dry climatic conditions; increased forest sand steppe fire frequency; forest area 
has been reduced by 0.46% annually due to these conditions  
                                                             
11http://www.ilo.org/ public/english/dialogue/actemp/downloads/publications/formalizing_enterprises_mong
olia.pdf


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
 Climate  zone shifts; increased outbreaks of new emerging infectious diseases.  
 
Ulaanbaatar, where the program will be based, is home to half of the Mongolian population. Based on a 
study in 2011 by World Health Organization, Ulaanbaatar ranked as the second most polluted city in the 
world.  Much of this pollution comes from the purchase and use of energy -intensive inefficient products, in 
particular for transportation and heating, on both an individual and corporate level. The annual average for 
PM 2.5 in Ulaanbaa tar is 12 times the World Health Organization guidelines, and highs in the winter 
months can reach 75 times that level.  The resulting air pollution is a significant health risk for all residents.  
 
Economic and social development level of the country and af fected population  
For this project, the affected population comprises Mongolia’s SMEs. According to the National Statistics 
Office, there were 54,929 active SMEs in 2013. SMEs play a large role in the Mongolian economy. SMEs 
make up 98% of all enterprises in Mongolia. They contribute 25% to  GDP and employ 52% of the 
workforce .12 Of all enterprises, 63% are located in Ulaanbaatar. According to the NSO, 38% of active 
enterprises are engaged in wholesale and retail trade, repair of vehicles and household goods,  17% in real 
estate and construction business and 17% other businesses.13 
Conditions for SME business operations have been improving in Mongolia.  An IFC report writes “ Mongolia 
ranked 56th among 189 countries in Doing Business 2016 report, an improvement of  20 ranks compared 
to the 2014 report. The report recognized two regulatory reforms that contributed to the improvement of 
the business environment from June 2014 to June 2015: (i) starting a business; and (ii) getting credit.”14 
However, the greatest chall enge for SMEs remains the lack of affordable capital. Reports by the 
International Labor Organization, IFC, and ADB on the SME sector all highlight access to financing as the 
primary market obstacle for Mongolian SMEs.15 XacBank and other Mongolian banks of fer business loans 
to SMEs at an average of 22.7% interest per annum.  
 
 
 
Scope and needs across beneficiary groups  
                                                             
12 http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/d8 5f65804697b853a598bd9916182e35/Women+SME -Mongolia -
Final.pdf?MOD=AJPERES   
13 http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/d85f65804697b853a598b d9916182e35/Women+SME -Mongolia -
Final.pdf?MOD=AJPERES   
14 Ibid.  
15 For International Labor Organzation report see: 
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/dialogue/actemp/downloads/publications/formalizing_enterprises_mongol
ia.pdf   
For IFC report see: 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/d85f65804697b853a598bd9916182e35/Women+SME -Mongolia -
Final.pdf?MOD=AJPERES   
ADB report is in progress and forthc oming.


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
In addition to articulating the project benefits across sectors, previous work by the ADB has divided the 
helpfully divided the project acro ss stakeholders/beneficiary groups. Below are listed the scope of these 
groups, their needs, and the benefits they stand to gain from the MSME program:16 
 
Stakeholder/beneficiary 
groups  Needs  Benefits  
Government of Mongolia:  
Ministry of Environment 
and Green Development 
(MOEGD)  
 Ministry of Energy 
(MOE)  
Ministry of Finance 
(MOF)   Burden eased on 
national power grid  
 Budget spent on 
energy imports 
reduced  
 Pace of climate 
change slowed  
 Private sector co -
operation with national 
energy and climate 
related prio rities 
including the Energy 
Conservation Law and 
stated goals of 
economic 
diversification  
 Strengthened 
institutional capacity to 
functionally implement 
and regulate energy 
laws 
  Reduction in demand for electricity 
from residential, commercial and 
industrial consumers due to 
demand -side energy efficiency 
measures  
 Reduction in GHG and other 
harmful emissions; reduction in air 
pollution in Ulaanbaatar thereby 
improving air quality and quality of 
life in the city  
 Reduction in electricity shortages 
due to increased demand -side 
energy efficiency and decentralized 
clean energy generation  
 Reduction in dependency on 
imported and expensive energy 
sources such as petroleum 
products  
 Increase in private sector and SME 
participation in Mongolia’s energy 
sector  
 Increase in domestic production 
and use of renewable energy, a 
step towards reaching the 
government’s 2020 RE deployment 
targets  
 Increased financial access to 
under -served sections such as 
SMEs  
 Local job creation due to increased 
demand for clean energy and 
energy efficiency products and 
human resource development  
 Reduction in energy intensity of 
economy, which can grow with 
lower energy requirement than 
before  
                                                             
16 Extracted and modified from ADB report


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
 Diversification of economy with 
increase in clean energy and 
energy efficiency manufacturing 
and i nstallation activities  
Borrowers - MSMEs   Affordable financing  
 Strengthened energy 
auditing and self -
regulatory practices   Access to affordable and long -term 
financing  
 Reduction in dependence on grid 
electricity due to decentralized 
renewable energy generation  
 Reduction in impact of upcoming 
electricity shortages due to energy 
efficiency improvements and 
decentralized power generation  
 Reduction in operating costs of 
businesses in off -grid or unreliable 
grid areas such as telecom towers 
due to reduction in diesel 
consumption for power generation  
 Improved economic productivity 
and opportunities, thereby enabling 
business activities and economic 
growth  
 Sustainable and scalable business 
opportunity to enhance 
competitiveness and business 
growth  
 Economies of scale will make clean 
energy and energy efficiency 
products more affordable in the 
local market  
 Marketing opportunity  as a green 
and socially responsible business  
 Access to locally available trained 
human resources to support and 
sustain scale -up 
Financial Intermediary - 
XacBank   Diversified customers 
with particular 
emphasis on 
strengthening existing 
momentum in the 
women -led SMEs 
demographic  
 Access to a new line of 
credit at a low cost to  Access to low -cost and long -term 
source of capital for on lending to 
clean energy and energy efficiency 
infrastructure projects  
 New customers and asset classes 
to finance, thereby increasing its 
outreach which in turn will increase 
growth in port folio and profitability


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
stimulate EE and RE 
investment during 
trying economic 
conditions   Marketing opportunity (financing a 
green and socially responsible 
business)  
 Support construction of sustainable 
energy infrastructure and reduction 
in GHG emissions and air pollution 
in Mongolia  
 Ability to further its mission of 
financing projects that can create 
financial, social and environmental 
impact in the country  
 
Absence of alternative sources of funding  
Other sources of funding for these programs exist, though they are offered at far less favorable terms. In 
order to maximize the effectiveness of the program, XacBank plans to blend GCF funding with these 
alternative funding sources. However, GCF funding is itself necessary to bring down the interest rates in 
order to feasibly be financially attractive to MSMEs. In addi tion, GCF funding is needed as a separate 
entity from MonSEFF  and GCPF  funding for the program -related reasons stipulated in section D.1.  
 
 
 
 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or program  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including 
NAMAs, NAPAs and NAPs  
Alignment with the country’s national climate priorities  
The program is in line with a number of explicitly stated policy initiatives on the part of both the Mongolian 
government and the Ulaanbaatar municipality.  Mongolia has submitted an Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC) which outlines national priorities, goals and approaches to the mitigation of and 
adaption to climate change. Mongolia’s priorities vis -a-vis climate change can be considered in two 
categories: mitigation and adaptation. In order to achieve the Mongolian government’s stated goal of a 
14% reduction in total national GHG emissions, the IND C outlined a number of policies across the energy, 
industrial, agricultural, and waste sectors. The program will help achieve the overarching goal of the INDC, 
which is a 14% reduction in total national GHG emissions by promoting the production of products  that are 
energy efficient and/or renewable. In addition to this general alignment, the program falls under the 
following INDC goal: “increase the share of renewable electricity capacity to 30% of total electricity 
generation capacity, from 7.62% in 2014.”  The program here proposed is in line with Mongolia’s INDC as it 
incentivizes businesses to increase their renewable energy capacity and/or to provide products that allow 
consumers to increase their renewable energy capacity and their energy efficiency.  
In 2016, the Mongolian government approved the Green Development Policy, which aims to couple 
Mongolia’s continued economic development with environmental sustainability by incorporating


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
Partnership for Action on Green Economy (PAGE) initiatives. One of th e goals of the plan is to leverage 
tax, credit, and incentive mechanisms to finance a green economy. This program creates a facility that 
economically incentivizes green purchases for profit -minded SMEs.  As such, the program aligns with 
domestic INCD, NAM As, and the Green Development Policy as well as the mission of the Green Climate 
Fund.  
Finally, as explicated earlier, in November, 2015, the Mongolian parliament passed the Energy 
Conservation Law (ECL). The ECL stipulates that large energy consumers (re ferred to as ‘designated 
consumers’) audit their energy usage and make plans to reduce their energy intensity by 15% in the 
course of 5 years after they have been appointed. The ECL is to take effect beginning in 2017, and 
designated consumers have already  begun to be appointed. Thus, the Mongolian has begun to mandate 
investment in EE and RE technology from businesses. In this way, XacBank’s new MSME program will be 
the private sector partner to this national policy ordinance, by providing the new designat ed consumers the 
financial support they need to implement the required changes. Indeed, historically Mongolian energy 
regulations have been strong on paper but weak in implementation due to lack of supporting mechanisms 
and private -sector buy -in. The MSME program would contribute to lessening these roadblocks and thus 
successfully implementing this important legislation.  
 
 
 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
 
XacBank relevant experience  
As the project sponsor, XacBank brings a wealth of past management experience on similar projects in 
similar areas. XacBank is the market leader in providing business loans for energy efficiency and 
renewable energy solutions with a SME portfolio of about US$15 million.  
 
Beginning in 2009, XacBank started distributing consumption loans  (funded by FMO)  under the “Energy 
Efficient Product Distribution Program”, which was financed by the Millennium Challenge Account, the 
World Bank’s “Clean Air Project”, and the government of Mongolia’s special “Clean Air Fund”. These 
financiers combined to allow for a subsidy that let residents of the Ger Residential Area to purchase 
energy efficient stoves, ger blankets, vestibules and to energy efficient houses at a largely  discounted 
price, which is crucial, as this segment of the population is economically challenged, and don’t have 
access to basic amenities including running water, central heating, or a sewage system. This project 
allowed about 80% of the 185,000 househol ds in the area to purchase one or more of the products 
through XacBank product centers, which helps to reduce the massive amounts of pollution produced from 
burning low quality coal in old, traditional inefficient stoves to endure the 8 month long heating season of 
Ulaanbaatar, during which the nighttime temperatures can drop as low as -40C during some of those 
months.  
 
Then, starting in 2012, XacBank began disbursing energy efficient housing and mortgage loans. In 2013, 
XacBank implemented the Business Loan for GHG Emission Reduction program, and through this 
program, the Bank began disbursing loans to SMEs for energy ef ficient and renewable energy product


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
producers, traders, installation service providers, and end users based on the requirement that they are 
able to produce a 20% increase in energy efficiency or reduction in emissions.  
 
Finally, in 2015, the bank introd uced two new products. The first being an expansion to the GHG reduction 
program, a facility called MonSEFF – Mongolian Sustainable Energy Financing Facility, in cooperation 
with EBRD, to further support energy efficiency and renewable energy projects for end users, which 
requires a 15% increase in energy efficiency cases, and all renewable energy projects are qualified. One 
major benefit of MonSEFF is the complementary technical advisory provided to the client and the bank 
through an international team of energy experts and engineers that help evaluate the projects. For more 
information on MonSEFF, please visit the www.monseff.com   The second product was Green Car Loans, 
which allows Mongolians to gain access to better  than market loan rates to purchase hybrid cars.  
 
As a result of these projects, XacBank is a trusted name in the SME business community with already -
established direct lines of communication and a proven capability to work with the private sector to reduc e 
CO2 emissions in Mongolia. These prior SME loan program s have laid the ground work for this larger -
scale project and given XacBank valuable project management and monitoring capabilities.  
 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
 
XacBank has well -established processes for engagement with relevant stakeholders as well as civil 
authorities so as to ensure both country and private sector ownership. These processes are detailed 
below.  
 
Stakeholder engageme nt process with funding partners  
Since 2012, XacBank has worked closely with multiple stakeholders for the existing Business Loan 
Program for GHG Emission Reduction, the two main being the EBRD, GCPF, with the soon to be added 
DWM Securitizations, becoming  the third main stakeholder. It will be the organization’s first time entering 
the Mongolian banking market. As GCF funding is disbursed to XacBank to expand the existing program, 
the GCF will become the fourth main stakeholder.  
Furthermore, XacBank has a lso worked with IFC, Deutsche Bank, ADB, and others on the energy 
efficiency market for businesses in Mongolia. XacBank’s activities in the sector serve as an ongoing 
engagement between parties interested in improving the energy efficiency in Mongolian bus iness. For 
contractual engagements with relevant funding partners for this program, see annex 2.  
 
 
 
Stakeholder engagement process with the NDA  
In addition to SME engagement, XacBank has an established relationship with the NDA. The AE has 
worked closely w ith the NDA as well as other civil authorities, such as the Ulaanbaatar Municipality, on the


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
implementation of previous projects.  Government entities have been consulted on both a formal level, as 
in the case of the No Objection Letters, and on an informa l level, as valuable consultative assets.  
These stakeholder engagement processes have already been activated for this program. The NDA has 
been consulted on the developme nt of the concept note related to this funding proposal , contributing 
valuable countr y-specific knowledge, and has indicated their support for the project through the signing of 
a No Objection Letter. Lines of communication between the FP and the NDA will continue to be utilized in 
later stages of program development, such as during the co mposition of the funding proposal.  
 
Stakeholder engagement process with civil society organizations  
The FP is currently in the process of engaging with civil society organizations to increase awareness of the 
program and receive private sector input on program design.  
In addition, the FP plans to collaborate with local NGOs with regard to gender -equal d evelopment issues. 
For more information on this, please see the attached Gender Action Plan  (annex 8) . 
In addition, XacBank plans to engage local NGOs and public -sector organizations. Example of which is 
the Building Energy Efficiency Center, which is affiliated with the Mongolian University of Science and 
Technology.  We will work together with these organizations to help XacBank define baselines and make 
comprehensive measurements. In the future, this k ind of stakeholder engagement with NGOs will be 
increased.  
 
 
Gender -sensitive stakeholder engagement  
As the program is highly targeted toward women -led SMEs, it is increasingly important that women from 
both a client and a partner side are consulted in dec ision-making and program design. The Eco Banking 
Department  is 50% women, including the bank senior leadership . As a result,  program design has taken 
into consideration the particular needs of working women. In addition, from the client side, in 2014, 
XacB ank ran a focus group with women -led SMEs to understand their specific financing needs. The 
results of this study were used in the design of the program. Finally, XacBank has utilized the GCF’s 
gender resources and expertise through consultative meeting an d the development of a strong Gender 
Action Plan.  
Crucial  to gender -sensitive stakeholder engagement is the engagement of local NGOs who work on 
issues of women’s economic empowerment. More engagement activities are planned with government 
gender -equity concerned entities, as well as other NGOs. The FP is curren tly in the proc ess of conducting 
a landscape study to identify other relevant NGOs with whom the program can partner. Some of these 
gender -based NGOs have agreed to support the program through in -kind donations.   
 
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropria te, financial soundness of the project/ program


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
The AE is confident that the program would be both economically and financially sound due to its past 
experience in the field, having been disbursing loans to the market since 2012. Since the Bank has been 
carrying out similar activities over the past almo st 5 years, there would be no crowing out of private or 
other public investment, as the investment needs for EE/RE are estimated at close to US$100 million  per 
year, which is much more than this facility can offer.  
As highlighted throughout this document,  the main challenges to fully leveraging the market demand are 
the current cost of financing sustainable financing projects. This program aims to ameliorate these issues, 
and as such, would present an attractive option for interested MSMEs and corporate en tities.  
Through XacBank’s own calculations, the emission reduction potentials of the Program  shows that 1 ton of 
CO2 equivalent emission reductions can be achieved  with US$ 50.24  of mitigation investments in this 
program. The GCF will be able to achieve unit emi ssion reductions with US$ 16.74  of its own funds on 
mitigation activities.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
Domestic c o-financing is not widespread, however, certain large or mega -projects have been co -financed 
by international financial institutions (IFI’s).  
For this program, XacBank’s co -financing ratio (through blending with its currently existing EE/RE 
facilities) is  as such:  
- GCF portion of total program: 33 .3% 
- XacBank co -financ ing portion of total program: 66.7 % 
On the project level, XacBank will be using the funds to finance projects with loans only, no equity 
investments will be made for any projects under the program.   
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Each sub -project under the program will be required to meet certain profitability criteria (e.g. IRR > 10%). 
These assessments will be made for each individual sub -project during the technical eligibility assessment 
to ensure the economic feasibility of th e projects and asset quality. Incorporating EE/RE elements into 
MSMEs would increase the creditworthiness status of these entities, as these EE/RE processes often lead 
to reduced operational costs through increased energy savings and more production reliab ility. The GCF’s 
exit strategy is simple, as XacBank will be paying the GCF back directly, based upon the terms that the 
GCF is able to offer.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
The program’s activities have been developed with consideration of best practices and lessons learned 
from past and ongoing initiatives.  
 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation only)


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 57 
 
 
 E 
GCF 
core 
indicators   
(a) Total program  financing  US$60,000,000.00   
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$20,000,000.00   
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  1,194,323.98  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$50.24  / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e  = b / c)  US$16.74  / tCO 2eq 
 
The above expected lifetime emission reductions savings were calculated based on the 
amount of tCO2eq reduced through the leveraging of existing dedicated funds since 2013, 
then projected over the life time of the program, based on the amount of total financing of sub -
projects.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/ program  and as a result 
of the Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
The total program financing is US$60,000,000, of which GCF financing is US$20,000,000. Of 
the remaining US$40,000,000 from co -financing funds , 62.5% is private and 37.5% is public . 
As such, the total private financing amount is US$20,000,000. For every GCF dollar invested, 
the expected net benefit is US$3.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -
benefit generated as a result of the project/ program )


---
*Page 47*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 57 
 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/ program  appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
GCF Concessionality  
Section B.3 outlines the existing interest rates and loan tenors typical to the Mongolian commercial 
banking market.  
Blending concessional funding from the GCF with XacBank’s existing EE/RE financing facilities, which 
offer below market rates, will bring impactful benefits to the loan recipients: incentives to establish and/or 
expand on new business models for integratin g EE/RE solutions; capacity building of Mongolian MSMEs 
as mentioned in other sections of this document, and the promotion of gender equality through the support 
of women -led MSMEs.  
Concessionality will consist of reduced pricing compared to Mongolian pri cing and the international market 
finance available thus far to XacBank. The provision of reduced pricing is the most crucial element in 
attracting clients to utilize EE/RE solutions. Gaining access to reduced pricing loans will incentivize the 
Bank’s clients to accept the enhanced reporting and monitoring requirements, as well as the expenditure in 
setting up new lines of businesses to incorporate EE/RE measures.  
Without access to the  maximal concessional financing provided by the GCF, operating on an as -is basis 
under the current market conditions, EE/RE financing has not been able to achieve anywhere near its 
potential on the Mongolian market. Since the inception of the GHG Emissions  Reduction Program, 
XacBank has been able to leverage approximately US$ 15 million over more than 3 years to redu ce CO2 
emissions by about 76,769.25  tons. These loans have been mostly been disbursed to MSMEs on small 
scale projects, however, many opportuni ties to finance larger scale projects have been lost due to the high 
interest rates currently available for EE/RE financing.  
As can be seen in the financial model, the current rates are at 18.0% and 19.2%, with tenors up to only 5 
years for such projects. Even with the Bank not making any profits with the EE/RE loans (only covering 
costs), we are not able offer further concessio nal rates. With concessional funding from the GCF, XacBank 
will have the opportunity to reduce this interest rate down to as little as 14 -15%, with loan tenors of up to 8 
years. In this case, the EE/RE financing product would have a much wider appeal, thus , allowing the Bank 
to better leverage the funds to make a much larger  scale impact in Mongolia, home to the most polluted 
capital city in the world, Ulaanbaatar.  
For specific details regarding interest rate concessionality, please refer to the attached f inancial model.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
 
Projects using the GCF will meet technical performance requirements as specified in the below statement:  
 Energy savings ratio of projects must be at least 20% compared to baselines or CO2 
emission reduction ratio of project must be at least 20 % compared to baselines. End -users 
that are upgrading their equipment and vehicles must achieve at least 15 % of energy 
savings ratio compared to baseline scenario.    
 Internal Rate of Return (IRR ) of projects must be greater than 10%  
 Global/regional/national consultants  will provide a list of equipment and measures that meet 
the MSME GHG reduction loan program criteria and that are appropriate for the local


---
*Page 48*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 57 
 
 
 F 
market context. For complex industrial o r building projects, experts procured by XacBank 
will conduct technical evaluations for the individual project and prepare technical evaluation 
reports.  
 
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
1. Social and Environmental Management System  (SEMS)  
XacBank will establish a comprehensive SEMS for the program, based on its established Social and 
Environmental Management System. This will ensure that sub -projects financed through the program will 
comply fully with all requiremen ts needed to ensure mitigation of environmental and social risks related to 
the implementation of these projects. XacBank will also define roles and responsibility for designated staff 
members for the oversight and on -going implementation of our SEMS. As t his has been the Bank’s 
practice since the SEMS was internally adopted in 2002, with revisions made in 2008, 2011, and 2014, all 
of which had to be approved by XacBank’s Board of Directors.  
XacBank provides annual reports on environmental and social pract ice to the Mongolian Bankers 
Association (as part of the Sustainable Finance Initiative)  and other international partners , in conformity 
with the respective credit agreements and the Shareholders’ Agreement. Reporting to the GCF will be 
based on the result s of this monitoring.  
Environmental and Social Responsibility Risk Evaluation  
Risk evaluations are carried out for all Bank loans that are more than MNT 50,000,000 (a pproximately 
US$25 ,000) and have tenors more than 12 months, based on a comprehensive scorecard, including 
sections on environmental issues, social and labor issues, and compliance issues. Each risk category is 
rated from 6 to 1, with 6 being the least risk and 1 being the highest. The Bank is determined to 
demonstrate the utility of its SEMS to its stakeholders, including clients, and closely monitors the 
environmental performance of these borrowers and actively manages any instances of non -compliance to 
rectify such situat ions.  
Each sub -project under the MSME program will be considered on a case -by-case basis. When evaluating 
the environmental and social risks associated with a sub -project, the Bank will consider a wide variety of 
factors, including the following:  
1. Nature o f the sub -borrower’s business (e.g. micro, small, or medium -sized business sector).  
2. Does the sub -borrower have any particular current exposures that represent high environmental 
and social risks?  
3. Does the sub -borrower have appropriate waste management solu tions?  
4. Does the sub -borrower have any water pollution management?  
5. Does the sub -borrower’s activities cause any damage or contamination to the local soil or 
cause excessive dust?  
6. Does the sub -borrower’s activities cause any undue air pollution?  
Also taken i nto consideration are the sub -borrower’s employee work place safety, health and hygiene 
practices and whether or not they cause any adverse effect to the local areas and community.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 57 
 
 
 F 
Furthermore, all sub -projects financed by the Bank must comply with the Ban k’s SEMS List of Excluded 
Activities and Mongolia’s national environmental, health, safety and labor regulations and standards.  
Monitoring  
All sub -borrowers will be required by the Bank to submit environmental and social reports on an annual 
basis accordin g to the format provided by the Bank. The format will integrate the Environmental and Social 
Responsibility Risk Evaluation, which is a comprehensive assessment comprising environmental, social, 
labor, and compliance issues. The Bank reserves the right to conduct site visits to financed sub -projects to 
monitor the implementation of the Bank’s requirements as necessary. For further details about monitoring, 
including how monitoring is conducted and what elements are to be monitored for in the MSME program, 
please refer to the attached Social and Environmental Monitoring System document.  
2. Gender Considerations  
The MSME program will aim to promote gender equality in the  implementation of the program. For this, 
gender analysis will be conducted before the prog ram is implemented to undertake a baseline assessment 
with sex -disaggregated data.  The program aims to define women -led MSMES as satisfying either of the 
following conditions:  
d) Firms with 51% or more ownership by women;  
e) Firms with at least 30% women on the Board of Directors or in senior management positions; or  
f) At least 40% women employment.  
XacBank has prepared an overall Gender Action Plan, which includes specific activities, expected outputs, 
outcomes and impacts as well as monitoring indicators. Resour ces will be allocated to integrate these into 
the implementation of the program. Further details regarding gender considerations can be found in the 
Gender Action Plan attache d in the annex  8 of this document .  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
XacBank has implemented a robust Financial Data Management System with world -class certified data -
secure IT infrastructure. The Bank uses a fully updated version of the FlexCube software developed by 
Oracle as the Financial Information System.  All reports  produced by FlexCube are then run through an 
internally developed system called XacBanker, which translates reports and distributes them to the correct 
departments at the correct intervals. These systems will be used to facilitate the financial management  and 
reporting of the MSME program. All reporting is done in accordance with International Financial Reporting 
Standards. The bank is fully audited by internationally recognized auditing firms such as Deloitte and Ernst 
& Young, in accordance with Internat ional Standards on Auditing.  
Financial management of the program will be guided by XacBank’s accounting policies and procedures, as 
well as by procedures related to the financial and operational aspects of project management administration. 
Details regard ing the Ban k’s financial and operational aspects can be found within the Funding Management 
Strategy  (available in English) , as attached in annex 11 of this proposal. Further  information is included in 
the Bank’s Funding Accounting Policy, and Chart of Acc ounts, both of which are only available in Mongolian 
language.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 57 
 
 
 F 
GCF funds will be registered following XacBank’s “chart of accounts” under the relevant “GL” (General 
Ledger) account, which will be opened specifically for GCF –related  activities; separate from the Bank’s other 
sources of funding.    
XacBank will be the Executing entity of this program. Therefore, the disbursement will be conducted in 
accordance with the Credit Risk Management Policy (CRMP); the General Procedure on Loan  Operations, 
the Loan Operations Guideline , the Procedure on Business Loans, and the Guidelines  on 
Appraisal/Assessment and Monitoring of Business Loans, and all other relevant credit activity guidelines and 
procedures. These procedures also defined the mo nitoring methods on loan disbursement and credit 
monitoring.     
XacBank has the capacity to implement variable frequencies of reporting to ensure with the utmost 
transparency that the funds are being used effectively and appropriately.  
Financial reporting on the GCF will be provided on a semi -annual basis, as is standard, covering the period 
of January to December (inclusive). If more frequent financial reporting is required, this will be subject to 
negotiations at the time of the signing of the relevant fu nding agreement.  
XacB ank has an Internal Audit Division. Its mission is to add value through an independent appraisal of all 
of XacBank’s operations and activities and governance. The result of such appraisal is improved 
operational efficiency, risk analys is and management, and internal control systems so as to aid XacBank in 
achieving its corporate objectives.   As is stated in XacBank’s Audit Division Charter, the division operates 
under the principles of “integrity, objectivity and confidentiality.”  Curre ntly, the Emission Reduction program 
has not undergone audits by the Internal Audit Division, as it has not been required by our existing funders.  
 
Beyond the Internal Audit functions, the regular and on -demand monitoring function also serves as an 
Intern al Control check at both the branch and headquarter s level.  
 
XacBank will use its own procurement policies for operations that receive financing from this program . 
However, the initial funding from GCF is a facility for lending purposes. Therefore, borrowe rs’ procurement 
of the borrowed fund will be regulated by appropriate loan policies and guidelines. XacBank’s policies on 
such matters require that funds from XacBank loans be used only for procurement of activities specifically 
contracted with borrowers. According to XacBank’s loan procedure, business loans of US$150,000 or 
more, an annual process monitoring is performed. During the credit committee approval process, this once 
a yearly monitoring can be made to be performed monthly, quarterly, or semi -annu ally, based on a case -
by-case basis. The loan’s intended purpose usage will be monitored by the credit risk analyst (who is 
responsible for making the independent analysis as described in this proposal). Furthermore , the borrower 
must receive explicit cons ent from this risk analyst to perform any transactions with the loan funds. After 
the loan has been disbursed, if the loan purpose needs to be changed, then the loan must be re -submitted 
to the Bank’s credit committee to be approved. The measures to be tak en in these instances are clearly 
outlined in the Bank’s General Procedure on Credit Activities, and the Procedure and Guideline on 
Business Loans.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 47 OF 57 
 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might 
prevent the project/ program  objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation 
measures.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description  Risk 
category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Lack of interest in loan program from 
MSMEs /limited uptake of EE and RE products  
 
 
 Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Demand for loans in previous programs has been strong ly correlated with the favorability of the interest 
rate. There is no doubt that MSMEs want to make EE and RE investments, but merely need financial 
assistance lowering the capital burdens. In addition, with the new Energy Conservation Law, in many 
ways demand for EE and RE solu tions will no longer be a choice for those designated consumers.  which 
are to begin with large energy users (note: not necessarily large enterprises, as designated consumers 
could be MSMEs in energy intensive industries) and trickle down to all the private sector. The current 
recession in Mongolia will further encourage  MSMEs to seek cost -cutting measures, such as EE and RE 
solutions.  
 
Risk of low demand will be mitigated by  these environmental aspects in addition to XacBank’s publicizing 
of the favorable interest rates available. In addition, the FP plans to initiate i ncreased marketing research 
from XacBank’s internal team. In addition to educating businesses on the importance of energy efficiency G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
The program’s success could be impinged by the following key risks: cannibalization by SEFF program  
(recently approved by GCF) , lack of interest or uptake from Mongolian MSMEs in EE and RE solutions, 
currency risks, MSME loan defaults, and loans not being used for the agreed upon purpose. These risks 
are considered to be largely moderate, and the probability of both their occurre nce and the severity of 
their impact on the program is to be limited by mitigation measures, as described below.  
XacBank has over seven  years of experience operating RE and EE financing projects with international 
partners in the domestic market. As such,  stringent control systems and fully developed risk assessment 
and mitigation tools specifically geared to the challenges of the RE and EE market remain in place and 
utilized by XacBank.  
Other than the below specified  risks, See annex  5 for a social and e nvironmental risk assessment 
conducted for a project for the MonSEFF program, which is relevant in nature to the currently proposed 
program.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 48 OF 57 
 
 G 
and renewable energy, the FP expects that demand will be high if the favorable interest rates , and long -
term cost -reduction s of EE and RE investments,  are clearly communicated.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk 
category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Currency risk /FX fluctuations  
 
 Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Exchange rates from USD to MNT frequently fluctuate, and have been particularly strained starting in the 
second half of 2016. XacBank hedges against this currency risk by performing currency swaps with the 
central bank, the Bank of Mongolia (BoM), in short or long -term swaps. XacBank has limited its USD 
lending activities, and over the past 2 years, have been lending in MNT almost exclusively. As such, 
XacBank would take the funds received from the GCF and perform a swap with the BoM to conve rt the 
USD into MNT. For the MSMEs, the currency fluctuation risk poses in higher loan default rates is low, as 
the loans would be made in MNT.   
It is important to note that the currency risk is not passed on to the borrower but rather is taken on by the 
bank.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk 
category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
MSMEs default on loans  
 
 Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
XacBank’s NPL rate is at 8%, so this is certainly a risk. The Mongolian banking sector’s overall NPL ration 
is 8.99%, which is mostly due to bad loans in the construction and mining sectors, of which XacBank does 
not give loans to the mining sector. Additi onally, there are no comparable EE/RE/GHG programs in 
Mongolia at the moment. Regardless , the bank is prepared to take on this risk.  XacBank has a strong 
and conservative risk policy, which includes the Bank’s status as having the deepest reserve of loan loss 
provisions compared to the other three major commercial banks in Mongolia. This mean s that when non -
performing loans occur, the operation has the capacity to handle it. In addition, loans are only issued in 
the currency that the business receives income in, which lessens the default risk due to currency 
fluctuations. In addition to these institutional mitigation tactics, the risk of NPLs will be incorporated into 
the pricing structure of the MSME loan program.  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk 
category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 49 OF 57 
 
 G 
 
Funds not being used for intended EE and RE 
purposes  
 
 Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
XacBank has a long history of implementing projects similar to this one (see section E.5.2). Through 
these projects, the Bank has developed strong monitoring capacity, including a department entirely 
dedicated to the monitoring of XacBank’s eco products.  The same thoroughness will be applied to this 
program, using existing internal processes and mechanisms, as outlined in section H.2. In addition, the 
steps taken to verify the use of the funds and to monitor the use through interviews and on -site visits ar e 
outlined in section C.7  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Technology -related risk, 
e.g. failure of installed 
RE and EE components, 
installed technologies 
not suited for required 
task, inexperienced staff 
unable to operate the 
equipment to achieve 
efficiency gains  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The technological elements of proposed p roducts will either be verified  through supplier documentation of 
testing, or tested in collaboration with XacBank’s local partner Building Energy Efficiency Center (BEEC), 
which XacBank has worked with on many  projects. In addition to verifying the actual functionality of the 
products , XacBank will provide technical advisory to ensure the selected product is appropriate for the 
task required of it. Finally, the primary focus of awareness raising activity with regard to EE and RE will 
center around reducing perception of risk with these products (closing technological knowledge risk). 
Many MSMEs know that these products exist, but they perceive them as a risky investment. Making them 
aware of the extensive testing and risk reducing measures that are integrated into the program will cull 
more interest in participation.   
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 50 OF 57 
 
 G 
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 55*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 57 H 
H.1. Logic Framework . 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level17 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathways  The MSME program will mainstream energy efficiency and renewable energy investments 
in the Mongolian private sector.  It will do so by developing market conditions conducive to 
RE and EE investment, allowing it to compete alongside the traditionally cheaper, 
conventional, high -emission alternati ves. The program will access all sectors of the RE and 
EE supply chain, from producers to traders to installers to end -users, in order to 
significantly shift the needle on the green sector in Mongolia and allow the significant 
benefits of such investment t o trickle down to the consumer level as well. In making capital 
available, capacity building and robust knowledge sharing between these sectors, the 
program will lessen the perceived  and the actual  barriers to investment in EE and RE . 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verificatio
n (MoV)  Baseli
ne Target  Assumption
s Mid-term 
(2021)  Final  
(2025)  
Fund -level impacts  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -
emission energy 
access and power 
generation  Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided  XacBank 
program 
monitoring 
reports  0 262,564.
49 
 tCO2  525,128.
98 
tCO2  Majority of 
the emission 
reduction is 
likely to be 
achieved 
from energy 
efficiency 
projects  
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided  XacBank 
program 
monitoring 
reports  0 334,597  
 tCO2  669,195  
tCO2  Emission 
reduction will 
be achieved 
mostly from 
building 
sector as it is 
the majority 
17 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 56*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 57 H 
of the 
emissions.18 
Sum 597,161. 4
9 tCO2eq  1,194,323.
98 million 
tCO2eq  
18 Emission reduction for cities, industries and appliances are not speci fied in our calculation, but included as 
the bulk of “other”.  H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/ Program  level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verificatio
n (MoV)  Baseli
ne Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term 
(end of 
2021)  Final  
(end 
of 
2025)  
Project/ program  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large low -
emission power 
suppliers  6.3 MWs of low 
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated or 
rehabilitated  XacBank 
program 
monitoring 
reports  0 60 MW  As this 
calculation is 
based on the 
minimum 
capacity factor 
of 20%  for a 
technology to be 
adopted, this 
indicator is most 
conservative, 
and can 
increase for 
technologies 
with higher 
capacity factor.  
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances  7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  XacBank 
program 
monitoring 
reports  0 51,564 
MWh/ 
year 103,309 
MWh/ 
year Same as 
assumption in 
M3.0


---
*Page 57*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 57 H 
Project/ program  
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1.Commercially viable
EE and RE projects are 
identified, financed and 
implemented  Volume of financing  XacBank 
program 
monitoring 
reports  0 USD 30 
million  USD 
60 
million  n/a 
2.Sustainable energy
project identification 
awareness capacity 
increased across local 
institutions  Number of loan 
officers are trained 
to offer Eco 
Products  
Number of SMEs 
who reach out to 
XacBank about 
participating  XacBank 
program 
monitoring 
reports  0 240 loan 
officers  
(60 per 
year for 
first 4 
years)  400 
loan 
officer
s n/a 
3.Increased awareness
of benefits of EE and RE 
projects  Number of contacts 
made through 
various marketing 
events  XacBank 
program 
monitoring 
reports  0 900 
MSMEs 
(25% of 
active 
MSMEs)  1,700 
MSM
Es 
(50% 
of 
active 
MSM
Es) Based on existing 
data of active 
MSMEs that 
XacBank worked 
with 
Number of unique 
page views on Eco 
Banking program 
website  479 
(from 
Jan-Oct 
2016)  2400  4800  Based on most up 
to date analytics 
data on existing 
EE program 
website  
Number of loan 
inquiries (regardless 
of ultimate 
acceptance)  3 loan 
inquires 
per 
week 
(144 per 
year)  576 loan 
inquires  1,152  
loan 
inquiri
es Based on current 
experience with 
existing EE loan  
program  
Number of case 
studies published  0 16 case 
studies 
published 
(4/year 32 
case 
studie
s


---
*Page 58*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 57 H 
with 
emphasis 
on 
showcasin
g women -
led 
MSMEs)  publis
hed 
(4/yea
r) 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1. Financing of projects which increase the generation of
renewable energy, the efficient use of resources of MSMEs  Financial resources and technical expertise 
deployed to develop, assess, finance and report 
on projects  
1.1. Financing of 
MSMEs  Checking and financing of MSME -
sized, standardized investments 
following credit analysis and 
eligibility assessment based on pre -
established  list of BATs with the aid 
of technical advisory  Internal financial, 
technical, 
environmental and 
IT experts ; 
External experts to 
be contracted  when 
necessary  •Financial,  technical and
environmental experts 
required for  customized 
investment plan formulation 
and assessment, including 
for on -site visits to clients’ 
facilities;  
•Financial, technical and IT
experts required for the  
compilation of pre -assessed  
standardized BAT 
measures, to be used by 
XacBank to verify  
eligibility of smaller -scale 
investments;  
• Financial resources, on
commercial and/or 
concessional terms, 
deployed to support the 
implementation of the 
eligible projects;  
1.2. Reporting  Estimating and reporting the level of 
enhancement of resource use 
efficien cy and/or climate resilience 
at the Program levels  Internal expertise to 
aggregate database, 
webpage;  
Use verification 
methods  •Dedicated expertise
required for the aggregation 
and maintenance of results 
tracking  databases and 
webpages with the 
estimated impact of the 
financed projects and 
measures;  
•Verification methods
required  to verify the 
physical  implementation of 
projects (on a sample basis


---
*Page 59*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 57 H 
for the smaller scale 
projects).  
1.3. Financing women -
led MSMEs  Finance 50% women -led MSMEs 
fund-wide Same as 1.1.  Same as 1.1.  
2. Capacity building of financial institutions in originating,
assessing, financing and tracking sustainable energy and 
climate resilience projects  Expertise and skills transfer for capacity 
enhancement  
2.1. Internal Training  Training of Business Banking 
department staff and retail staff to 
market the benefits of EE and RE 
projects, and training of client 
relationship managers to recognize 
clients with investment potential;  Conduct  internal 
training every first 
quarter of the year. Training experts,  
complemented by financial  
and technical experts, 
required to develop training 
materials  and deliver 
targeted training  sessions for 
a range of XacBank staff: 
sales, client relationship 
managers, credit experts, 
lender’s engineers  (the latter 
applies to 2.2 as well) . 
2.2. Customer Training  Development of MSME training 
programs to teach basic ability to 
identify potential projects from 
MSME leaders  Conduct minimum 1 
training per year  Training offered to 
Mongolian MSMEs about 
how to identify potentially 
fruitful projects in their own 
business venture, opening 
up the pipeline of eligible 
projects and increasing 
capacity of local businesses 
to access climate finance.  
3.Awareness raising am ong MSMEs and individual clients Experience and skills transfer for marketing and 
awareness raising  
3.1. Development of 
Marketing Strategy  Development of marketing 
strategies for XacBank catered to 
the offerings of this specific 
program. Create specific marketing 
tools (such as brochures  etc) to 
market XacBank’s capacity to 
finance RE and EE projects  Use internal experts 
on marketing and 
design works  Marketing and design 
experts from XacBank’s 
marketing team to 
complement implementing 
financial experts, s o as to 
develop marketing tools, and 
program  website;  
3.2. Marketing events  Engagement of XacBank’s  
existing and prospective clients on 
MSME and individual levels via  
targeted marketing events;  Organize minimum 1 
marketing event per 
year using internal 
and external 
resources, including 
the engagement of 
clients  Same as 3.1, plus m arketing 
experts and event  
organizing resources for 
client  events, including 
access to civil organizations, 
and women in business 
organizations  
3.3. Website update  Development  of a program -specific  
content on XacBank’s  website to Make website 
update as ne cessary Same as 3.1


---
*Page 60*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 57 H 
market the facility and to report on 
the progress of the program.  
3.4. Awareness raising  Ensure additional effort is put forth 
for awareness raising within  
women’s spaces and 
businesswomen communities  Same as 3.2.  Same as 3.2.  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Monitoring  
For information on monitoring, including what will be monitored and how monitoring will be conducted please 
see the attached Social and Environmental Monitoring System document  as well as the tables in section C.3 
titled “MSME Eligibility .” To explicitly clarify, XacBank is the entity responsible for monitoring, and bears the 
cost of monitoring and verifying emissi ons savings, as well as keeping evidence/invoices. XacBank 
calculates final savings by sub -project and in total, and the project owner will be t he owner of reduced 
GHGs.  
Monitoring, reporting, and evaluation arrangements will comply with the relevant GCF policies as appointed 
in the MAF, AMA, etc. XacBank will report to the GCF on a periodic basis as agreed with the GCF, on the 
status of GCF funded activities throughout the relevant reporting period. These reports will include the 
disbursements made during  the relevant period, the implementation status of the sub -projects and the 
monitoring of results and impacts of sub -projects.  
Milestones/Reports  Expected Dates  
Start of Implementation  upon effectiveness of the FAA  
Interim Evaluation report  Three years after the effectiveness of the FAA  
Completion report  1 month after the end of the Tenor or Extended Tenor, as applicable  
Final Evaluation report  2 months after the end of the Tenor or Extended Tenor, as 
applicable  
Reporting  
Internally, reports will be conducted on a quarterly basis. These reports will be conducted based upon 
internal processes as outlined in section C.7 (implementation arrangements). For external reports to GCF, 
the timing and cadence of such external reports  will be negotiated and decided upon at the signing of the 
funding agreements.  
Evaluation  
For the evaluation mechanisms for RE and EE loans, see the tables in section C.3 titled “MSME Eligibility”


---
*Page 61*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 57 H 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents.  I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
 ☒  NDA No -objection Letter  server  
 ☒  Feasibility Study  
 ☒  Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if 
applicable ) 
 ☒  Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (If applicable)   
 ☒  Project/ Program  Confirmation /Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement 
schedule, etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I   
 ☒  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management 
Plan 
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation Report  of the baseline project  (If applicable)   
 ☒  Map indicating the location of the project/ program   
 ☒  Timetable of project/ program  implementation


---
*Page 62*
---

Page 58


---
*Page 63*
---

Page 59


---
*Page 64*
---

Page 60 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  MSME Business Loan Program for GHG Emission Reduction  
Accredited entity  XacBank LLC  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 2 (I2)  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan  (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if appli cable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -11-11 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Mongolian  
Link to disclosure  English: http://xacbank.mn/en/552/about -xacbank/social -
responsibility/eco -bank/esms   
Mongolian: http://xacbank.mn/mn/552/about -xacbank/social -
responsibility/eco -bank/esms   
Other link(s)  N/A