=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20161007212452+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20161010152441+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VIII 
Funding proposal package for FP 025 GCF/B.14/0 7/Add.08/Rev.01 
10 October 2016  Meeting of the Board  
12 – 14 October  2016  
Songdo , Incheon, Repu blic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem 11(f) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following four  parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ Sustainable Energy Financing Facilities ”
submitted by European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .;
b)No-objection letter s issued by the national desig nated authorities  or focal point s;
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  and
d)Letter of Intent to participate in the co -financing of the sustainable energy financing
facilities submitted by the Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Republic of Korea .
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(i es) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund , the funding proposal “Sustainable Energy 
Financing Facilities ” submitted by European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Memb ers and Alternate 
Board Member s to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or 
commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

` 
GCF/B.14/07/Add.08/Rev.01  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal summary submitted by the accredited entity                                                               1 
 No-objection letter s issued by t he national designated authorities  or focal point s                         51 
                Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                                                                                            68  
Letter of Intent to participate in the co -financing of t he sustainable energy financing                   69  
facilities  submitted by the Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Republic of Korea


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Project/Programme Title:  Scaling up private sector climate finance through local financial 
institutions (GCF -EBRD SEFF co-financing Programme ) 
Country/Region: k The Middle East and North Africa , Western and Central Asia, Southern 
and Eastern Europe  
Accredited Entity:  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
Contents  
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
Section I  ANNEXES


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
List of figures and tables  
Figure 1 The SEFF Programme model  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  15 
Figure 2 Volume of EBRD SEFF financ ing disbursed over the last five years  ................................ ...............................  21 
Figure 3.  Theory of change – Sustainable Energy and Climate Resilience Financing Facilities  ................................ .... 22 
 
Table 1 Indicative type of climate technologies to be financed under the Programme  ................................ ...............  8 
Table 2 Energy and carbon intensity of the Programme region  ................................ ................................ ..................  13 
Table 3. Example civil society capacity building activities in the Kyrgyz Republic  ................................ .......................  24


---
*Page 6*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 48 A 
A.1.  Brief Project/Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project /Programmed title  Scaling up private sector climate finance  through local financial institutions  (GCF -EBRD 
SEFF co-financing Programme ) 
A.1.2. Project or Programme  programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion  13 countries  in the Middle East and North Afr ica, Western and Central Asia, s outhern 
and eastern Europe   
• Central Asia:  Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan  and Mongolia  
• Southern and eastern Europe: Albania, Moldova, Montenegro and Serbia   
• The Middle East and North Africa : Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia  
• Western Asia  (the Caucasus) : Armenia  and Georgia  
Among the beneficiary countries, the Programme  will initially focus on Egypt, Georgia, 
Morocco, Tajikistan and Tunisia .  
A.1.4. National designated 
authority (ies)  NDAs as designated on the GCF website . 
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)  
A.1.5 .a.Access modality  ☐ Direct  ☒ International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entit ies: 
1. EBRD’s SEFF team: EBRD’s in -house staff to design each of the Sustainable Energy 
and Climate Resilience Financing Facilities (‘SEFF’ or ‘Facility’) under the Programme 
and oversee Programme activities  
2. SEFF implementation teams1: A group of local and inter national experts that will be 
procured in each region or country. They will be supervised by the EBRD to support 
the execution of the Programme and to monitor PFI’s compliance throughout the 
entire Programme lifetime.   
3. Participating financial institutions (‘PFIs’):  Microfinance institutions, leasing 
companies, technology vendors as well as local banks  that will on-lending the loans 
to final beneficiaries . All the sustainable energy and climate resilience projects 
under the Programme shall be financed via PF Is, not directly financed by the EBRD. 
At minimum 3 2 financial institutions are expected to participate in the Programme.  
Beneficiar ies include:   
• Micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), the industrial and corporate sector, 
farmers and households  
• Public entities (invested via private companies)  
• Technology suppliers, producers, vendors and installers  
Executing entities namely PFI, local engineers and project developers, and Special 
Purpose Corporations (SPC) will also benefit as a result of capacity  building, investment 
support and increased demand.  
                                                                 
1 SEFF operation teams and Project implementation teams are used interchangeably in the proposal.


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 48 A 
A.1.7. Project size category  
(Individual project size  under the 
Programme , million USD) 2 ☒ Micro (≤10)  
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☒ Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☒ Mitigation  ☒ Adaptation  ☒ Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  
Date of last submission  11 December 2015 ;  
19 September 2016  
A.1.1 0. 
Project contact 
details  Contact person, 
position  Andreas  Biermann , Head of Policy and Climate Finance , Energy Efficiency and Climate 
Change team ; Marta Simonetti , Deputy Head of Multilaterals, Donor Co -Finance  
Organization  EBRD  
Email address  BiermanA@ebrd.com ; Simonetm@ebrd.com   
Telephone  +44 (0) 20 7338 6000  
Mailing  address  One Exchange Square, London EC2A 2JN  
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation (E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐ Low emission transport (E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)  
☒ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances (E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies 
and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐ Forestry and land use (E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment a nd management, etc.)  
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  (E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply 
sources and supply chain management, relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  (E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment (E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
☐  Ecosystem and ecosystem services (E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
  
                                                                 
2 Here, a project refers to an individual loan between the EBRD and the partner financial institution.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 48 A 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Scaling up private sector climate finance is an urgent priority to rapidly put the world on a mitigation path leading to a 1. 5°C 
outcome and enable vulnerable countries to shift on to a climate resilient pathway.  The EBRD -GCF SEFF Co -Financing 
Programme ( the “Programme”) has been developed to deliver this scale in the EBRD region through the use of an innovative 
approach that builds on over a decade of experience and an existing portfolio of USD 3.5 billion of climate finance mobilized  
through Partner Fina ncial Institutions (the “PFIs”).  
The Programme will contribute to achieving a paradigm shift by creating new and significantly scaling up existing markets for  
commercial sustainable energy, energy efficiency and climate resilience financing. By doing so i t will contribute to the aim as 
stated in the Paris Agreement to “make finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and 
climate -resilient development”, through an innovative combination of financial support, capacity buildin g and technology 
transfer and supported by a deep level of country ownership.  
The Programme will deliver scale over the next three years by financing, via local PFIs, more than 20,000 scalable and 
replicable renewable energy, energy efficiency, and climat e resilience projects across the industrial, commercial, residential, 
transport, and agricultural sectors in the Middle East and North Africa, Western and Central Asia and Southern and Eastern 
Europe.  It will address multiple market barriers along the tech nology supply chains and unlock the potential of private sector 
finance by:  
 Building the capacity of all actors along the climate technology supply chain, in particular by encouraging local PFIs to 
establish and grow climate financing solutions for RE, EE and CR that currently either do not exist at all, or are 
underserved;  
 Stimulating demand for best -available climate technologies by providing much -needed long -term finance that more 
closely matches the financial characteristics of RE, EE and CR projects; a nd 
 Facilitating the creation of new markets by demonstrating the profitability and enhanced competitiveness of climate 
technologies and ultimately de -risking climate investments to leverage a growing level of funding from the private sector 
over time.  
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited 
entity’s Board (if applicable)  EBRD will obtain its internal approvals within the period specified in the AMA.  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Within 12 months after all the relevant agreements between EBRD and the GCF 
are finalized for the priority countries . Within 36 months for all countries targeted.  
Estimated implementation start and end 
date  Start  of Implementation : 01 Jan 2017  
Last Availability Date for Loans to PFIs : 3 years from the date of the execution of 
the Funded Activity Agreement between GCF and EBRD  
Programme completion date : the earlier of: (1) 15 years from the date of 
execution of the F unded Activity Agreement  between GC F and EBRD, or (2) all the 
loans to the PFIs are fully repaid to GCF  
Project/ Programme  lifespan  15 years


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 48 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
Programme finance by source of funding  
  Total amount  Currency  GCF  EBRD   
1. Credit lines (non -grant)  1,462.5  million USD ($)  382.5  1,080.0 *  
2. Technical support  (grant)  76.0  million USD ($) equivalent to be 
committed in EUR  38.0  38.0 ** 
Total Programme finance  1,538.5  million USD ($) equivalent  420.5  1,118.0  
* EBRD’s ordinary capital resources .  
** EBRD will at least match GCF grants 1:1 either from its own grant resources, and/or from other bilateral or multilateral 
donors . To date, the EBRD has secured USD 3 million of technical support grants from t he Government of Republic of Korea 
through its Korea Technical Assistance and Cooperation Fund (KTCF) .  
Programme finance by type of activity  
Component   Sub-component  Total 
amount  Currency  GCF funding 
amount  EBRD funding 
amount  
1. Credit 
lines        
(non -grant)  1.1 Energy efficiency loans  900.0 million USD ($)  225.0 675.0 
1.2 Renewable energy loans  450.0 million USD ($)  135.0 315.0 
1.3 Climate resilience loans  112.5  million USD ($)  22.5  90.0  
Component 1 total  1,462.5  million USD ($)  382.53 1,08 0.0  
2. Technical 
support 
(grant)  2.1 Capacity building (training)  3.8 million USD ($) equivalent *  2.0 1.8 
2.2 Awareness raising (marketing)  19.0  million USD ($) equivalent *  0.0 19.0 ** 
2.3 Project assessment, 
implementation and monitoring  36.0  million USD ($) equivalent *  34.0  2.0** 
2.4 Travel cost  (e.g. site -visits for 
project assessment)  7.6 million USD ($) equivalent *  0.0 7.6 
2.5 SEFF office and miscellaneous  7.6 million USD ($) equivalent *  0.0 7.6 
2.6 Gender mainstreaming4 2.0 million USD ($) equivalent *  2.0 0.0 
Component 2 total   76.0  million USD ($) equivalent to 
be committed in EUR*  38.0 38.0  
* Exchange rate of USD1= EUR0.897 was applied in currency conversions.  
** Of USD 3 million of grants from  the Korea Technical Assistance and Cooperation Fund  (KTCF ), up to USD  1 million equivalent 
will be used for awareness raising activities and USD  2 million for project assessment, implementation and monitoring.  
                                                                 
3 Of GCF USD 382.5 million, up to USD 72 million equivalent will be provided in Euro.  
4 Gender assessment, mainstreaming training and technical assistance , monitoring,  evaluations and publications


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 48 B 
Use of loan proceeds  
In order to promote the uptake of innovative, high performing climate technologies that have low market penetration rates,  the 
Programme  sets ambitious eligibility criteria for climate technologies so that technologies that clearly perform beyond current 
market practice are financed and demonstrated. At the same time, the level of ambition needs to be appropriate and relevant i n 
each marke t to avoid promoting a prohibitively expensive market niche.   
The following list of climate technologies is to enhance understanding of the potential technologies to be financed under the  
Programme. This indicative list is thus neither exhaustive nor appli cable to all Programme countries.  
Table 1 Indicative type of climate technologies to be financed under the Programme  
Example 
climate 
resilience 
technologies  The P rogramme will promote and finance innovative and/or high performing t echnologies and solutions that 
can address specific climate change impacts, namely water efficiency and climate resilience in agricultural 
sector.   
[Water efficiency]  
In regions where water resource availability is vulnerable to the impacts of climate cha nge, the following 
types of water efficiency technologies, inter alia, will be considered for demonst ration and financing under 
the P rogramme:  
 Installation of rainwater harvesting system  
 Installation of water re -use/ grey water recycling system  
 Refurbishment of water distribution system in farm buildings, namely water pipes, pumps and taps  
 Installation of gravity/drip irrigation system  
 Installation of pressurized systems such as pump, pipes, sprinklers and other fittings  
[Climate resilient agricultural production]  
 Minimum / zero till te chnology to reduce soil erosion  
 Monitoring and optimizing the use of resources in agriculture production to reduce water demand, soil 
erosion as well as environmental impact (“smart farm”) . For example, monito ring of water use (irrigation 
system), pollutants, lighting and temperat ure management for greenhouses.5 
Example 
renewable 
energy 
technologie s:  Installations of solar systems for electricity generation, hot water production (e.g. solar water heaters), 
and/or for heating/cooling/drying processes  
 Installations of wind turbines  
 Small run -of-the-river hydropower plants  
 Biogas or biomass for production of heat and/or electricity, landfill gas recovery and use  
 Other renewable technologies and/or energy storage s ystems  
 Advanced waste management with production of RDF (refused derived fuels)  
Example 
energy 
efficiency 
technologies 
and services:  Replacement of production/process machinery and improvement of relevant business processes such as:  
 Installation of absorption Chillers, Variable Speed Drives on selected electric motors  
 Improvement of motor system, compressed air system, pipeline and process machine insulation  
 Implementation of energy saving measures primarily aimed at reducing energy consumption of th e 
auxiliary and process equipment  
Commercial, public, and residential buildings:  
 The insulation of buildings, replacing windows, doors, heating and lighting systems  
 Improvement of Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning and Refrigerating System  
 Improvement  of boiler system efficiency  
Others: fuel switch, on site co -generation of heat and electricity, implementation of Energy Management 
Systems or Building Management Systems  
 
                                                                 
5 Pending confirmation of specific technologies, and the presence of reliable manufacturers, suppliers, distributors and 
installers etc.


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 48 B 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  1538.5  million USD ($)   
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  Senior Loans  382.5  million USD ($)  As outlined in 
Term Sheet  As outlined in 
Term Sheet  
Grants*  38.0  million USD ($)  equivalent in EUR  Not applicable  Not applicable  
Economic and financial justification for the concessionality that the EBRD is requesting from the GCF is 
provided in Section F.1 . 
Total requested  420.5  million USD ($)  
(c) Co -financing 
to recipient  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
 Senior Loans  1,08 0.0  million USD ($)  EBRD  As outlined 
in the Term  
Sheet  Market -
based  As outlined 
in Term 
Sheet  
Grant  3.0 million USD ($)  
or EUR 
equivalent  KTCF  n/a n/a n/a 
Grant  35.0  million USD ($)  
or EUR 
equivalent  EBRD and/or 
other 
bilateral and 
multilateral 
donors  n/a n/a n/a 
Lead financing institution: EBRD.  
(d) Financial 
terms between 
GCF and AE (if 
applicable)  With regards to the loan proceeds, GCF resources will be passed directly to partner financial institutions  (PFI)  
by the EBRD. An up -to-date due diligence must be in place before EBRD approves each PFI under this 
Programme . The EBRD will assess PFI financial management capacity and financial regulatory compliance as 
part of its due diligen ce. Pricing for GCF loans will be agreed on a case -by-case basis for each market and the 
principle of not improving on the GCF terms extended to EBRD.   
B.3. Financial Markets Overview  
Financial barriers are a significant barrier to the mobilization and scaling up of climate finance. These can manifest themse lves in 
inadequate pricing, inflexible grace periods and loan tenors that are not adapted to the characteristics of an investment. The lack 
of available and accessible commercial finance on offer by local financial institutions  hinders the ability of home -owners and 
businesses to invest in renewable energy, energy efficiency and climate resilience investments. Finance facilities that addre ss 
these barriers at the same time can contribute to increasing market confidence, reducing  risk perception and attracting  private


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 48 B 
investors into this market segment . The countries targeted by this Programme are characterised by a diversity of financial market 
characteristics in terms of funding sources, pricing and market penetra tion. SEFF are designed to address financial barriers specific 
to each country’s market context.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 48 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
1. Common priorities as stated in the INDC and the role of the private sector  
The participating countries (the “Countries”) highlighted the crucial role of energy efficiency and renewable energy deployment in 
mitigating climate change, in the Intended Nationally -Determined Contributions  (INDC) for each nation. The INDCs placed 
particular emphasis on improving demand -side energy efficiency in the industrial sector and buildings , an objective that has 
traditionally been difficult to achieve due to the diverse nature of  these two sectors, and the need for private -sector involvement. 
A majority of the Countries, in their INDCs, also highlighted their vulnerability  to the  diverse  impact s of climate change. In the case 
of the Countries in Central Asia , the Middle East and N orth Africa, reducing water demand in water -intensive sectors is a top 
priority in their national adaptation agenda .   
Some policy measures together with limited public spending are being planned in the Countries  to create a more conducive 
environment for investments in sustainable energy and climate resilience . This  indicat es a recognition and support of  the private 
sector’s important role in deploying  investments to support the INDCs, and its potential to contribute to the  paradigm shift to a 
low-carbon, climate resilient economy .  
2. Strong potential for private sector investment in climate technologies in the proposed regions  
Investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy  will have to deliver about  70% of the global greenhouse gas emissions 
reduct ions required to shift the world to a below  2°C warming path.6 The private and financial sectors are integral for achieving 
the investment volume required in the time available.  
Energy efficiency : Significant potential for such investments exists in the C ountries , some of which  are among the most energy - 
and carbon -intensive economies in the world. In these regions, technologies that improve energy efficiency can help businesses 
optimi se their production processes and improve product quality to boost profi tability and increase competitiveness. In 
commercial, residential and public buildings, energy efficiency technologies and services can contribute to inhabitants’ enhanced 
well-being and productivity as well as reduced utility bills.  
Renewable energy : The Countries have a bundant renewable resources that present commercial opportunities to generate clean 
electricity at low cost while reducing exposure to volatile fossil fuel prices and securing energy supply through diversified  energy 
sources . Delivering cl imate finance through local financial institutions enables access to smaller investors and, in particular, 
distributed and/or building -integrated renewable energy production.  
Climate resilience : Many of the Countries are also characterized by their vulnera bilities to the impact s of climate change, in 
particular  reduced  availability of  water resource s. The Programme covers some of the world’s most water -scarce regions , such as 
Central Asia, t he Middle East and North Africa. In these regions,  water efficiency  is critical not only for sustainable development , 
but also to maintain and enhance  business competitiveness. Nevertheless, the level of technologies deployed is often very basic. 
Significant opportunities for water efficiency investments on a commerci al basis exist in these regions. These opportunities 
include innovative and/or high -performing technologies for harvesting rainwater, re -using or recycling water, and more efficient 
irrigation  systems . Using local financial institutions to facilitate investmen ts in these technologies will access smaller clients and 
dispersed investments, especially in the agricultural sector - the main water user in many countries.   
3. Tapping into the wealth of investment potential through a structured, holistic approach  
The Programme will provide the mechanisms needed to effectively and efficiently address the wide range of barriers to scaling  up 
the deployment of innovative, higher performing  climate technologies.7 Implementing the Programme will allow Countries to tap 
into the potential for  financially attractive energy efficiency, renewable energy and climate resilience project opportunities . 
                                                                 
6 Source: International Energy Agency.  
7 Technologies here include services and practices.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 48 C 
Delivering these investments  requires mechanisms that can  identify, develop, finance and deliver large numbers of relatively 
small pr ojects scattered among tens of thousands of enterprises  and residences . Only the local financial sector has the reach and 
capacity to deliver climate finance to service the pent -up demand for investments in cleaner and more sustainable solutions.   
4. Mains treaming gender equality and sustainability into business operations and capacity building  
The Programme  will provide comprehensive support for PFIs in the areas of gender mainstreaming and environmental and social 
safeguards. This will contribute to PFIs’ greater understanding of and compliance with the GCF’s Environmental and Social 
Safeguard and Gender Po licy, facilitating tens of PFIs to become effective partners of the GCF as accredited entities.  
Promoting gender equality :  
EBRD is committed to promoting gender equality, as set out in the EBRD’s Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality . By 
putting a strong focus on mainstreaming gender in this Programme,  in an approach developed jo intly between the GCF and the 
EBRD, it is ensure d that the Programme is fully  align ed with the Gender Policy and the Gender Action Plan of the GCF , which aim s 
to ensure that women and men will equally benefit from loans/investments supported by the Fund an d build both women and 
men’s resilience to climate change. Mainstreaming gender from the initial assessment to finalisation of the financing schemes will 
highlight EBRD’s added value in the mobilisation of private sector climate finance , where gender equal ity is poorly addressed in 
general. EBRD will work closely with end beneficiaries, namely SMEs and households, as well as the local financial sector to bring 
gender considerations into their management and operations8.  
 
Environmental and social risk manag ement : 
The partner financial institutions participating in the Programme will be required by the EBRD and the GCF to address 
environmental and social risks in their projects in a comprehensive manner, going well beyond minimum standards. PFIs will learn 
how to set specific climate technology benchmarks by sector and deliver climate financing volume at scale.  As a result, 
environmental and social risks of the p rojects will be assessed more clearly, and preventative measures and plans will be 
prepared in a more systematic manner. Moreover, partner financial institutions will be trained to better respond to sustainability 
issues that emerge in project implementation, and to implement  a systematic approach to managing such issues .  
  
                                                                 
8 This builds on the lessons learned from a gender study in the residential sector financed by the Clean Technology Fund, and 
from the EBRD’s Woman in Business  programmes that provide female entrepreneurs access to credit. More information on the 
gender component of the Programme can be found in the Programme gender action plan document submitted to the GCF in 
parallel to the proposal.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 48 C 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
The countries where EBRD proposes to invest with this Programme  are characterized by inefficient use of energy and h igh carbon 
intensity (tCO 2eq/GDP) which range from 1.5 to 8 times that of the global average .  
Table 2 Energy and carbon intensity of the Programme region9 
 Gross Domestic 
Product  (GDP)  
(billion 2005 USD)  Total Primary  
Energy Supply  
(million toe) Emissions from 
fuel combustion  
(million tCO2 ) Energy  
Intensity  
(TPES/GDP)  Carbon  
Intensity  
(CO 2/GDP)  
1 Armenia    6.9   2.9   5.2 0.4 0.7 
2 Egypt    128.5    77.5    184.3  0.6 1.4 
3 Georgia    9.7   3.9   6.6 0.4 0.6 
4 Jordan    18.4    7.7   22.8  0.4 1.2 
5 Kyrgyz  Republic    3.6   3.9   8.9 1.1 2.4 
6 Moldova    4.0   3.1   6.7 0.7 1.6 
7 Mongolia    5.1   5.2   18.7  1.0 3.6 
8 Montenegro    2.9   1.0   2.3 0.3 0.7 
9 Morocco    85.0    18.9    50.3  0.2 0.5 
10 Serbia    28.4    14.9    45.3  0.5 1.5 
11 Tajikistan    3.9   2.5   3.3 0.6 0.8 
12 Tunisia    43.3    10.4    23.7  0.2 0.5 
13 Albania  11.3  2.3 3.6 0.2 0.3 
European Union - 28  15 148.4   1 625.6   3 340.1  0.1 0.2 
India   1 489.8    775.4   1 868.6  0.5 1.2 
Brazil   1 166.7    293.7    452.4  0.2 0.3 
People's Rep. of China   4 864.0   3 009.5   8 977.1  0.6 1.8 
Russian Federation    993.5    730.9   1 543.1  0.7 1.5 
These countries  are characterized by low market penetration of climate technologies, namely  energy efficiency, renewable energy 
and water efficiency  technologies . Despite the commercial viability and substantial economic, social and environmental benefits ,  
investments in climate technologies are given low levels of prioritization due to a number of barriers as follows:   
 Financial barriers: high upfront cost of high performing climate technologies, an absence of adequate pricing (inte rest rate 
and tenor) to incentivize investments  
 High perceived risk of energy efficiency and renewable energy lending  
 Technical barriers: Financial institutions lack experience and skills in originating commercially viable energy efficiency an d 
renewable  energy projects; borrowers are often unfamiliar with energy costs saving opportunities and lack technical know -
how for feasibility studies and energy audits.  
 Lack of awareness among stakeholders about the benefits of sustainable energy and climate resilie nce projects. This includes 
a lack of knowledge about how to access loan products among end borrowers; local stakeholders lack understanding of the 
beneficial impacts that sustainable energy production and consumption have on energy or water security, envi ronmental 
benefits, health and livelihoods in general.  
                                                                 
9 Source: International Energy Agency 2015 (2013 data)


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 48 C 
 
Without addressing these key barriers, the development of a market for sustainable energy and climate resilience is likely to  
remain limited and the EBRD regions will continue their energy inefficient practices while relying heavily on fossil fuels in  their 
energy mix. By addressing multiple barriers through its design, the Programme aims to scale up private sector investments in 
energy efficiency , renewable energy and climate resilience projects.  
 
The f our specific objectives  of this Programme  are: 
1. Demonstrate and scale up commercially viable sustainable energy and climate resilience  financing  
The Programme  will help to develop and to demonstrate efficient and effective financing mechanisms for energy efficiency and 
renewable projects through new business models designed for industrial, corporate and residential clients.  The Programme  has 
important transformational impact aspects as it is expected that other financial institutions will follow and develop sustainable 
energy and climate resilience  business lines to scale -up the potential impact of the project. Through increased financing vehicles, 
faster market penetration of low -carbon technologies is expected.  
2. Lower the risk perceptions towards sustainable energy and climate  resilience  projects  
The Programme  will encourage partner financial institutions  to actively develop these new markets and reduce the perceived high 
risk of financing sustainable energy and climate resilience projects. Extensive training on risk analysis will enhance PFI loan 
officers’ understanding in these new sectors, and as a result, the risk margins related to the technical risk of project s are expected 
to be reduced. This brings a benefit to the end beneficiaries  in reduced price of borrowing which acts as a pass -through 
mechanism of the GCF concessional funding from local financial institutions to the final benef iciaries.  
3. Transfer skills for sustainable energy and climate resilience  projects  
The Programme  will provide technical training for sustainable energy and climate resilience financing to loan officers from various 
departments (r etail, small and medium sized enterprises and mortgage, head offices and regional branches) at partner financial 
institutions . At the end of the Programme , partner financial institutions  will have increased in ternal  capacity to deliver energy 
efficiency, renewable energy and climate resilience investments.  
4. Raise public awareness of benefits, financial viabilities and positive impacts on the livelihoods of affected communities that 
result from  sustainable  energy and climate resilience projects  
The Programme  will launch regional or country specific project s through which sustainable energy and climate resilience (mainly 
water efficiency) technologies, appliances and equipment to the proposed regions above the current market practice by raising 
public awareness, building capacity to civil society organisations and leveraging their network s. In addition to stimulating demand 
through increased recognition, marketing activities will improve climate resilient behavior of communities and help potential 
clients to better understand requirements of financial institutions for sustainable energy and cl imate resilience lending.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 48 C 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Through the climate technology -driven approach  as stated in Section B , the Programme will demonstrate at least 20,000 energy 
efficiency, renewable energy and climate resilience project s with clients in all range of sectors from small and medium -sized 
enterprises, corporate and industrial sector, renewable energy project developers, farmers and households .  
 
Figure 1 The SEFF Programme model  
 
COMPONENT 1. CREDIT L INES (SUSTAINABLE ENERGY AND CLIMATE RESILIENCE LOANS) –NON -GRANT COMPONENT  
The first component of the Programme proceeds will be utilized by Participating financial institutions  (PFIs) for sustainable energy 
and climate resilience lending. The financing w ill support investments in high performance climate technologies and supply chains 
/ local manufacturing to ensure the availability of these technologies.   
In principle, all PFIs that comply with EBRD criteria are eligible. Eligibility criteria include:  
 PFI financials, integrity  and ownership  
 PFI business potential forecast / client base in relation to identified market demand / extent that client base would benefit  
from higher energy performance technologies  
 PFI outreach practices / familiarity with fina ncing core items of equipment / executive management enthusiasm for new 
financing products  
The use of proceeds should be in accordance with a ‘Policy Statement’ as part of the Loan Agreement between EBRD and 
PFIs .PFIs will on -lend the funds to their clients (end beneficiaries)  for either investing in (A) pre -approved technologies from the 
Best Available Technologies  Selector or (B) technologies and equipment validated by the experts procured by EBRD.  
 
COMPONENT 2.  TECHNICAL SUPPORT –GRANT COMPONENT  
The technical support component of the Programme will include investment assistance, training and marketing activities.  
2.1 SEFF implementation support throughout the Facility lifecycle  
• Initial Facility set up: Develop relevant instruments and tools to ensure efficient and effective implementation and increase 
PFI’s understanding and commitment.  
o Templates (e.g. project assessment report, pipeline monitoring report), on -line calculator, Market -specific 
Global/regional BAT selector  (Equipment finder, Energy Efficiency (EE) Benchmarking of Equipment and Technologies,


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 48 C 
definition of standard equipment and technologies, defining EE benchmarks, identification of suppliers, etc.); and  
o Pre-signing support in the form of manage ment presentations, pipeline preparation and kick -off workshops.  
o Gender analysis and sex -disaggregated baseline data to inform the design of Facility and set specific gender 
mainstreaming targets  
• Identifying potential clients & marketing: Loan officers fro m lending and risk management department at PFI level will learn 
about screening approaches, data collection and analysis (industries and regions), selection of target clients, preliminary 
eligibility and creditworthiness assessment of projects. This will help to select creditworthy companies and to identify eligible 
projects at an early stage.  
• Project screening for technical eligibility: Project assessment report will include verification of technical feasibility and  
financial viability, findings and conc lusions, cash -flow forecasts, financial viability parameters (NPV, IRR), sensitivity analysis 
and risk analysis.  
• Implementation and verification results monitoring and reporting: The Programme will support the procurement process 
with regards to the imple mentation of projects and support PFIs with monitoring the projects development and performance 
to ensure accountability, consistent practices, and continuous  improvement.  
• Periodic monitoring of the Programme  progress and final evaluations: The efficiency and effectiveness of the Facility will be 
assessed throughout the Facility lifetime. Final evaluations on the success of the Programme  will be prepared. For the gender 
component of the Programme  an additional mid -term review will be conducted in the 4 init ial target countries (Georgia, 
Morocco, Tunisia and Tajikistan) in order to revise – if necessary – some aspects of the Programme  to meet specific countries’ 
needs.  
2.2 Targeted training  and capacity building  
There will be several workshops and training s essions for bank officers to effectively use provided tools ( Global/regional BAT 
selector , Project  Assessment Report templates, etc.) and learn necessary sales and project evaluation skills.  
 Product design, pipeline development &  sales techniques to the lending department at PFI so that loan officers are able to 
identify business opportunities among existing clients, to screen the existing portfolio and to sell EE lending products  
 Project Assessment & Risk Analysis  training, in pa rticular specific skills for p roject finance (in comparison to PFI’s business -as-
usual corporate lending), will include contents such as: Cash -flow forecast, Viability parameters, Sensitivity analysis, Financial 
modelling, Technical and economic risk analy sis.  
 Training on SEFF tools to help PFI staff familiarize with relevant tools such as ‘ global/regional BAT selector ’ and online energy 
saving calculators.  
 On-the job training to help PFI staff to effectively conduct on -site visits and enhance sales skill s. 
 Environmental and Social (E&S) training to credit/risk staff at PFI to ensure PFI´s implementation of the required EBRD 
E&S Risk Management Procedures for Corporate, SME and Micro loans (an outline of the EBRD´s E&S training 
Programme is available at http://www.ebrd.com/who -we-are/our -values/environmental -emanual -information.html ).  
 Gender related training to  address specific needs of women and men and  potential project/Programme risks on women and 
men associated with investments  
2.3 Awareness raising activities  
Marketing activities to raise awareness about sustainable energy and climate resilience investments to potential clients and key 
stakeholders including  business associations, government institutions, donors and civil society o rganisations.  
 Marketing tools for targeted marketing activities  
 Develop a marketing  plan to define target groups and markets and determine targeted marketing instruments, time horizons 
and budget


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 48 C 
 Develop promotional materials covering case studies from v arious regions  
 Support direct mailing campaigns  
 Organise or participate in sustainable energy and climate resilience related events  
 Raise awareness about sustainable energy and climate resilience related topics, to attract attention and interest of potenti al 
borrowers  and increase demand and project inflow  
 Media Work will include publication of sustainable energy and climate resilience articles, advertisements, press releases, 
radio/TV spots and online publications  
 Website including Facility information, tools (Online calculator, Equipment Selector, Templates) and marketing materials 
(Articles, press releases, case studies, etc.).  
 Gender aspects will be considered in designing marketing materials or carrying out market events, so that both men and 
women co uld be equally informed about opportunities to access climate finance.  
 
2.4 Gender action plan  
During the first phase of the Programme, a gender analysis will be conducted in all countries involved by consultants to unde rtake 
a baseline assessment with sex-disaggregated data related to climate finance and relevant sectors . The analysis will inform the 
design and implementation of the Programme in a gender -responsive manner. The Gender Action Plan of the Programme will be 
first tested in the initial targe t countries and afterwards revised to adapt to the existing challenges observed in each country of 
operations.   
Please see the Annex for the Gender Action Plan.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
EBRD  and PFIs   
Since 2006, EBRD has established a partnership with over 110 local financial institutions to mobilise private sector climate finance. 
Through wide networks of PFIs across 23 countries, o ver USD 3 billion of EBRD’s climate finance has been on -lent to 90,000  
beneficiaries to adopt climate technologies; t his has led to over 6 million tonnes of CO 2 emission reductions .  
EBRD will help PFIs address environmental and social risks through a number of EBRD’s environmental and social (E&S) risk 
management tool s. EBRD’s E&S risk management toolkit will help PFIs screen transactions for E&S risks and assess the 
effectivenes s and adequacy of their client’s E&S risk management systems. See Section G  and Section F.3  for more information  on 
the EBRD’s E&S risk management .  
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
Detailed market analys es will be provided at either PFI or Facility level.   
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
EBRD need not obtain any additional licenses or permits to carry out the proposed activities  in this Programme .  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
The l egal arrangements among the GCF, EBRD, PFIs, and final beneficiaries : 
(1) Following the GCF Board approval, EBRD and GCF will, based on the AMA, enter into a project -specific legal agreement for the 
provision of funds. The  FAA will outline the sectoral and geographical scope (the “Mandate”) of the proposed EBRD/GCF Co -


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 48 C 
financing Programme (the “Programme”). The EBRD will be solely responsible for the management and administration of GCF 
resources and w ill carry out such management and administration in accordance with its policies, procedures and practices, 
and with at least the same degree of care as it uses in the administration of its own funds or other donor funds, taking into  
account the provisions  of Accreditation Master Agreement ( AMA ).  
(2) EBRD will seek to sign loan agreements  (the “transactions”)  with individual PFIs.  These transactions  will make available EBRD 
finance as well as GCF co -finance for investments in line with the Mandate of the Programme . During the implementation of 
the Programme, the EBRD will be responsible for providing the necessary governance, oversight and quality assurance in 
accordance with its policies, procedures and any specific requirements in AMA.   
The EBRD shall follow commercial practices and procedures appropriate for PFIs in all operations financed with the resources 
of the GCF. In particular, in providing financing, the EBRD shall pay due regard to the prospect that PFIs will be in a posit ion to  
meet their obligations under the investment agreement. An up -to-date and robust due diligence will be in place before EBRD 
approves each PFI under this Programme  and be presented to the EBRD’s investment committee  for review.   
(3) Applying the Mandate’s c onditions, PFIs will disburse the GCF and EBRD loan s to final beneficiaries in line with the Mandate. 
Under the EBRD SEFF team’s guidance and supervision, SEFF operation teams  will help PFIs carry out marketing activities, 
evaluate eligible technologies an d/or projects, and check compliance with the mandate. EBRD in turn will report to the GCF in 
line with the conditions of the Agreement.  
  
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please see the Annex for the timetable.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 48 D 
 
 D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
The Programme  can help the GCF to achieve a paradigm shift to a “well -below 2°C” path  by contributing to creating a demand -
driven, self -sustaining market for sustainable energy and climate resilience  in markets of 280 million people . Sustainable energy 
and climate resilience financing in the proposed regions is still in a very early develo pment stage with few banks offering 
dedicated loan products or actively marketing the benefits of such investments. Further efforts to demonstrate the benefits o f 
sustainable energy financing are required to reach a critical mass and upscale the commercial  financing of these projects.  The 
Fund will effectively fill the gap in the market through a structured commercial financing scheme combined with long term 
financing and technical support to accelerate the adoption of climate technologies.  
The Programme  will help the GCF to “accelerate the operationalization of the adaptation and mitigation windows, and to ensure 
adequate resources for capacity -building and technology development and transfer”, as requested to the GCF Board during COP 
20. By participating in the proposed Programme , the Fund can leverage the EBRD’s wide range of networks with financial 
institutions and deliver a large number of projects to reach critical mass for the creation of a competitive market. For EBRD , 
Component 2 . Capacity building , which is an essential component of SEFF to address capacity bottleneck, can onl y be provided 
by donor funding.  
The Programme  targets various areas of the GCF strategic impacts and cross -cutting investment priorities. Through the mix of 
investment priorities and results areas, the Programme  aims to deliver on the balanced, cross -cutting approach to mitigation and 
adaptation activities, the GCF seeks. The Programme  also targets many of the gaps in the current climate finance landsca pe, and 
some of the areas not adequately financed through current channels, that the GCF aims to address. These include energy 
efficiency investments in buildings, agriculture, capacity building, and cross -cutting support for innovation, through instrument s 
tailored to the specific capital markets of countries .  
Nevertheless, the SEFF Programme’s component with the highest value added for GCF involvement is the opportunity to partner 
with the private sector and harness EBRD’s implementation capacity, to cat alyse investment in the results areas and maximize 
the impact of the Fund’s own investments. The SEFF Programme  seeks to help to scale up investment in low -emission 
development and unlock private sector investments in adaptation, responding to different co untry financial contexts and 
availability of capital. It will support mitigation by scaling up in creased supply of clean energy, through the combination of EBRD 
and GCF loans, while also mobilizing private sector activity on the demand side to trigger more  efficient energy use and more 
climate -compatible business practices. The SEFF also boost s private sector involvement in adaptation projects, which until now 
have suffered from a lack of private capital.  The GCF is also the ideal partner for this Programme  due to the combination of 
concessional lending  and grant for technical assistance required to achieve the SEFF objectives and consequent paradigm shift in 
the targeted countries .  
D.2. Exit Strategy   
PFIs accessing GCF resources through the EBRD will make the p ayments  of interest, principal and fees  in line with the loan 
agreement. The EBRD Funds Control team will direct these p ayments on the GCF portion into the (to be established) GCF Special 
Fund. T hese funds in the GCF Special Fund can be drawn by the GCF in line with the arrangements made in the AMA (to be 
agreed and signed).


---
*Page 22*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 48 E 
 
E.1.  Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/ Programme  to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
As a result of implementing the Programme, over 309 MW  of renewable energy generation capacity are expected to be 
installed and 3,533 GWh of annual  final energy savings are expected to be achieved through improved energy efficiency.  
At least 90,000 individuals will benefit from the climate resilience investme nts (water efficiency improvements), awareness 
raising campaign and training. Of this, over 53,000 people are expected to be exposed to climate resilience awareness 
campaigns and relevant knowledge sharing activities carried out  online and offline.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 
eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  1,939,061  tCO2 eq/year  
Lifetime  29,085,915  tCO 2eq 
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender  (adaptation 
only )  
Number of beneficiaries relative to total population, 
disaggregated by gender (adaptation only)10 Total  Total number of beneficiaries: 90,660 (of 
which at least 33,611 women)  
Percentage  0.06%  
Other 
relevant 
indicators   Over 20,000 energy efficiency, renewable energy and climate resilience project s to be implemented  
 Over 300 case studies of successful project s to be published on Facility websites  
More indicators can be found at Section H.  
  
                                                                 
10 Based on total  population in all target countries.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 48 E 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/ Programme  investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Historic analyses: increased volume of EBRD SEFF financing over the last five years  
 
Figure 2 Volume of EBRD SEFF financing disbursed over the last five years  
 
 
The above chart highlights the increased volume of the EBRD’s SEFF over the last five years. The EBRD aims to replicate its 
success and scale up climate financing in the new regions ( Albania, Jordan, Montenegro, Tunisia), new sectors (from industr ial 
and commercial sectors to residential and public sectors), new areas of technologies (from energy efficiency and renewable 
energy to water efficiency, to broader types of climate resilience technologies).  
 
Scaling up and replicating climate technology  investments from the financial sector’s perspectives  
During the Programme intervention  
The on -lending structure with local financial institutions as proposed in this programme is widely observed in climate change 
financing due its efficiency and effective ness. The proposed programme, however, goes far beyond making basic lines of 
finance available through local financial institutions in the following manner:  
 Broader marketing network to reach out tens of thousands of project opportunities across regions, s ectors and customer 
segment: the scope of PFIs has been broadened to include not only local banks but also microfinance institutions, leasing 
companies and technology vendors.  
 The SEFF operations teams will provide PFI relevant training and technical tools and help set targeted benchmarks so that 
they could prioritise and integrate the financing of climate technologies in their daily business practices. As a result, PFIs 
will be  able to identify climate technology investment opportunities from day -to-day financing requests . Furthermore, to 
deliver the committed climate financing volume and meet the benchmarks on the number of projects by sector, PFI will 
tap into the large number  of small scale project opportunities by addressing the new segment of clients – namely female 
entrepreneurs, micro enterprises and lower income households – that have often been neglected in the traditional 
banking sector .  
Post the Programme intervention  
 Scaling up climate finance within the PFI: Through technical training, on -the-job training, and actual delivery of the climate


---
*Page 24*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 48 E 
financing benchmarks together with the SEFF operation teams, PFIs will be able to identify commercial opportunities 
regarding cl imate technologies into their daily business operations – for example, from ‘business -as-usual’ financing 
requests from SMEs with outdated equipment and business processes. With enhanced understanding of these sectors and 
their profitability, PFIs will hav e a greater demand for financing climate projects and start using their own resources for 
climate lending. As a result, PFIs will be scaling up the volume of climate financing to tap into the commercial 
opportunities. Climate technology finance therefore w ill become an integrated and permanent aspect of the PFI’ 
businesses.  
 
 Replicating the Programme’s success into other financial institutions and other regions will result from knowledge sharing 
among financial institutions that will be initiated by the EB RD bankers as part of ongoing business relationships with 
financial institutions in the target countries. The upfront engagement of technical assistance teams to deliver case studies,  
origination training and marketing efforts will help to establish demand  for the financial product and for the Programme to 
be replicated.  
 
The EBRD’s theory of change   
 
Figure 3. Theory of change – Sustainable Energy and Climate Resilience Financing Facilities  
 
A theory of change (ToC ) diagram is presented in Figure 3 and provides the logical underpinning of the Programme . Specifically, 
the theory of change highlights the relation between “activities”, here indicated by the actions proposed for each component, 
and the main “products” or expected outputs from the implementation  of the activities.  
For the successful achievement of the outputs, under the current market environment, so me hypotheses are needed, as 
shown in Figure 3 as assumptions. The right half of the figure provides the link between the “products” and the expected 
outcomes, or project “results”.  
The application of ToC indicates that if the establishment of lending Programme s for climate change related purposes is 
achieved and the technical capacity in the partner financial institutions  is built up, then demand for such a lending product will 
increase within the country, driving the broadening of the lending activities. From “results” to “impacts” we assumed, as


---
*Page 25*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 48 E 
indicated in the figure, that increased lending for the purpose of investing in, inter alia, renewable energy projects, energy 
efficiency projects, and climate resilience projects, will lead to the achievement of climate mitigation and resilience impac ts 
thro ughout the economies of the countries where the lending Programme s are being established.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Transfer of expertise and skills is a cor e objective of this P rogramme. It will mainly benefit loan officers at local financial 
institutions, while potential clients and civil society organisations ( CSOs ) active in promoting sustainabl e energy and climate 
resilience are also expected to receive support. The P rogramme aims to prepare at least 300 case studies  to demonstrate  
successful project s across various sectors (Output 4 indicator in Section H ) and make them publicly available through a SEFF 
Programme  website  or a Facility website . 
For PFI, the SEFF Programme  will deliver trainings on business development and risk management in the sustainable energy 
and climate resilience sector to staff with client facing roles as well as risk analysis roles . Initial training of loan officers will 
focus  on classroom training  followed by on -the-job training.  
 Classroom training – comprehensive training materials, covering the details and eligibility criteria of the facility, technical 
aspects of the proje ct evaluation with illustrative examples, case studies and sales issues.  
 On-the-job training  – problem solving with actual pipeline of projects as loan officers and branch managers need 
substantial time and a period of trial and error before they became m ore adept at project identification. This hands -on 
training will result in the identification of ‘start’ loan officers, who fully embrace the opportunities for sustainable energy 
and climate resilience  lending and pro -actively go out to promote  such projec ts, going as far as helping their clients to 
identify potential energy saving projects.  
For end-beneficiaries , namely SMEs, industrial and commercial sector companies and housing associations, expertise and skills 
will be transferred during the marketing a ctivities of the Facility and via the project development assistance targeting 
beneficiaries.  
 The widest knowledge and skills diffusion channel will be the various marketing campaigns associated to Facilities, 
whereby potential clients will learn about su stainable energy and climate resilience financing opportunities, and learn 
about the requirements of loan applications.  
 For smaller -scale project s which are assessed and qualified for financing using lists of best available technologies (See (A) 
of the Component 1 in C.3 ), end -borrowers benefit from improved awareness of efficient, advanced technologies. From 
their interaction with the list tool, and with trained client -facing bank officers, end -borrowers are sensitized with regards 
to criteria which make technology upgrad e choices bankable. Sometimes this can be reflected in clients opting for 
measures with higher up -front costs but better performance which they may not have chosen otherwise. Such a wareness 
is an essential skill gain in order to ensure future continuous improvements in investment patterns.  
 For medium -sized industrial or building project s, procured experts  from the SEFF operation teams  will visit client 
companies to conduct feasibili ty studies or energy and/or resource audits . The aim is to formulate priority investment 
plans based on the cost savings from energy use and environmental improvements. This process fosters understanding by 
enterprises of their risks associated with ineffi cient use of energy or environmental compliance status, their exposure to 
climate risks, and their technology upgrad e and optimization potential. This increased awareness is likely to reflect not 
only in the directly enabled investment, but over the long -term, in other subsequent improvements. A particular aspect 
contributing to this lasting effect is due to experts from the SEFF operation teams having to interact with the companies’ 
financial officers, technical officers and PFI loan officers alike, in ord er to enable investment buy -in. A major barrier for 
sustainable investments globally is exactly this lack of integration of technical and financial awareness among enterprises’ 
decision -makers, in order to prioritize measures which are both technically opt imal and bankable.  
 All end -beneficiaries  benefit from advice on behavioral changes, which are essential to reap the benefits of all efficiency -
focused upgrade s. In the industrial sector this often materializes as advanced energy management systems which r ely on 
users and staff being trained to use facilities and equipment correctly. In the buildings sector, whether commercial, public 
or residential, building users are trained or informed of how to minimize energy and water losses.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 48 E 
 All groups  benefit from heightened awareness and understanding of how their operations impact natural resources, 
contribute to and are effected by climate change, and the kind of measures they can take in order to reduce their impacts.   
Civil Society /Non -Governmental  Organisation s (CSOs /NGOs ): 
 Working through CSOs /NGOs , the Programme will transfer skills and knowledge to local populations in a sustainable 
manner , and ensure the inclusive involvement and buy -in of local stakeholders.  
 Associations active on sustainable energy and climate resilience in the proposed regions will receive support to enhance 
technical knowledge and their capacity to deliver trainings.  
Table 3. Example civil society capacity building activities in the Kyrgyz Republic  
Overview  
Related Investment 
Programme  Scaling up private sector climate finance through local financial institutions in Kyrgyz 
Republic  
Duration  Approx. 36 months (1 -2 assignments per year lasting 10 -15 months each)  
Rationale and description of the civil society capacity building  
During the implementation of SEFF projects, there are a number of specific challenges and bottlenecks which can 
be effectively addressed through civil society capacity building projects focusing on institutional capacity, transfer 
of skills and technical k nowledge, training capacity and communication and outreach skills. Depending on the 
specific needs of different SEFFs in different countries, the capacity enhancement of civil society organisations 
(CSOs) would aim to contribute to one or more of the follo wing outcomes : 
 raising awareness among the general population about sustainable energy and its relationship to climate 
change, environmental benefits and positive livelihood impacts;  
 stimulating sustainable positive behavioural changes among the populatio n in terms of rational energy 
consumption and other adaptation options;  
 enhancing the capacity of housing and resident associations to access loans from SEFFs;  
 training of installers of energy efficiency/ renewable energy equipment;  
 supporting social ent erprises focusing on sustainable energy for vulnerable groups;  
 facilitating knowledge transfer between research and business.  
Sectors: SEFF projects typically range across all sectors (agribusiness, food processing, and manufacturing to 
industry, constru ction and services). Therefore, CSO capacity building activities would not be limited to individual 
sectors. An initial needs assessment and experience from previous technical cooperation projects indicates 
particular potential to work with the residential  borrower segment. In addition, cooperation with the financial 
institutions (who are the recipients of the SEFF credit lines) could be envisaged with regards to trainings on general 
financial literacy and access to specific loans to housing associations, s ocial enterprises and other potential non -for-
profit type clients.  
Case study in Kyrgyz Republic  
The CSO capacity building component will build on the successful experience of the technical cooperation project 
‘Capacity Building of a Kyrgyz Association - Energy Efficiency in Buildings’ which supported a SEFF in the Kyrgyz 
Republic in 2013 -2015. The technical assistance was attached to the Kyrgyz Sustainable Energy Financing Facility 
(KyrSEFF), which aim ed to reduce the high carbon -intensity of the residential building sector in the country. The 
civil society capacity building project addressed a specif ic bottleneck in the implementation of the investment 
project – namely poor quality of installation of energy -efficient equipment in residential buildings which is due to a 
low level of technical skills and vocational training of local installers. The bene ficiary CSO (an association working on 
sustainable energy) received support to enhance its institutional capacity, technical knowledge and its capacity to


---
*Page 27*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 48 E 
deliver trainings in order to be able to assume its aspired role as a leading training body and techn ical expert on 
energy efficiency and renewable energy in buildings. The association then promoted the correct use of energy 
efficient technology and conducted trainings that improved vocational skills of installers according to best 
international standards  in the city of Bishkek as well as the regions in line with the regional coverage of KyrSEFF. A 
training curriculum was integrated into the portfolio of the association which now allows it to offer trainings in a 
financially sustainable manner. Also, after  the successful completion of technical training courses, trainees were 
included into a list of Master installers recommended by KyrSEFF to carry out orderings from the borrowers of the 
KyrSEFF partner banks. Finally, the technical cooperation project rais ed awareness and increased access to 
residential energy efficiency loans among potential borrower  groups emphasising that the desired energy savings 
and making homes better equipped for climatic conditions depend on the quality of installation works.  
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
The Programme contributes to creating an  enabling environment for sustainable energy and climate resilience investment  
through  targeted capacity building, awareness raising and connecting a diverse range of stakeholders along the supply chain. 
The Programme  will result in bridging the gap in the climate technology supply chain from manufacturers, suppliers and 
installers , to buyers, to finance providers, and to other stakeholders by  
 establishing the market specific lists of Best Available Technologies;  
 various marketing and networking opportunities;  
 investment assessments and meetings where SEFF operation team experts, beneficiary’s finance team and technical staff 
will be present;  
 consultation with local stakeholders and capacity building of civil societies.  
On the PFI’s side, t he Programme will enhance the PFI staff’s understanding of evaluating sustainable energy and climate 
resilience investments and change the risk perceptions to wards these new financing opportunities. This will contribute to a 
rapid scale  up of necessary capital in the market .  
On the end beneficiary ’s side, enhancing investments in more efficient technologies will ultimately make beneficiaries more 
competitive, more profitable, and less exposed to input costs of energy and resources. From EBRD’s SEFF experience, many 
such investment opportunities would either not come to fruition, or would not happen as rapidly as optimal, were it not for the 
“accelerating” role of targeted technical assistance tools which bridge potential beneficiaries  and providers of finance.  
 End-beneficiaries will benefit from technical SEFF investment assessment tools (such as the expert teams conducting 
customized energy and/or resource aud its, or the eligibility assessment against lists of best available technologies) as 
these tools make their investment plans bankable – they integrate in a streamlined manner considerations related to both 
technical performance and financial returns.  
 For i nvestments in climate resilience, beneficiaries can deepen their understanding of the longer -term risks associated 
with vulnerability to climate change and an alignment of their investment with this risk factor.   
 The beneficiaries in the buildings sector optimize their investment plans which often present wider social and 
environmental benefits, especially in the municipal and residential sectors. These include enhanced comfort levels and 
safety, alignment with regulatory requirements for social infrastruc ture buildings, aesthetic improvements, and increased 
property asset value.  
 Awareness raising activities and dedicated loan product availabilities are expected to stimulate demand for sustainable 
energy and climate resilience investments.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
Successful performance of the Programme will encourage  national and local  authorities to  prioritise policy  improvement in this 
sector. To address legal barriers in the market, the EBRD will carry out polic y dialogue activities, not as part of the proposed 
Programme  but in parallel with , and informed by, the activities of the proposed Programme .


---
*Page 28*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 48 E 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic  co-benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
1. ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL C O-BENEFITS  
Economic benefits  
In the proposed countries, the SME  sector  employ s the majority of the population and has vast potential for energy efficiency 
improvements. Improved operational efficiency t hrough the P rogramme intervention will contribute to SME’s competitiveness.  
By directly involving the private sector, and raising awareness of the benefits of sustainable energy and climate resilient 
technolo gies, at both household, and market levels, the Programme  will directly contribute to the creation of markets for these 
products in the targeted countries . The SEFF Programme  will contribute to mainstreaming energy efficiency and renewable 
energy investmen ts in the financial sector as well as private sector companies by developing competitive market conditions 
both on the demand side (over 20,000 commercial project s across sectors and raised awareness) and supply side (available 
capital for sustainable ener gy financing, capacity building, enhanced knowledge sharing between market players along the 
supply chain). This Programme  will scale up private sector water efficiency financing by introducing water efficient 
technologies, supporting local financial insti tutions, delivering innovative water efficiency lending and raising awareness. By 
delivering demand -side water efficiency improvements at scale in some of the most water -scarce regions in the world, the 
Programme  will drive business competitiveness, reduce  the water stress faced by communities and ensure lasti ng and 
sustainable development.  
Job creation potential: Roughly speaking, the Programme  is expected to contribute to around 11,500 green jobs by creating a 
market for sustainable energy technologies al ong the supply chain as well as vocational training. The estimate is based on an 
assumption drawn from the UK Energy Research Centre (UKERC)’s findings that for every GBP 1 million of sustainable energy 
investments across Europe and countries  have contributed to 10 jobs created (equivalent to US D 1 million of investments 
creating 6.8 green jobs).11  
Social  benefits  
Improving the efficiency of heating system s and equipment , and building energy use will bring important health and social 
benefits to the residents in Central Asia and the Caucasus.  Heating is of paramount importance in countries with long, cold 
winters such as those in Central Asia and the Caucasus. Reliable and affordable heating in homes and at work is a fundamental 
need for all, i n particular people living with disabilities and elderly citizens. Also, the Programme  interventions are expected to 
improve adaptive capacities of the vulnerable groups (e.g. farmers) and strengthen community ownership of renewable energy 
projects through  stakeholder engagement.  
 
2. GENDER SENSITIVE DEVELOPMENT IMPACT  
Gender equality is an important dimension of the proposed Programme  as the EBRD recognises the importance of this agenda 
as follows:  
 Improved and more reliable access to electricity will have  strong co -benefits for gender -sensitive development and 
contribute to better living conditions.  Energy vulnerability may have specific impacts on women, such as the increased use 
of low -grade fuels for cooking and heating which leads to health impacts, re sulting in opportunity costs, and fewer 
                                                                 
11 UKERC  http://www.ukerc.ac.uk/publications/low -carbon -jobs-the-evidence -for-net-job-creation -from -policy -support -
for-energy -efficiency -and-renewable -energy.html


---
*Page 29*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 48 E 
education/income generation opportunities due to lack of indoor lighting (UNDP 2012).  
 There is a financing gap which mirrors the underinvestment in gender equality in the economic and productive sectors in 
general.12 While the transport and energy sectors receive the largest amounts of bilateral aid to climate change overall, 
only a very small proportion of this targets gender equality. Almost no climate aid to the transport and energy sectors was 
reported as targetin g gender equality as a principal objective.13  
 In the Middle East and North Africa, closing the gender gap in the labour market could increase GDP by more than 25  per 
cent  per capita.14 This region still has the lowest levels of women in the workforce in the  world . Entrepreneurship, in 
particular female entrepreneurs, remains an untapped potential source of economic growth. I mproving females’ access to 
business  support and credit lines could contribute to entrepreneur ship, business competitiveness and economi c growth .  
The EBRD’s Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality  15 constitutes a major step towards a more systematic approach in 
terms of gender equality and includes specific references to the work to be done on climate change. For example, gender 
assessments were conducted for a SEFF in Turkey in which credits became a vailable for women -led small and medium -
enterprises, reducing gender gaps in access to finance (See  11). 
By taking into account gender components from the initial design of facilities and providing technica l support on the promotion 
of gender equality throughout the Programme  lifetime, the Programme  will add significant value in the sectors where gender 
equality is poorly addressed . By mainstreaming gender, the Programme  is in line with the Gender Policy and  the Gender Action 
Plan of GCF which aim to:  
 Ensure that women and men will equally benefit from loans/investments supported by the Fund;  
 Address the assessed potential project/ Programme  risks on women and men associated with energy efficiency and 
renewable energy investments financed by the Fund;  
 Contribute to reducing the gender gap of climate change -induced social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities; and  
 Build women and men’s r esilience to climate change.  
Gender assessments of initial target countries and a Programme  level gender action plan were  provided to the GCF alongside  
the proposal .  
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country  and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Climate resilience investments, in particular water efficiency, will be piloted in t he countries in Central Asia, the Middle East 
and North Africa, which are characterized by their vulnerability  to the impact of climate change, particularly suffering severe 
water stress.   
The countries in Central Asia are projected to be particularly affected by climate change. Predicted increases in the variabi lity of 
precipit ation and changes in snow melt patterns have a severe impact on water availability. This is potentially a detrimental risk 
to economies relying on water as a key resource, with the main sectors depending on agricultural irrigation and hydropower as 
the main source  of electricity.  
The Middle East and North Africa region  is projected to suffer from increased water scarcity due to climate change. The stress 
on water resources is often exacerbated by widespread inefficient usage practices and a lack of adeq uate institutional capacity 
for effective management. Further, temperatures in the region are projected to rise, leading to increased heat stress and mor e 
                                                                 
12OECD (2015) “ From commitment to action: Financing gender equality and women’s rights in the implem entation of the 
Sustainable Development Goals”  
13 OECD DAC Network on gender equality (Gendernet) (2015) “Making climate finance work for women: overview of the 
integration of gender equality in aid to climate change”  
14 OECD, http://www.oecd.org/mena/competitiveness//Statistical%20Portrait.pdf   
15 EBRD, http://www.ebrd.com/gender -strategy.html


---
*Page 30*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 48 E 
frequent heat waves. This in turn will result to more demand for room cooling a nd an increase in ener gy usage.  
 
In addition, other Programme regions are vulnerable  to the impacts of climate change.   
The projected impacts of climate change in the Caucasus region  in the form of shifting precipitation patterns, glacial shrinkage 
and more variable hydrology h ave serious implications for water availability. This impacts the economic productivity of the 
region in a range of key sectors including agricultural irrigation, hydropower generation and natural resource extraction.  
South -eastern Europe and Moldova: Projections in the IPCC’s 5th Assessment Review for the wider Mediterranean Basin, 
including the five Western Balkan countries, for the second half of the 21st century, indicate future increases in temperatures, 
increased frequency and extent of drought period s, and a decrease in precipitation patterns. Additionally, given the 
mountainous topography of the Western Balkans region, there is a growing risk of flooding associated with more irregular 
heavy precipitation events. The region as a whole relies on hydrop ower more so than others in Europe, so there is a direct link 
between changes in precipitation patterns and the wider economy via th e impacts on the power sector.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Need of households and MSMEs for climate finance  
Among the beneficiaries of the Programme, MSMEs, households and agricultural sector clients often need  climate resilience 
solutions  the most , including those on low -income s that rely on the availability of financing to afford higher per formance 
technologies. For example, investing in residential energy efficiency is a key measure in approaching the rising affordabilit y 
impact on households as energy prices will continue to rise to align to costs.  
Households and micro, small and medium en terprises (MSME) often lack access to financing due to small loan sizes and 
relatively high transaction costs. PFIs would be interested in this client segment if large numbers of micro or small sized l oans 
are aggregated  and benchmarks targeted at addressi ng this group of customers are set. The global/local BAT selector that will 
be used in this Programme includes climate technologies and equipment that have costs starting from just US$200, enabling 
the financing of large number of micro and small -sized loa ns. The EBRD’s BAT selector  enables delivering the MSMEs and 
household climate finance at scale through a fast technical eligibility screening and the resulting loan approval by  PFIs – often 
less t han a day. In this regard, PFIs are encouraged to promote m any micro or small sized loans and those who might have been 
marginalized in traditional banking could benefit from the Programme.   
Need by region  
The Caucasus: Armenia and Georgia widely vary in their energy and environmental policy challenges, due to differences in 
energy supply accessibility, but confront together the impacts of climate changes, such as increasing temperatures, melting o f 
the glaciers, flooding , heat waves, and water shortages. On average, the three countries present an intensity of energy 
(TPES/GDP, PPP) consumption approximately 33% higher than in the EU. Georgia and Armenia  are net energy importers. 
Therefore, diversification of energy supply  and tapping into its substantial energy efficiency po tential is a regional priority and 
vital to Georgia and Armenia’s energy security.  
Central Asia  continues to suffer from its dependence on fossil fuel, antiquated infrastructures that date back to the S oviet 
times, and severe scarcities in resources, in particular water. in a region highly prone to climate extremes and climate chan ge, 
most countries have adopted low -carbon development paths by adopting national strategies that list policy measures and 
actions for climate mitigation and adaptation, but still have weak regulatory environments to support these policy measures 
and thus lag in mobilising relevant investments, particularly in the private sector on energy efficiency and renewable energy .  
The Mi ddle East and North Africa: Enhancing energy sustainability and energy efficiency is undeniably a top regional priority in 
countries targeted in the region, which are suffering from severe energy crisis and energy deficit, as well as resource scarcity, 
undermining even political stability.  
South -eastern Europe and Moldova:


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 48 E 
Countries in the Western Balkan region present a very particular situation in terms of overall economic and institutional 
context, owi ng to their combined transition and post -conflict . Overall, they differ in their levels of income and institutional 
setup; however per capita incomes in the region as a whole stands at below a third of the EU average, while on average policy  
implementation and formulation capacities remain low.  
Financia lly, countries in the region are either recovering slowly or facing stagnant economic conditions, in the aftermath of the 
crises and slowdown in the Eurozone which they are closely linked to. Although their baking sectors are now generally stable 
and liqui d, banks have been shrinking loan books and remain reluctant to service the region’s huge energy and resource 
efficiency needs given that such investments require adequately termed finance, technical support and often partial grant 
support. Generally, bank s in the region, although liquid, lack access to long -term wholesale financing sources and therefore rely 
on IFI credit lines for longer on -lending maturities as is required for sustainability focused investments.  
This occurs in the context of the region displaying energy intensity levels of GDP four times higher than the EU average (or, 
more suggestively, 3.7 times the level of neighboring Greece), and primary energy imports representing on average a third of 
their total primary energy needs. 97% of the o il and natural gas needs of the countries, which account for a third of overall 
primary energy consumption, are met through imports. The rest of the energy mix is preponderantly represented by coal, and 
in some countries more than in others, by hydroelectr ic generation. This still leaves the average CO 2 emissions intensity of GDP 
of the five countries taken together, at more than 5 times the EU average, according to the IEA. Taken together, these aspects 
mean that investments in households’ energy efficienc y need to be made widely available, but together with enabling 
structures which facilitate access to finance, such as technical assistance and/ or incentive grant co -financing.  
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies ) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or Programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs and 
NAPs  
The Programme  will contribute to meeting beneficiary countries’ nationally set climate targets and policy priorities  by upscaling 
private sector financing in highly energy intensive and climate vulnerable regions, mainstreaming climate finance into privat e 
investments and local financial institutions and building local capacity and awareness on identifying investment opportunities 
and benefits and how to implement them.  
The Caucasus region:  
Georgia and Armenia are both parties to the UNFCCC and have submitted Intended Nationally Determined Contributions to the 
Paris Agreement. Both countries have presented quantified mitigation targets and have included an adaptation component. 
Their contributions build on several years of climate change policy development, reflected in  previous national communications 
to the UNFCCC and, in the case of Georgia, its low emissions development strategy. Both countries have adopted strategies and  
policies at national as well as local levels, such as the Covenant of Mayors.  
Central Asia :  
Central Asia continues to suffer from its dependence on fossil fuel, antiquated infrastructures that date back to the Soviet times 
and severe scarcities in resources, in particular water. In a region highly prone to climate extremes and climate change, mos t 
countries have adopted low -carbon development paths by adopting national strategies that list policy measures and actions for 
climate mitigation and adaptation, but still have weak regulatory environments to support these policy measures and thus lag 
in mobilising relevant investments, particularly in the private sector on energy efficiency and renewable energy. The Central 
Asian countries have all ratified the UNFCCC and have submitted INDCs. Kazakhstan, for example, has adopted green growth as 
a nationa l objective and priority, and has improved its regulatory environment for commercial renewable energy investments 
over the next few years.  
The Middle East and North Africa:


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 48 E 
Enhancing energy sustainability and energy efficiency is undeniably a top priority in the region, which suffers from severe 
energy crisis and energy deficit, as well as resource scarcity, undermining stability. All six countries have ratified the UN FCCC 
and submitted INDCs, although the commitment levels are at a considerable range. Nota bly, Jordan has achieved a series of 
regulatory improvements between 2012 and 2013 for energy efficiency and renewable energy, approving the “Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency Law,” as well as announcing the “Energy Efficiency bylaw,” providing ground s for the 
establishment of a national Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund. Despite the relatively well -established banking 
sectors in the region, there is little to no experience in financing sustainable energy and climate resilience investments, 
especially to SMEs and retailers, and the EBRD has been actively engaged in policy dialogue and pioneering in sustainable 
energy and climate resilience finance through local financial institutions.  
South -eastern Europe and Moldova:  
Albania, Montenegro  and Serbia are Contracting Parties to the Energy Community Secretariat, an inter -governmental 
organization seeking to align the energy policies of the Western Balkans and Black Sea countries with those of the EU. As suc h, 
these countries have committed to ado pting EU policies, acquis and related standards in the field of energy and environment 
into their national laws. These include EU Directives on energy efficiency (2012), on energy services (2006), energy 
performance of buildings (2010), energy use related labelling of products (2010), etc.  Some countries are more advanced than 
others in transposing these directives. The Energy Community Secretariat regularly monitors their progress. Additionally, most 
countries in the region have adopted National Energy Ef ficiency Action Plans submitted every three years, and, as non -Annex I 
Parties to the UNFCCC, have submitted INDCs.  
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
Since 2006, the EBRD has invested in over USD  20 billion in sustainable energy 16  and climate resilience financing, either 
through direct investments or investments via local financial institutions. With  the EBRD Board approv al on  the Green Economy 
Transition (GET) approach, the EBRD  is expected to increase its lev el of financing in the sphere of climate mitigation and 
resilience  to around EUR 18 billion over the next five years . Therefore the EBRD ’s green financing will be expanded to around 
40 per cent of its total annual investment  by 2020 .  
In the proposed regio ns, the EBRD has a proven  track record of implementing SEFFs and the Programme would greatly aid 
scaling up and broadening the scope of EBRD SEFFs into new sectors.  The proposed Programme  will build on EBRD’s past 
experience and the GCF’s ability to mobilise a large amount of resources to achieve otherwise unattainable results and 
eliminate market barriers at both country level and regional level. The proposed Programme  will ensure the penetration into 
previously untapped markets, as well as fully eli minate the targeted market barriers in the developing countries in which EBRD 
already launched smaller SEFFs in the past.  
What has allowed the SEFF Programme to be particularly successful is that a SEFF operation team at Facility level has been 
establishe d and has provided support on the ground under the supervision of EBRD in -house SEFF managers. The SEFF 
operation team comprises of local and international experts, to provide professional technical and marketing assistances to 
local financial institutions  and their clients. The knowledge sharing and the local capacity building achieved through this 
support have been essential to scaling -up finance in sustainable energy in the local market and raising awareness.  
The EBRD also combines relevant policy dialo gue efforts in parallel to the Programme to further engage in improving regulatory 
environment for private investments in sustainable energy.  
In the countries where EBRD hasn’t launched dedicated energy efficiency financing products through local financia l institutions, 
namely Albania, Jordan, Montenegro and Tunisia, EBRD has established relationships with local financial institutions through 
other financial products and has knowledge on the market for sustainable energy and climate resilience through its direct 
investment.  
Please see the EBRD SEFF website for more details on EBRD actions in each country, Facility, and project.  
                                                                 
16 In this Programme’s  context, sustainable energy refers to energy efficiency and renewable energy.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 48 E 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
EBRD works very closely with governments, authorities and the civil society, to uphold the principle of country ownership via  
direct partnerships ( regional offices); via country representatives on EBRD’s resident Board of Directors ( all member countries 
are represented ), and via the provision of country and sector strategies  that are developed with the relevant country’s 
involvement and in consultation with key stakeholders.  
EBRD has engaged  with NDAs with regards to this Programme  through face -to-face meetings, presentations and email 
correspondence. This will be an ongoing process through out the implementation phase . EBRD has also engaged with respective 
governments through policy dialogue activities. For example, in South -eastern Europe, the EBRD has been engaging with 
Albania, Montenegro and Serbia , either directly or via the Energy Community Secretariat, with regards to energy and energy 
efficiency policy formulation and i mplementation.  Additionally, EBRD has extensive multi -stakeholder engagement experience 
in the area, as shown by the decision not to proceed with several projects in the past where environmental concerns were 
flagged up by relevant local groups. These were  hydro and transport infrastructure projects.  
 
Engagement with civil society organisations (CSO s)  
The EBRD recognises the important role of CSOs in raising awareness and stimulating behavioural change , and has engaged 
with a wide range of CSO s throughout past SEFF s, for example in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan .  
 In the Kyrgyz Republic, a capacity building project for a Kyrgyz Association for sustainable energy was carried out to raise 
public awareness on the rational use of energy and to improve vocational skills of installers ( Kyrgyz Sustainable Energy 
Financing Facility ).  
 In Tajikistan, EBRD has been closely collaborating with a wide -reaching CSO network on questions of climate resilience. 
This has facilitated a continuous dialogue with a wide range of CSOs, which contributed to the development of the climate 
resilience component of SEFF . 
The Programme's  design and implementation are consistent with the Fund's requirements for stakeholder engagement and 
disclosure, as well as the GCF's Criteria for Programme and Project Funding. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan will guide 
communications in the Programme  with  stakeholders including public disclosure of additional information not required by local 
laws and gender considerations. The Programme  will ensure all consultations be designed in a gender responsive way and 
women will be equally consulted and participate  in all discussions related to the project (including the question of affordability 
that may potentially affect single headed households). The EBRD’s stakeholder engagement schemes will ensure that the views 
and concerns of local communities are adequately  reflected and that the Programme  objectives, risks, and results are 
communicated effectively among local stakeholders ensuring local ownership of this Programme . 
In addition, a civil society capacity building component  will enhance CSOs’ technical knowled ge, institutional and skills transfer 
capacity (Training of Trainers), as well as training and outreach skills. This will enable CSOs to implement public awareness  
raising activities and disseminate skills and knowledge among their constituencies about the  benefits of sustainable energy 
production and consumption, access to loan products, environmental benefits, the relationship between climate change and 
energy security and consequent impacts on public health, as well as adaptation options, thus promoting sustainable positive 
behavioural change among target citizen groups. The  capacity building component will be implemented through trainings, 
tailored coaching, public events and workshops. Beneficiaries will include a range of CSOs, such as sustainable energy CSOs, 
environmental NGOs, resident and housing associations, neighbor hood groups, and local small business associations.  
The Programme ’s CSO engagement and capacity building component will draw on the successful experience of previous SEFF s 
in the Kyrgyz Republic. Replicating the positive impact from KyrSEFF, specific bott lenecks in the implementation of the 
Programme  will be addressed in a manner that is tailored to the needs and specificities of each country and local stakeholder 
group s. The summary of the KyrSEFF case study  is provided below  (See  10 for more details):  
As part of Kyrgyz Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (KyrSEFF), capacity  building  project was carried out for a Kyrgyz


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 48 E 
association which  promotes the use of energy efficient technologies between 2013 and 2015 . Trainers from the 
association who received training from KyrSEFF then conducted trainings that improved vocational skills of installers 
according to best international standards in the city of Bishkek as well as the regions covered under KyrSEFF. Trainees 
who successful ly completed technical training courses were included into KyrSEFF’s list of Master Installers , which 
borrowers of KyrSEFF loan s referred to in order to identify qualified installers. T he CSO capacity building project 
contributed to raising awareness and increased uptake of residential energy efficiency loans among potential borrower  
groups .  
Gender -sensitive stakeholder engagement  
The Programme  will ensure all consultations with stakeholders to be designed in a gender responsive way and women will be 
equally consulted and participate in all discussions related to the project (including the question of affordability that may  
potentially affect si ngle headed households). This approach will be incremental and would set a proper benchmark for the 
projects to follow.  
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/ Programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness  and efficiency  
The analysis on the emission reduction potentials of the Programme shows that 1 tonne of CO2 equivalent emission reduc tions 
can be achieved with US$46.4 of mitigation investments in this Programme . The GCF will be able to achieve unit emission 
reductions (1 tonne of CO 2 eq) with US$11. 6 of its own funds on mitigation activities (See Section E6.5 ). 
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
The EBRD will provide co -financing of USD  1,118  million from its own resources and from the EBRD’s bi lateral and multilateral 
donors . The Government of the Republic of Korea will contribute USD  3 million through its Korea Technical Assistance and 
Cooperation Fund.  As a result, the GCF contributions will account for around 27% of the total financing required to deliver the 
Programme. This is expected to leverage a substantial amount of financing from local financial institutions.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 48 E 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Each SEFF  under the Programme will approve project s that meet certain profitability criteria (e.g.  Internal Rate of Return  > 10  
per cent ) on an ex -ante basis during the technical eligibility assessment to ensure financial viability of project s and asset quality. 
Improvement s in energy efficiency often help the credit worthiness status of industrial and commercial companies due to 
reduced ope ration al costs , which are achieved  through  energy savings and increased  production reliability.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Industrial energy efficiency and building level project s require technical assessments by e xperts procured by EBRD.  The expert s 
will conduct supply chain analysis, identify best available technologies for the client companies  and help to prioritize 
investments.  As a result, clients can adopt international best practices in terms of efficient energy and resource use , which 
often o utperform national regulations.  
In addition, SEFF uses a  list of best available  technologies for small scale projects to speed up investment in these technologies . 
This market -specific technology database is publicly available  on each  Facility website and introduces technologies that have 
been identified as having high performance at a reasonable cost. The list will contain around 50 climate technology categories , 
500 sub-categories  and performance criteria ; equipment models , materials available  in the market ; a list of manufacturers, 
suppliers and installers . As i nvestments from the list  can be approved by local financial institutions  without further eligibility 
assessment s, the list reduces transaction costs for local financial institutions  and accelerates financing for a large number  of 
small -sized  projects .  
The extent to which the performance requirement goes beyond the reference baseline differs for each specific technology and 
is set according to four major principles: technological prog ress, maturity of market supply, market penetration rates and 
technology costs.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions  
 Mitigation finance only 
(excluding adaptation finance 
and cross -sectoral TA support)  Total programme finance  
(a) Total Programme financing  US$ 1, 350.0 million  US$ 1, 538.5 million  
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$ 337.5  million  US$ 420.5  million  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  29,085,915.9  tCO 2eq 29,085,915.9  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 46.4/tCO 2e US$ 52.9/tCO 2e 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eqremoved    
(e = b / c)  US$ 11.6/tCO 2e US$ 14.5/tCO 2e 
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/ Programme  and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
Given the early devel opment stage of the market, the Programme requires that local financial institutions 
successfully on -lend EBRD and the GCF resources to final beneficiaries. For this reason, EBRD does not track co -
financing amount s by partner financial instituti ons (PFI) nor require reporting of co-financing from PFIs .  
PFIs report to the EBRD the disbursed/utilized amount of the credit line only. The EBRD obtains information on co -
financing amounts indirectly from SEFF operation team s through monthly, bi -monthly or quarterly reporting. SEFF 
operation team s assist PFIs with project  screening and implementation. They report to the EBRD the


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 48 E 
disbursement rate of the credit lines, the number of project s approved during the reporting period , and the total 
investment size of each project . The EBRD estimates the co -financing amount based on the difference between 
the total project  size and the project  loan amount. This difference can be from the PFI’s own resources, the 
borrower ’s own resource s, or other sources, most of which come from the private sector. However, reporting by 
SEFF operation team s cannot differentiate between these various sources of co -financing amounts.  
Additional information on co -finance can be obtained through EBRD -led su rveys of PFIs. Also, the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the SEFF Programme  is likely to be evaluated by the EBRD’s independent Evaluation department 
after the closing of the Programme , in line with EBRD policies.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 48 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/ Programme  appraisal document.  
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
A detailed economic and financial analysis will be conducted at project level for investments that require eligibility assessments . 
The regional and country specific ec onomic and m arket analyses  have been provided to the GCF Secretariat .  
GCF Concessionality  
Concessional and grant funding from the GCF to go alongside the EBRD will bring a range of benefits to the recipients as well as 
final beneficiaries: incentiv es to establish and/or expand on new business models for lending for sustainable energy, resource 
efficiency, and climate resilience ; technical assistance and capacity building of final beneficiaries, namely energy audits and 
energy management systems; and t he promotion of gender equality .  
Concessionality will consist of reduced pricing compared to EBRD pricing and market finance . The provision of  such  reduced 
pricing  is a key element attracting PFIs . It will enable PFIs to justify internally the acceptance of the enhanced reporting and 
monitoring requirements, as well as the expenditure of setting up new lines of business in unproven markets, and the 
investment in training of loan officers. It will also drive competition between PFIs in a given market who ca n use the 
concessional pricing to pass on benefits to their clients with the aim of increasing market share in sustainable energy lending.  
Concessionality will be tailored to the specific local market situation within the parameters established as part of this 
Programme application.  
The relatively low level of blended concessionality  does not allow for a requirement to have this passed on to the end client of 
the PFIs. First, such a pass -through requirement will remove the incentive for the PFI to engage in  building up the lending 
Programme s, as discussed above.  Secondly, the low level of concessionality will not make a substantial difference to end 
borrowers in influencing their investment decision. Thirdly, there would be substantial cost involved in estab lishing and policing 
such as mechanism. Finally, there market observation indicates that some of the concessionality will be passed on by PFIs as 
part of the competitive process, when they attempt to build market share.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
A number of ex -ante technical performance indicators will be defined and provided as Policy Statement (see samples submitted 
as part of this application) governing Loan Agreements between EBRD and PFI. Projects using the SEFF loan proceeds will thus 
meet t echnical performance requirement specified through this statement.  
Those indicators are namely:  
 Energy saving ratio of projects to be more than 20% compared to baselines  
 Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of projects to be more than 10%  
Global/regional BAT se lector  will provide a list of equipment and measures that meet the SEFF loan criteria and that are 
appropriate in the local market context. For complex industrial or building projects, experts procured by EBRD will conduct 
technical evaluations for the ind ividual project and prepare technical evaluation reports.  
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
1. Environmental and Social Management System  
The EBRD will establish a comprehensive Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) for the Programme , based on 
its established Environmental and Social Policy. This will ensure that PFIs financed through the Programme  will comply fully 
with all requ irements needed to ensure mitigation of environmental and social risks relating to the implementation of project s. 
PFIs will also have to define roles and responsibilities for designated staff members for the oversight and day -to-day 
implementation of thei r ESMS and ensure that adequate technical expertise is available (either in -house or externally sourced)


---
*Page 38*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 48 F 
for the implementation of their ESMS.  
PFIs will be categorised and will have a number of requirements to meet the EBRD’s environmental and social perfo rmance. 
Comprehensive monitoring will be carried out by EBRD and technical consultants implementing the support of the Facility. 
Reporting to the GCF will be based on the results of this monitoring.  
Categorisation of PFIs and Environmental and Social Due D iligence  
Given that the financing structure of the Facility involves provision of financing through financial intermediaries (FIs), EB RD will 
categorise all projects under this Facility as “FI”. The PFIs will therefore generally have to follow the same environmental and 
social appraisal process as directly financed projects by EBRD would. However, the nature of environmental and social apprais al 
will be adjusted to the specific characteristics of PFI projects.  
Although the EBRD does not formally further categorise its FIs into FI -1, FI -2 and FI -3, the EBRD does, at the time of 
categorisation, undertake an informal risk categorisation of the FI and its current and proposed activities. In the context o f the 
Facility, loans provided to PFIs for residential f inancing will typically be considered as low environmental and social (E&S) risk, 
whereas loans provided for the financing of industrial and commercial projects would typically be considered low -medium, or 
high -medium, risk and in a few cases high risk, pa rticularly where financing is to be provided for selected renewable energy 
projects.  
Each PFI will be considered on a case -by-case basis. When appraising the environmental and social risks associated with a PFI, 
EBRD will consider a variety of factors, nam ely the nature of the PFI’s businesses, E&S and human resources policies and 
management systems and current exposures to E&S risks.  
The environmental and social due diligence (ESDD) for PFI projects will start with questionnaires, which must be completed b y 
the PFI’s client and submitted to EBRD for review. Based on the information obtained through the questionnaires, EBRD will 
determine:  
 whether further environmental and social investigation is needed;  
 a need for additional requirements for projects or for  training to strengthen the environmental and social and/or human 
resources management capacity of the FI; and  
 the nature of reporting and monitoring requirements to be imposed on the project.  
General Performance Requirements  
All PFIs financed through the Facility will also be required to comply with the relevant EBRD’s Performance Requirements, as set 
out below.  
1) Applicable to the PFI itself and not the project portfolio  
PR2: Labour  and Working Conditions. The key requirements of PR2 are that the PFIs comply, at a minimum, with (i) national 
labour, social security and occupational health and safety laws, and (ii) the fundamental principles and standards embodied 
in the ILO convention s. 
 
PR4: Health and Safety. The key requirements of PR4 are that PFIs take steps to identify and prevent accidents, injury and 
disease to workers and affected communities arising from or associated with, or occurring in the course of the project 
activities  and prepare and implement preventative measures and plans to manage health and safety risks in accordance 
with the mitigation hierarchy approach and GIP.  
2) Applicable to the PFI and to its activities and portfolio


---
*Page 39*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 48 F 
PR9: Financial Intermediaries.  The key requ irements of PR9 are that PFIs put in place a clearly defined Environmental and 
Social Management System (ESMS), including an environmental and social policy and environmental and social procedures 
commensurate with the nature of the FI, the level of enviro nmental and social risks associated with its business activities, 
and the type of the project s.  
Exclusions, and Compliance with Relevant Laws and Regulations  
All project s financed by the PFIs must comply with EBRD’s Environmental and Social Exclusion List as well as applicable local and 
national environment, health, safety and labour regulations and standards.  
In cases where the PFIs finance projects that would be classif ied ‘A’ on the environmental risk assessment if they were to be 
financed by EBRD, the PFI will be required to ensure that all such project s meet the criteria in the indicative list of Category A 
projects included as Appendix 2 in the EBRD Environmental and  Social Policy (ESP); such project s will be required to meet PRs 1 
to 8 and 10.  Appendix 2 can be found on Page 9 of the EBRD’s Environmental and Social Policy at this link . 
The full PRs can be found following this link . To assist the PFIs in implementing the above requirements, EBRD has developed a 
number of guidance documents.  All of these can be found through this link . 
Monitoring  
On an annual basis, all PFIs will be required to sub mit to the EBRD annual environmental and social reports on the 
implementation status of the ESMS, PR9, PR 2, the occupational health and safety requirements of PR 4, as well as the 
environmental and social performance of its portfolio of project s. EBRD als o reserves the right to conduct site visits to PFIs to 
monitor the implementation of the Bank’s requirements and to visit project s as necessary.  
2. Gender Considerations  
The Programme  will aim to promote gender equality in the implementation of the Programme . For this, gender analysis  will be 
conducted - during an early phase of the Programme  - to undertake a baseline assessment with sex -disaggregated data  and 
inform the design of Facilities . In this context, gender profiles of the first 4 pilot coun tries are prepared and submitted alongside 
the proposal.  
The EBRD has prepared an overall  gender action plan , which includes specific activities, expected outputs, outcomes and 
impacts as well as monitoring indicators (See the table below) . A dedicated bud get will be allocated to undertake this gender 
action plan in order to allocate adequate resources to integrate dedicated specialis ts into the SEFF operation team s in each 
country . A dedicated team will also be allocated (composed by consultants team leade r and Programme  manager) to 
coordinate all consultants and monitor activities and results,  with an oversight by the EBRD.  
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement  
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
As stated in Article 10 of the Agreement Establishing the EBRD, Separation of operations , the ‘ordinary capital resources’ of the 
EBRD and the GCF resources as ‘Special Funds resources’ of the EBRD shall at all times and in all respects be held, used, 
committed, invested or otherwise disposed of entirely separately fro m each other. EBRD will thus establish the GCF Special 
Fund (‘the Special Fund’) internally, through which all payments from the GCF and repayments to the GCF will pass.  
Financial Reporting on the GCF Special Fund  will be provided on an annual basis as standard, covering the period January to 
December inclusive. If more frequent financial reporting is required, this will be subject to negotiations at the time of sig ning of 
the relevant funding agreement.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 48 F 
PROCUREMEN T 
1. EBRD’s Procurement Policies and Rules (PP&R)  
The EBRD aims to help create reliable and stable markets for climate technologies in its regions and thus puts strong emphasi s 
on procurement of relevant goods and services. The EBRD's Procurement Policies and Rules (PP&R)  are designed to promote 
efficiency and effectiveness and to minimise credit risk in the implementation of the EBRD's lend ing and investment operations.  
Among the EBRD’s PP&R17, Procurement in Private Sector Operations  (PP&R Section 4) and Procurement of Consultant Services  
(PP&R Section 5) are of particular relevance to this Programme .  
2. Event of violation of procurement policies and EBRD Enforcement Policy and Procedures  
The EBRD requires that clients, including beneficiaries of Bank -financed operations, as well as tenderers, suppliers, contractors, 
concessionaires and consultants under EBRD -financed contracts, observe th e highest standard of transparency and integrity 
during the procurement, execution and implementation of such contracts. In pursuance of this policy, the Bank defines 
prohibited practices, namely coercive practice, collusive practice, corrupt practice, fra udulent practice and theft (PP&R Section 
2.9).  
Any occurrence, or suspected occurrence, of a Prohibited Practice in the procurement, award, or implementation of a Bank -
financed contract in the context of a n EBRD transaction  shall be dealt with in accordan ce with the provisions of the Bank’s 
Enforcement Policy as defined in the EBRD’s Enforcement Policy and Procedures.  These rules will be included in the loan 
agreements with PFIs and in any contracts selected under this Programme .  
3. Procurement plan for consultant services for SEFF implementation teams  
 Step 1. As soon as the Programme  gets the GCF board approval, the EBRD will seek to obtain internal approval of using the 
resources of the GCF  for technical cooperation activities (C omponent 2 at Section B.1 ) – expected duration 1 month  
 Step 2. The EBRD provides an official channel for consultants procurement . The EBRD will prepare specific Terms of 
Reference (ToR) for each Facility , including a description of the tasks to be performed, time -schedules and reporting 
instructions – 2 month  
 Step 3. The EBRD will review qualified candidates’ expression of interests and tech nical and financial proposals. Proposals 
will include details of the expert(s) proposed to carry out the work.  – 2 months  
 Step 4. After reviewing the proposals, the EBRD will invite the final candidates for face -to-face interview and will make 
decisions. Negotiating with the pricing, duration and scope of the assignments will be carried out. – 1 month.  
                                                                 
17 http://www.ebrd.com/news/publications/policies/procurement -policies -and-rules.html


---
*Page 41*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  |PAGE 39 OF 48 G 
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
The performance of the Programme  could be affected by the following key risks : limited uptake of sustainable energy or 
climate resilience products, Environmental and Social (E&S) policy compliance , procurement to FIs and final borrowers in line 
with the GC F fiduciary requirement, market risks due to f oreign exchange fluctuation s. The level s of these key risks are 
considered moderate and expected to be mitigated to a substantial degree by the EBRD’s operational  tools and control 
mechanisms .  
With over 10 years of experience on sustainable energy financing through local financial institutions, EBRD has established a nd 
enhanced control mechanisms to address key project risks. As a result, historic risk of default of the SEFF projects and the los s 
given default  are among the lowest in the EBRD’s financial sector portfolio . 
The EBRD’s willingness and ability to bear risk, as a result of its shareholder base  and established control systems , allows itself 
to act at the frontier of commercial possibil ities and be an effective ‘demonstrator’ with regards to sustainable energy and 
climate resilience financing.  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/ Programme  objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Risk factor 1. Limited uptake of energy efficiency loans  in the residential sector  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of 
risk occurring  
The penetration of energy efficiency loans in the residential sector  
might be very low due to the frag mented residential sector, lack of 
awareness of the potential energy savings  and lack of capacity of local 
financial institu tions . The main implementation risk lies in the limited 
uptake of loans by local financial institutions  and underutilization  by 
households . Technical and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk can be mitigated to a substantial degree  by a strong marketing campaign, skill s transfer aimed at building durable 
skills and capacity within local bank s and key stakeholders , and a targeted selection of the  financial institutions that are 
dedica ted to mainstream energy efficiency lending in their business lines.  
Risk factor 2. Sub-loan (asset) quality   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Ineffective  decision making in PFI may result in unrealistic  
expectations, disbursement delays and repayment problems  and 
hence affect the success of the Facility (SEFF) .  Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low


---
*Page 42*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  |PAGE 40 OF 48 G 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Sub-loan quality risk is expected to be mitigated to a substantial degree through a technical support component in the 
Programme . To ensure the underlying investments are financially viable, the SEFF operation team  will provide support with 
technical eligibility assessment s and financial analysis to project cash -flow from the anticipated technical performance. The 
SEFF operation team  will provide on -the-job training to loan -officers and develop  relevant tools such as  Operations Manual s, 
standard app lication form s, etc . In addition , qualifying financial institutions  will con duct credit risk assessment s on their clients 
(final beneficiaries) and structure security as necessary, all of which will help to maintain good asset quality.  
Risk Factor 3. Macro -economic risks   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Macroeconomic factors such as p olitical instability  and decrease of 
currency value can lead to a slowdown in both the growth of the 
economy in the Programme region  and financial sector. This could 
pose threats to the financial performance of the PFI and their ability 
to successfully utilise the credit lines under the Programme . Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
EBRD will closely monitor the upcoming events on the market s and the potential impacts on the financial performance of 
partner financial institutions . Partner financial institutions  will have an obligation to regular ly report on financial performance, 
financial cove nants and implementation of the Facility. In addition, EBRD will coordinate closely with the SEFF operation team  
and receive regular updates and reports on the project implementation.  
Risk Factor 4. Use of loan proceeds or grants in unintended areas   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Use of loan proceeds for purposes other than those envisaged under 
the Facility  Other  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The risks that loan proceeds or grants could be utilized for objectives not consistent with the Programme  objective will be 
mitigated as follows:  
 The scope of each project  to be implemented will be defined and agreed in consultation between the SEFF operation 
team  and clients (final beneficiaries who borrow funds from the partner financial institutions ) and must meet eligibility 
criteria of the respective Facility ; 
 The project  completion is validated by the SEFF operation team ; project s not meeting th e criteria will be excluded from 
the portfolio of the Facility ; and  
 Frequent monitoring of progress by EBRD through the project monitoring reports .


---
*Page 43*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  |PAGE 41 OF 48 G 
Risk Factor 5. Environmental and social (E&S) safeguards  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
When less strict national regulations  are in place , PFIs may not carry 
out necessary steps to ensure environmental and social due diligence  
to comply with the EBRD Environmental Social Policy , whi ch is in line 
with the GCF Environmental and Social Safeguard s. Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Majority of loans for financing (I) pre-approved techn ologies  in the BAT selector , namely household equipment, will typically 
fall into low environmental and social (E&S) risk  category . On the other hand , (II) loans provided for the financing after expert 
assessments  (e.g. medium sized industrial and commercial  projects ) will fall into various E&S risk categories depending on the 
project -specific characteristics ; E&S risk for these complex projects can vary from  low-medium  to high -medium, to high risk  
where financing is to be provided for selected renewable energy projects.  
Each project  in the second category (II) will be assessed by the SEFF implementation team  and will be reviewed by the EBRD 
in-house staff . In this manner, PFIs ’ compliance with the EBRD’s environmental and social policy (ESP) will be closely 
monitored.  
PFIs will be required to report to the EBRD on the implementation of its E nvironmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
Performance Requirements as well as the environmental and social performance of its portfolio of project s. EBRD also 
reserves the right to conduct site visits to PFIs to monitor the implementation of the Bank’s requirements and to visit project s 
as necessary.  
Risk Factor 6. Failure of third parties to comply with the policy requirements of the EBRD and the GCF  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
During the 12th Board meeting of the GCF, civil society organisations  
and the GCF Secretariat stated concerns with regards to failure of 
compliance by the third parties in using the resources of the GCF.  
In this Programme ’s context, they are partner financial institutions 
(PFI).  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20%  of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EBRD has established oversight and control practices to address the above risks to the fullest extent throughout the enti re 
project and project  lifecycle.  
Majority of financial institutions to participate in this Programme  are expected to have  existing relationships with the EBRD. 
The EBRD has already tested the ir level of compliance with policy requirements,  via sustainable energy and climate resilience 
financing  products (SEFF) and/or  other financial products. The EBRD has filed existing PFI’ track record and exposure to risks 
with regards to AML/CFT, E&S and other corporate practices.  
The EBRD specifically does not work with PFIs where policy compliance i s in doubt or considered at risk.  For both existing and


---
*Page 44*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  |PAGE 42 OF 48 G 
new PFI clients, the EBRD carries out a robust and thorough due diligence assessments to address the mentioned above risks.  
Risk Factor 7. Foreign exchange (FX) fluctuations  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of 
risk occurring  
Foreign exchange (FX) fluctuations could affect the value of reflows to 
the GCF and/or the probability of default of PFIs.  
In the Central Asia  and the Caucasus , small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) often borrow in foreign currency while selling their goods and 
services in local currency. This practice could lead to heightened 
currency risks for borrower s and PFIs.  Financial  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EBRD  can hedge the currency risks with the following measures:  
- providing  local currency loans through procuring local currency funding or hedging  
- entering  into currency swaps with third party providers, such as the Currency Exchange Fund called TCX.  
Source: http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/sectors -and-topics/local -currency -early -transition -countries.html   
By lending in local currency, the EBRD can  achieve the following:  
- Improve the creditworthiness of projects which solely generate local currency income by avoiding FX risk  
- Stem unhedged currency mismatches on the balance sheets of both c orporate, SME and household sectors  
- Extend the maturity of local currency loans available in the market  
- Address the lack of local currency funding at the market (if applicable)  
In parallel to the project level curr ency risk hedging, the EBRD addresses currency risks at a systematic manner. The EBRD’s 
Local Currency and Capital Markets Development (LC2) initiative aims to build deeper and more resilient local financial 
markets in its regions. The LC2 activities inclu de analytical and advisory work, organization and implementation of capacity 
building and knowledge sharing activities, as well as technical support to investments and capital market transactions which 
could play catalytic roles in the capital market devel opment process.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 48 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .  
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under the 
Results Management F ramework . 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level18 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  The Programme  will contribute to mainstreaming energy efficiency and renewable energy 
investments in the financial sector as well as among private sector companies , by developing 
conducive and competitive market conditions both on the demand side (over 20,000 commercia l 
project s across sectors and raised awareness) and  on the  supply side (available capital for 
sustainable energy financing, capacity building, enhanced knowledge sharing between market 
players along the supply chain).  
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainab le development  This Programme  will scale up private sector water efficiency financing by introducing water efficient 
technologies, supporting local financial institutions, delivering innovative water efficiency lending 
and raising awareness. By deliverin g demand -side water efficiency improvements at scale in some of 
the most water -scarce regions in the world, the Programme  will drive business competitiveness, 
reduce the water stress faced by communities and ensure lasting and sustainable development.  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Base
line Target  
Assumptions  Midterm  
(End of 2024)19 Final  
(End of 2031) 
Fund -level impacts  
M1.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy access 
and power generation  Tonnes  of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided  EBRD 
Board 
documents  0 4.8 million 
tCO2eq  9.1 million 
tCO2eq   
M3.0 Reduced emissions 
from buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances  Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced  EBRD  
Board 
documents  0 10.7 million 
tCO2eq  20.0 million 
tCO2eq  
Sum  15.5 million 
tCO2eq  29.1 million 
tCO2eq  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Base
line Midterm target  Final target  
(2020 ) Assumptions  
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change  Number and  
value of physical 
assets made more 
resilient to  
climate variability EBRD 
Board 
documents  0 Not applicable 
(n.a)  USD 112.5  
million  of 
climate 
resilience 
financing or Each climate 
resilience project  
will include at least 
one physical asset 
(e.g. water 
                                                                 
18Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the following link 
(Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  
19 Mid-term (2024) and final target period (203 1) correspond to the  envisaged  economic life time (15 years) of a majority of eligible technologies to be 
financed under the Programme.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 48 H 
and change, 
considering human 
benefits20 2,900 physical 
climate 
resilience 
measures  efficiency 
equipment, etc.).  
All the output and outcome targets in Section H.1.2 are expected to be achieve d within a short implementation period and, 
thus, mid -term targets will not be reported.  
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term  Final  
(2019)  
Programme outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased number of 
small, medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers  6.3 MWs of low 
emission energy  
capacity installed,  
generated and/or  
rehabilitated  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a 309 MW   
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances  7.1 Energy  
intensity/improved  
efficiency of buildings,  
cities, industries and  
appliances  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a 3,533 
GWh 
/year  
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk -reduction 
processes  8.1: Number of males 
and females made 
aware of climate 
threats and  related 
appropriate  
responses  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a 53,000 
people  
Of which 
at least 38  
per cent  
to be 
women  Number of people 
reached through 
marketing activities: 
50,000. Of thi s, 
around 40  per cent  
is expected to be 
female.  
Number of people 
accessing the 
website: 3,000. Due 
to the difficulty in 
finding out gender 
of online users, 
female users are 
not estimated.  
                                                                 
20In this Programme ’s case, number and volume of ‘adaptation’ sub -loans to purchase physical assets that will enhance climate resilience.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 48 H 
Programme outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
Output 1. Commercially 
viable sustainable energy 
projects are identified, 
financed and 
implemented.  Number of project s 
 
 
 EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 
 
 
 
 n.a 20,000  
 
 
 
 1,200 Building -level 
projects; 1,200 from 
the industrial and 
corporate sector; 
17,600 from  the 
residential sector.  
Output 2. Increased 
volume of financing for 
projects typically 
perceived as risky.  Volume of financing  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a USD 
1,462.5  
million  Risk training, 
marketing activities 
and the concessional 
terms of the 
Programme finance  
will improve the PFI’s 
risk perception of 
commercially viable 
sustainable 
energy/climate 
resilience 
investments.  
Output 3. Sustainable 
energy project financing 
skills are successfully 
integrated in local 
financial institutions.  Number of loan officers 
trained  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  
 0 
 n.a 360 
 The total training 
budget of USD  
3,600,000 will be 
allocated across 40 
PFI. Estimated costs 
to deliver in -depth 
training are US D 
90,000 per PFI.  Number of branches in 
which loan officers are 
trained  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a 72 
 
Number of EE/RE loans 
originated by the PFIs EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a 20,000  The portfolio of 
project s under this 
Programme  will be 
similar to that of past 
EBRD SEFFs, in terms 
of average sub -loan 
amount and the 
shares of 
commercial, 
industrial and 
residential sectors.  
Output 4. Increased 
awareness of benefits of 
energy efficiency and Number of companies 
reached through 
various marketing EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 
 n.a 1,000  
 Targeted marketing 
activities, including 
SEFF website and


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 48 H 
renewable energy 
projects.  events  case studies, will 
enhance awareness 
of potential 
borrower s about 
eligible investment 
opportunities and 
the SEFF loan 
application process.  Number of people 
accessing the SEFF 
website  EBRD project  
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a 3,000  
Number of loan 
applications over time  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  0 n.a 20,000  
 
Number of case studies 
published  SEFF website  0 n.a 300 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Regarding Output 1 &2  
Financing of project s 
which increase the 
generation of renewable 
energy, the efficient use 
of resources and/or the 
resilience to climate 
change, of households, 
commercial buildings and 
SMEs and industrial 
entities  Activities will include:  
• Scoping and fina ncing of more complex, 
larger -scale, project s, based on 
targeted deployment of technical 
experts who can analyze and 
recommend priority investments for 
specific clients and their facilities 
(approximately 1,200 customized 
project s are estimated at the EBRD -GCF 
Program level);  
• Checking and financing of small -scale, 
standardized investments following 
credit analysis and eligibility 
assessment based on pre -established 
list of BATs (approximately 18,800 list -
based measures are estimated at the 
EBRD -GCF Program level);  
Estimating and reporting the level of 
enhancement of resource use efficiency 
and/or climate resilience at the project , 
SEFF, and Program levels.  Financial 
resources and 
technical expertise 
deployed to 
develop, assess, 
finance and report 
on project s • Financial and technical and 
environmental experts 
required for customized 
investment plan formulation 
and assessment, including for 
on-site visits to clients’ 
facilities;  
• Financial, technical and IT 
experts required for the 
compilation of SEFFs -specific  
lists of pre -assessed 
standardized BAT measures, to 
be used by financial 
institutions to check eligibility 
of smaller -scale investments;  
• Financial resources, on 
commercial and/or 
concessional terms, deployed 
to support the implementation 
of the eligible project s; 
• Dedicated expertise required 
for the aggregation and 
maintenance of results -
tracking databases and 
webpages with the estimated 
impact of the financed project s 
and measures;  
• Verification experts required 
to verify the physical 
implementation of project s (on 
a sample basis for the smaller -
scale project s).


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 48 H 
Regarding Output 3  
Capacity building of 
financial institutions in 
originating, assessing, 
financing and tracking 
sustainable energy and 
climate resilience projects  Activities will include:  
• Training of financial institutions sales 
staff to market the benefits of 
efficiency and/or resilience projects, 
and training of client relationship 
managers to recognize clients with 
investment potential;  
• Development of corporate strategies, 
financial prod ucts and/or tools to 
identify, assess, track and report on 
project s;  
Training of financing officers /credit staff 
to assess and carry through to financial 
close project s, based on specific 
assessment tools and financial products.   Expertise and skills 
transfer for 
financial 
institutions 
capacity 
enhancement  • Training experts, 
complemented by financial 
and technical experts, required 
to develop training materials 
and deliver targeted training 
sessions for a range of financial 
institutions staff: sales, clien t 
relationship managers, credit 
experts, lender’s engineers.  
• Corporate planning and 
process mapping experts, 
complemented by financial 
and technical experts, required 
to develop the strategy of each 
financial institution to 
mainstream and increase 
financin g of efficiency and/or 
resilience projects; this may 
include steps like the 
development of project 
eligibility lists, template 
project assessment forms, 
internal procedure to call -off 
technical experts who can 
assess client facilities, etc.  
Regarding Outp ut 4 
Awareness raising among 
financial institutions, 
SMEs and corporate 
borrowers and 
homeowners  Activities will include:  
• Development of marketing strategies 
for each financial institution and of 
specific marketing tools (such as 
brochures, webpages, etc)  to market 
their capacity to finance sustainable 
energy and/or climate resilience 
project s; 
• Engagement of financial institutions’ 
existing and prospective clients via 
targeted marketing events;  
• Development of a SEFF -specific website 
to market the facility and to report on 
the progress of the SEFF program.  Expertise and skills 
transfer for 
marketing and 
awareness raising  • Marketing and design experts, 
complemented by technical 
and financial expert s, required 
to develop PFI strategies, 
marketing tools, and SEFF 
website;  
• Marketing experts and event 
organizing resources for client 
events.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 48 H 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
MONITORING  
Implementation of each Facility under this Programme will be managed and monitored at project and Facility level by both EBRD’s 
in-house staff and SEFF operation team  procured by the EBRD:  
1. EBRD in -house staff’s oversight and quality assurance  
The EBRD h as dedicated staff in its headquarters and regional offices involved in engaging PFIs, selecting qualified PFIs,  structuring 
credit lines and agreements regarding on -lending criteria,  approving project  eligibility, and monitoring financial, technical and 
other risks.   
- EBRD SEFF Project managers will oversee and mitigate factors that can affect the performance of the Programme. SEFF 
project managers’ involvement can include the following: provision of standardized project  development procedures from 
sub-loan  application to eligibility and compliance screening, implementation supervision, marketing guidance and mitigation 
of Programme  risks  based on EBRD track -record and lessons learned from pervious SEFFs,  
- EBRD will conduct due diligence and monitor financial and integrity risks and prepare mitigation measures throughout the 
Programme lifecycle.  
- Assumptions and technical performance of the Facility that lead to climate objectives  will be verified by EBRD SEFF managers . 
2. Monitoring by the SEFF operation team s procured by the EBRD  
SEFF operation team s on the ground will assist and monitor PFIs along the entire project lifetime. SEFF operation team ’s roles 
include the following:  
- Training PFIs with standardized Project procedures along the project lifecycle from project screening to monitoring  
- Project level due diligence: screening project eligibility and compliance prior to approval  
- Follow -up after financial close:  verifying the implementation of p roject and performance of the project  
- Project level monitoring: monitoring the progress and implementation of the Facility as a whole . 
 
REPORTING   
I. Reporting of the PFI to the EBRD: As specified in the Loan Agreement between PFI and EBRD,  the PFI is obliged to report its 
portfolio on the use of proceeds of the Programme to the EBRD.  
2. Reporting of the SEFF operation team to the EBRD  
 Inception report:  As soon as a team of local and international consultants (‘SEFF operation team’ or ‘Proj ect implementation 
team’) is procured to implement a Sustainable Energy and Climate Resilience Financing Facility (‘SEFF’ or ‘Facility’) . During the 
inception phase, the SEFF operation team will report to the EBRD SEFF manager their activities including  the starting up 
phases of : establishing the country or region specific marketing strategy; establishing processes and procedures in 
consultation with PFIs and other stakeholders; develop ing a Facility website; establishing the Facility database, including  the 
market specific list of Best Available Technologies (BAT).  
 Facility monitoring reports : Once the Facility is officially launched, the SEFF operation team will consult with the EBRD SEFF 
managers on the progress of the Facility and report on a weekly,  monthly, and  quarterly basis throughout the Facility 
lifetime. These reporting will include (A) Facility and PFI level and (B) end -beneficiary level monitoring.  
(A) Facility and PFI level:  
- Portfolio reporting: disbursed sub-loan amount  by PFI , list of projects and sectors  by PFI , project values, etc.  
- Quantitative target monitoring: expected energy savings, expected emission reductions and specific adaptation benefits  
- Qualitative target monitoring: marketing activities, training and capacity buildings, u pdating the list of Best Available 
Technologies including eligible suppliers, installers, materials and equipment.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 48 H 
- Changes of Project and Facility risks and mitigation measures  
- Monitoring overall Facility success  
 (C) Beneficiary level:  
- Individual project assessment reports  (not applicable to investments in pre -approved technologies; applicable to 
investments that require eligibility assessments; See Component 1 in Section C.3 ) will involve desk -based a ssessments 
and/or site -visits and will contain the following: the beneficiary, project location and sector information; proposed 
measures by the beneficiary and experts’ consultation with the beneficiary with regards to investment priorities; expert’s 
reco mmendations on the beneficiary’s energy management systems; economic and financial analysis; mitigation and 
adaptation potential analysis; and environmental and social due diligence ( See more details on ESDD in Sectio n F.3 ). 
- Verification reports : verification of the implementation of projects through site -visits and/or desk -top based checks. 
Evidence such as invoices and photos will be presented.  
 Final report : Once the Facility reaches its final stage, the SEFF operati on team will prepare a self -evaluation report on a 
Facility scale.  
See more details on monitoring and reporting in Section G.  
3. Reporting of EBRD to the GCF  
Once the EBRD receives reporting from the PFIs and the SEFF operatio n teams, the EBRD will identify discrepancies and reconcile 
the data. Based on this, EBRD will provide a Programme -level reporting to GCF.  
The EBRD will report to the GCF on a periodic basis as agreed with the GCF, on the status of GCF funded activities throughout the 
relevant reporting period . The periodic reporting will include the disbursements made during the relevant period, the 
implementation status of the Funded Activity and the monitoring of results and impacts of such Funded Activity.  
In additio n, the EBRD will provide to the GCF an interim evaluation report and the final evaluation report  at the end of the 
implementation period of the Programme.  Upon completion, projects will be subject to the EBRD formal evaluation process. A f inal 
report prepa red by the independent Evaluation Department (EvD) sets out the results and impacts achieved, as well as their 
sustainability, scalability and lessons learned, during the relevant period.   
4. Reporting of EBRD to the respective Governments  
To help the ben eficiary country governments to track their mitigation and adaptation targets and progress, the EBRD will 
communicate the mitigation and adaptation impact of the Facilities with the respective governments.  
EVALUATION  
1. Project or Facility level evaluation by the SEFF operation teams and EBRD project managers  
Throughout the Facility lifecycle, both the SEFF operation team and EBRD project managers will evaluate the success and risks  of 
projects  and the Facility . A final report of each facility wil l include review and evaluation of the financial and technical 
performance of projects, capacity building results, estimated climate mitigation and adaptation impact, as well as donor visibility 
and marketing outreach.  
2. Project or Programme level evalua tion by the independent EBRD Evaluation department  
The independent Evaluation Department evaluates the performance of the EBRD’s completed pro jects and Programmes. The 
Evaluation Department (EvD)  is a department independent of the EBRD’s various banking divisions and therefore, EvD reports solely 
to the Board of Directors (i.e. to the representations of the shareholding governments). The EvD evaluates the effectiveness,  
relevance a nd input efficiency of projects and provides the Board with important insights into the implementation of projects, their 
impacts  and lessons learnt. Under the EBRD’s Public Information Policy, EvD publishes summaries of its independent project 
evaluations .


---
*Page 52*
---

 
ANNEXES  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 48 
50 I  
ANNEXES  
 
Programme Implementation Timetable  
 2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026  2027  2028  2029  2030  2031  
Output 1. Commercially viable sustainable energy projects 
are identified, financed and implemented.                 
Output 2. Increased volume of financing for projects typically 
perceived as risky                 
Output 3. Sustainable energy project financing skills are 
successfully integrated in local financial institutions.                 
Output 4. Increased awareness of benefits of energy 
efficiency and renewable energy projects.


---
*Page 53*
---

<u3 uus uLh <uLn uq b sn hE3 uL eLu'q u<4r uLn t E3 uL uutu un un n tE3 n FL
lrUluUnUn
MINISTRYOF NATURE PROTECTION OFTHE REPUBLIC OFARMENIA
MINISTER
M 14 H LICTE PCTBO OXPAH bI N PT POA bI PECNYENil Kil APME HI4 F
illlHllCIP
0010,p. bpt ur0, (ur0purqErnnrplur0 hp. ltunu{wprultu0 3-p4 mnr0
3 Government Bldg, Republic Sq, Yerevan, 0010, Armenia
0010, Apuexur, r.EpeBaH, 4oru npaeumenscmBa, 3,aaHue N3
qur2mn0ult{ur0 tl.qhnuun 10010608@e-citizen.am
tt.qhnuu /E-mail/ o^.noqma
Web page: www.mnp.am
a(37411)818501
E (374 11) 818 506Ng{,
u/9" " OB > 2016p.
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development ("EBRD") regarding the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financin$ programme
Dear Madam and Sir,
We refer to the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financing programme ("the programme") in Armenia
as included in the funding proposal submitted by the EBRD to us on 18 May 2016. The
proposal envisages up to USD 17 million of financing from the GCF, in the form of grants
and concessional loans, for financing energy efficiency, renewable energy and/or climate
resilience projects in Armenia.
The undersigned is the duty authorized representative of the Armenian Ministry of Nature
Protection, the National Designated Authority/focal point of Armenia.
pursuant to GCF decision B.0B/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the program as included in the funding
proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Armenia has no-objection to the program as included in the
funding proposal,
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Armenia's
national priorities, strategies and plans,
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the program as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
(t ru$($tl33ltPage 51


---
*Page 54*
---

We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the program as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Sincerely,
ARAMAYIS GRIGORYANPage 52


---
*Page 55*
---

Page 53


---
*Page 56*
---

საქართველოს  გარემოსა  და ბუნებრივი  რესურსების   დაცვის
სამინისტრო
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES PROTECTION OF
GEORGIA
KA060186409137016
საქართველო , 0114 თბილისი , გ.გულუას  ქ. N6; ტელ :2727200, 2727220, ფაქსი :2727237; www.moe.gov.ge
6 G. Gulua Str. 0114, Tbilisi, Georgia, Tel:(+995 32) 2727200, 2727220, Fax:2727237; www.moe.gov.ge
# 3534 11 / May / 2016
No-objection letter 1 2016
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(“EBRD”) regarding the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financing programme
Dear Madam and Sir,
W e refer to the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financing programme (“the programme”) in Georgia as included in the funding proposal
submitted by the EBRD to us on 8th January 2016. The proposal envisages no less then US$ 20.00 million of financing from the
GCF, in the form of grants and concessional loans, for financing energy efficiency , renewable energy and/or climate resilience
projects in Georgia.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Georgian Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Protection,
the National Designated Authority/focal point of Georgia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby  communicate our
no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Georgia has no-objection to the programme as included in the fundingproposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Georgia’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
W e also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal ha s
been duly followed.W e acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
First Deputy Minister Teimuraz Murguliaსაქართველოს  გარემოსა  და ბუნებრივი  რესურსების  დაცვისსა... http://kancelaria.cloud.gov.ge/nomfileserver//GetFile?file_id=41604569...
1 of 2 11.05.2016 1:27 P M
Page 54


---
*Page 57*
---

საქართველოს  გარემოსა  და ბუნებრივი  რესურსების  დაცვისსა... http://kancelaria.cloud.gov.ge/nomfileserver//GetFile?file_id=41604569...
2 of 2 11.05.2016 1:27 P M
Page 55


---
*Page 58*
---

Page 56


---
*Page 59*
---

Page 57


---
*Page 60*
---

Page 58


---
*Page 61*
---

o
.O\7
a
v
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT,
GREEN DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM
OF MONGOLIA
15160 Government building 2, United Nation's street 5/2,
Chingeltei district, Ulaanbaatar, MONGOLIA
Tel. (976-51) 263341 ,2661 71, Fax: (976-11)32 1401 ,
E-m ail : contact@m ne g ov, m n, http://vwvw. m ne. m n
{1 J*^ }-r,(^r
Date
Ref.
To: The Grgeq Climate Fund ("GCF")
Title: The National Focal Point for the GCF, Ministry of Environment, Green Development and
Tourism
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
('EBRD') regarding the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financing programme
Dear Sir or Madam,
We refer to the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financing programme ("the programme") in Mongolia as
incfuded in the funding proposal submitted by the EBRD to us on 13 June 2016.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Mongolian Ministry of Environment,
Green Development and Tourism, the National Designated Authorityltocal point of Mongolia.
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Mongolia has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Mongolia's
national priorities, strategies and plans;(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within
the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
BATJARGALZamba
National Focal Point for U , IPCC, GCF in MongoliaPage 59


---
*Page 62*
---

Ms. Hela Cheikhrouhou  
Rabat, 16 June 2016 
Executive Director of the Green Climate Fund 
Sondgo Business District  
175 Art Center daero Yeonsu-gu Incheon  
22004 
Republic of Korea 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development ( “EBRD ”) regarding the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financing programme 
Dear Ms. Cheikhrouhou, 
We refer to the the GCF-EBRD SEFF co-financing programme ( “the programme ”) in 
Morocco as included in the funding proposal submitted by the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development ( “EBRD ”) to us on 23 February 2016. The proposal 
envisages up to US$ 420 million financing from the GCF, of which EUR 34.1 million (US$ 37.5 million equivalent) in the form of grant resources, and US$ 382.5 million in the form of non-grant resources, for scaling up private sector climate financing activities through partnerships with local financial institutions. As stated in the proposal, it is envisaged that this programme will initially focus on four EBRD countries of operations, including Morocco. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment 
of the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco, the focal point of Morocco. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have 
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the 
funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of the Kingdom of Morocco has no-objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal; 
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Morocco ’s 
national priorities, strategies and plans; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF ’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations. Page 60


---
*Page 63*
---

We confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Sincerely, 
Her Excellency Ms. Hakima El Haité 
Minister delegate in charge of Environment 
Page 61


---
*Page 64*
---

Republic of Serbia
MINISTRYOFAGRICULTUREAND
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
No. 353-01-1987/2016-06
Date: 6 October 2016
Belerade
The Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
Songdo Business District, 175 Art center-daero
Yeonsu- gu, lnchean 220 0 4'
Reoublic of Korea
Dear Mr. Floch,
I would like to use this opportunity to express gratitude to the Green Climate Fund for support in
achievement of national priorities as well as goals identified through national strategies and
plans.
Moreover, please find enclosed Serbia's No-objection letters on funding proposal, as included in
and submitied by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD):
- "scaling up private sector climate finance through local financial institutions"
We are looking forward to future cooperation.Page 62


---
*Page 65*
---

To: To: Dr. Philippe Floch
The Green Climate Fund C'GCF')
Songdo Business District, 175 Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, lnchean 22004, Republic of Korea
., "elgrade, 6 October 2016
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD)regarding "scaling up private sector climate finance through local ltnancial institutions"
Dear Madam. Sir.
we refer to the rheGcF-EBRD SEFF "scaling up private sector climate finance through local
financial institutions" co-financing programmein the Republic of Serbia as included in the funding
proposal submitted by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)to us on
l6 August 2016.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative ofthe Ministry of Agriculture and
environmental protection, the National Designated Authority/focal pointof the Republic of
Serbia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the "scaling up private sector climate finance through
local financial institutions" co-financing programmeas included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The Govemment of the Republic of Serbia has no-objection to the "Scaling up private
sector climate finance through local financial institutions"co-financing programmeas
included in the funding proposal;
(b) The "scaling up private sector climate finance through local financial institutions" co-
financing programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Serbia's
national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the "Scaling up
private sector climate finance through local financial institutions" co-financing
programmeas included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws
and reeulations.Page 63


---
*Page 66*
---

We also oonfirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the "Scaling up private
sector climate finance through local financial institutions" co-financing programmeas included in
the funding been duly followed. .
this letter will be made publiclv available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
Nedimovic
ister of Agriculture and Environmental ProtectionPage 64


---
*Page 67*
---

Page 65


---
*Page 68*
---

Page 66


---
*Page 69*
---

Page 67


---
*Page 70*
---

Page 68  
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  GCF -EBRD Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (SEFF)  
Accredited entity  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 2 (I2)  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -05-16 
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Arabic, French and Russian  
Link to disclosure  ESMS (English, Arabic, French and Russian)  
http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/get/knowledge -hub.html  
Other link(s)  http://  
___
_____


---
*Page 71*
---

Page 69