=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20160608181954+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.16
/ModDate: D:20160608230232+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.16
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP 011 GCF/B.13/1 6/Add.03 
8 June 2016  Meeting of the Board  
28 – 30 June 2016  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem 12(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ Large -scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation in The Gambia:
Developing a Climate -Resilient, Natural Resource -based Economy” submitted by
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure .
The documents  are presented as sub mitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.13/16/Add.03  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point  
                 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
Project Title:  Large -scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation in The Gambia: 
developing a climate -resilient, natural resource -based 
economy.  
Country/Region:  The Gambia  
Accredited Entity:  United Nations Environment Programme  (UNEP)


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
  
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
  
  Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
 The total number of pages fo r the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LIST OF ACRONYMS  
 
AE Accredited Entity  
AFO Administration and Financial Officer  
ANR  Agriculture and Natural Resources  
CBD  Convention on Biological Diversity  
CBO  Community -Based Organization  
CCSFMA  Community Controlled State Forest Management Areas  
CF Community Forest  
CFUG  Community Forestry User Groups  
CN Concept Note  
CPA Community Protected Area  
CTA Chief Technical Advisor  
DNA  Designated National Authority  
DoCD  Department of Community Development  
DoF Department of Forestry  
DoPWMM  Department of Parks and Wildlife  Management  
DoWR  Department of Water Resources  
EbA Ecosystem -based Adaptation  
EBAFOSA  Ecosystem based Adaptation for food security in Africa Assembly  
EC Environmental Conservation  
EDP Enterprise Development Plan  
EE Executing Entity  
ESERN  Environmental, Social and Economic Review Note  
EWS  Early Warning System  
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization  
FFF Forest Farm Facility  
FG Farmer’s Group  
FP Forest Parks  
FPIC  Free, Prior and Informed Consent  
GCCI  Gambia Chamber of Commerce and Industry  
GCF  Green Climate Fund  
GoG  Government of Gambia  
GPS  Global Positioning System  
IE Implementing Entity  
IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural Development  
IFC International Finance Corporation  
INDC  Intended Nationally Determined Contributors  
IRR Internal Rate of Return  
IUCN  International Union for the Conservation of Nature  
JMFP  Jointly Managed Forest Parks  
JMWP  Jointly Manages Wildlife Parks  
LDC Least Developed Country  
LTRF  Long -Term Research Framework  
M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  
MA&D  Market Analysis and Development  
MFI Micro -Financing Institution  
MoA Ministry of Agriculture


---
*Page 6*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MoE/ 
MoECCFWW  Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Forestry, Water , and Wildlife  
MoFEA  Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs  
MoJ Ministry of Justice  
MoLG&L  Ministry of Local Government and Lands  
MoV Means of Verification  
MPC  Multi -Purpose Centre  
NAP National Adaptation Plan  
NBSAP  National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan  
NEA National Environmental Agency  
NFF National Forests Fund  
NGO  Non-Government Organization  
NRM  Natural Resource Management  
PA Protected Areas  
PC Project Coordinator  
PCA Project Cooperation Agreement  
PMU  Project Management Unit 
PPCR  Pilot Program for Climate Resilience  
PSC Project Steering Committee  
RAMPAO  Réseau des Aires Marines Protégées d’Afrique De L’Ouest  
REDD+  Reducing Emissions for Deforestation and Forest Degradation  
RFO  Regional Forestry Office  
SDF Social Development Fund  
TAMD  Tracking Adaptation and Measuring Development  
PO Programme Officer  
UNCCD  United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification  
UNDAF  United Nations Development Assistance Framework  
UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme  
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
USAID  United States Agency for International Development  
USD  United States Dollar  
VDP Village Development Plan  
WB World Bank  
WBS  Work Breakdown Structure  
WBSE  Work Breakdown Structure  Element  
WG Women’s Group  
WP Wildlife Park


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 66 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Project  / Programme Summary  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Large -scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation in The Gambia: 
developing a climate -resilient, natural resource -based 
economy.  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     The Gambia  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Bai Madi Ceesa y, Budget Directorate, Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Affairs.  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  United Nations  Environment Program ( UNEP ) 
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity – ministerial level: Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change, Water , Forests  and Wildlife  
Executing Entity – departmental level: Departments of 
Forestry and Parks and Wildlife Management  
 
 
Total beneficiaries:  Rural Gambian households within and 
adjacent to community -managed Forest Reserves and 
Conservation Areas:”  
 
11,550  direct beneficiaries ( 50% women)  
 
46,200  indirect beneficiaries ( 50% women)  
 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  X  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  30 November 2015  
6 June  2016 (resubmission)  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Ermira Fida  
Senior Programme Officer ;  
Coordinator,  Climate Change Sub -Programme  
Organization  United Nations  Environment Programme (UNEP) Nairobi, 
Kenya  
Email address  ermira.fida@unep.org  
Telephone number  Office land line: (254 -20) 76 23113  
Mobile: + 254 714 636329  
Mailing  address  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Headquarters  
Nairobi,  
Kenya  
 
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)


---
*Page 8*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 66 
 
 
 A 
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☒ 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. Poverty and environmental degradation are resulting in intensely negative socio -economic effects in The Gambia. 
Climate variability and change are exacerbating these effects. Droughts and floods are, for example, increasingly 
severe, resulting in reduced a gricultural production and unsustainable extraction of resources from forest ecosystems by 
rural households. At present there are insufficient financial resources and technical capacity to build the climate -
resilience of rural Gambians by adapting agricult ural practices and natural resource management to climate change 
conditions. Although the need to manage Gambian natural resources in a commercial yet sustainable manner is well 
recognised, a paradigm shift is required to manage these resources in a rigoro us, evidence -based manner under 
climate change conditions. The proposed GCF project will use large -scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) – a cost -
effective and low -risk approach for building climate resilience over large rural landscapes – to effect this paradigm shift. 
The objective of the project is consequently to build the climate -resilience of rural Gambian communities and facilitate 
the development of a sustainable natural resource -based (green) economy by implementing large -scale EbA within and 
adjacent to agricultural areas, community -managed forest reserves and wildlife conservation areas. This will entail: a) 
restoring degraded forests and agricultural landscapes with climate -resilient plant species that provide goods for 
consumption or sale; and b) facilitating the establishment of commercially viable natural resource -based businesses to 
be managed by community -based organizations. The Gambia’s existing policies that promote decentralization of natural 
resource management (including inter alia community forests, forest reserves and conservation areas) to community -
based committees will be used as an entry point for integrating EbA into ongoing national -, district - and village -level 
planning. The project will comprise three components: a) large -scale EbA to build a climate -resilient natural resource 
base; b) development of markets for natural resource -based businesses; and c) policy support, institutional 
strengthening and knowledge generation to support large -scale implementation of EbA . 
 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)   N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable)   N/A 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/01/2017 
End: 31/12/2022  
Project/programme lifespan  6 years


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 66 
 
 
 B 
B.1. Financing/Cost Information  
2. The Government of The Gambia requests that 100% of the proposed GCF project is committed in the form of grant 
finance. The request for grant finance is based on Gambia’s status as an LDC. The country has a low GDP per capita 
(USD ~488 in 2012), a high ratio of external debt to GDP (~43% in 2012), and does not have the financial capacity to 
manage loan or reimbursable grant finance. It consequently requires significant grant finance support to a dapt to the 
effects of climate change  – a requirement that has been articulated in the National Adaptation Programme of Actions 
(NAPA), Second National Communication (SNC) and Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  (INDC).  In addition, 
as specified in  the Governing Instrument of the GCF1, The Gambia as a developing country party to the UNFCCC is 
eligible to receive resources from the GCF that will finance agreed fu ll costs for activities to enable and support 
enhanced action on adaptation. As a result of the limited financial capacity of The Gambia as an LDC to adapt to 
climate change impacts as articulated in The Gambia's NAPA, SNC and INDC, and drawing on the Fund's governing 
instrument, The Gambia requests resources in the form of 100% grant finance for this project in order to enable and 
support enhanced action on adaptation. The requested GCF grant funding will be used to undertake concrete, on -the-
ground EbA interventions, procure  equipment to promote natural resource -based businesses, and provide technical 
support to communities undertaking the EbA and managing the businesses. The technical support will include inter 
alia: detailed market assessments, capacity -building and training of government extension officers and community 
members, and development of EbA restoration protocols. GCF funds will also be used to procure equipment and 
infrastructure to support the establishment of community -managed businesses based on natural resources in 
participation with at least 125 communities.  
 
3. The p roposed approach to disbursement of funds will address the following project barriers (see section C.2. below): 
a) insufficient financial resources within The Gambia to implement large -scale EbA and assess the commercial and 
adaptation benefits of this approac h; and b) limited incentives and a small evidence base to motivate for increased 
investment in large -scale EbA by the government and the private sector. An integrated financial model is presented in 
Annex B, comprising separate analyses of: a) the economic  feasibility of five potential natural resource -based 
businesses based on the proposed project’s investments in EbA; and b) the long -term economic benefits generated 
over the maturation of the total GCF investment. A summary of the project costs by compone nt is presented below. A 
summary of costs by individual activities  is presented in Annex D.  
 
Budget line  Output  1 Output  2 Output  3 PM Total  
Staff and Other Personnel 
Costs  2 672 276  863 080  685 000  1 270 000  5 490 356  
Contractual Services  7 657 500  355 000 70 000  0 8 082 500  
Travel  220 000  580 400  0 90 000  890 400  
Equipment Vehicles and 
Furniture  144 000  5 307 500  0 140 000  5 591 500  
Operating and Other Direct 
Costs  46 667  126 167  96 166  223 000  492 000  
Component totals  10 740 443  7 232 147  851 16 6 1 723 000  20 546 756  
Project Total          20 546 756  
 
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project (a) = (b) + (c)  25,521,367  million USD ($)   
                                                             
1Governing Instrument for the Green Climate Fund , paragraph 35.  
Available at: https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/56440/Governing_Instrument.pdf/caa6ce45 -cd54 -4ab0 -
9e37 -fb637a9c6235


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 66 
 
 
 B 
financing  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient   *(vi) Grants *  20 546 756  million USD ($)    
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspon d to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total 
requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v
+vi) 20 546 756  million USD ($)   
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of Institution  Ten
or  Seniorit
y 
 4,974,611  
 
 
 USD  - Government of The 
Gambia (Ministry of 
Environment, Climate 
Change, Water, Forests 
and Wildlife)    
 
Lead financing institution:  N/A  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and 
AE As the Accredited Entity (AE), UNEP, requests an accredited entity fee of 9% of total project costs  over 
the 6 -year project implementation period. The AE fee will be used to cover the cost of project 
supervision (preparation, implementation, completion, evaluation process, reporting), knowledge 
management, GCF coordination and management to ensure the GC F fiduciary standards are 
maintained and upgraded accordingly.  For the financing of the Project, the Fund will enter into a FAA 
with UNEP, which will regulate the terms and conditions described in the term sheet and any necessary 
deviations from the AMA  (which still under negotiation) . In accordance with the FAA, UNEP shall 
administer the funds disbursed by the GCF . The GCF funds will be channelled through UNEP, in its 
capacity as administrator of GCF funds, to the Gambian Ministry of Environment, Climat e Change , 
Water, Forests and Wildlife (the Executing Entity). UNEP shall enter into a Project Cooperation 
Agreement  (PCA)  with the EE to provide a grant of US$20,546,756 for the execution  of the project. The 
PCA will establish clear roles and responsibilit ies for both parties for the delivery of the proposed 
activities, the schedule and conditions for instalments, the determination of the prevailing fiduciary 
standards and terms and conditions for arbitrations and termination of contract. . 
B.3. Financial Market Overview (if applicable)  
4. As noted in section B.1, the proposed GCF project investment is requested to be provided exclusively as grant 
finance, totaling USD 20 546 756 . Consequently this proposal assumes that the GCF investment will have negligible  
impact on the country’s financial markets. This section is consequently not applicable to this project.


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
 
C.1. Detailed Project/Programme Description  
5. The proposed GCF project will use large -scale EbA to increase crop and livestock productivity, and increase the 
supply of resources from forest ecosystems under climate change conditions.  The project is consequently aligned with 
a wide range of Gambian policies, strategies and programmes  including:  
a) The Forestry sub -sector policy (2010 –2019) which encourages the involvement of the local communities and the 
private sector in the management an d development of forest. Specifically, the Forestry policy aims to: i) reserve, 
maintain and develop forest resources (at least 30% of total land area) to provide environmental protection 
through minimizing soil desiccation and erosion, improving and conse rving biodiversity, maintaining river bank 
stability and protecting swamps; ii) ensure that 75% of forest lands are managed and protected according to forest 
management principles and plans by engaging local communities in forest resource management, stren gthening 
local structures such as community forest committees, devolving authority and management responsibilities to 
local communities and introducing participatory techniques for local empowerment; and iii) ensure sufficient supply 
of forest produce nece ssary to both urban and rural population through the rehabilitation of forest lands and 
establishment of fast growing plantations and woodlots.  
b) The Agriculture and Natural Resources (ANR) policy document (2009 -2015) which identifies needs such as 
decentral ized management of wildlife resources, developing value chains for natural resource -based products, 
introducing micro -finance, and establishing REDD+ projects.  
c) Vision 2020, the Medium Term Development Framework, and the Gambia Environmental Action Plan, a ll of which 
highlight the importance of managing environmental problems – including land degradation, loss of forest cover, 
loss of biodiversity and climate change.  
d) The Programme for Accelerated Growth and Employment 2012 –2015 which focuses on sustainable forest 
management, increasing agricultural production and achieving food security for the country.  
e) The Forest Act 1998 which provides for the maintenance and develo pment of the forest resources of The Gambia 
with a view to enhancing the contribution of forestry to socio -economic development.  Of particular relevance to this 
project, the Forest Act remains the most recent and relevant piece of legislation detailing how community forests 
are formed and managed ( Part VII: Declaration of reserved forest. Creation of community forest. Designation of 
community controlled state forest ). This legislation  is soon to be supplemented by the Forestry Bill  2016 , which is 
currently in the process of being enacted by the Ministry of Justice.  
f) The Gambia UNDAF 2012 –2016 which has the objective of poverty reduction and social protection by generating 
sustai nable livelihoods while protecting the environment.  
g) The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) and the National Action Plan (NAP for UNCCD) 
which promote activities such as: wetland engineering to ensure food and water security; restoration  of degraded 
ecosystems; designation of more community protected areas and expansion of existing ones; expansion and 
consolidation of community forestry; and joint forest park management.  
h) NAPA -identified priorities relating to climate change,  including:  
 The Rehabilitation of Early Warning Systems on Climate -Related Natural Hazards;  
 Improvement of Freshwater Availability;  
 Diversification and Intensification of Agricultural Production, Processing and Marketing;  
 Expansion of Community Participation in the Ma nagement of Forests and Protected Areas;  
 Expansion and Intensification of Agro -forestry and Re -forestation Activities; and  
 Improved Livestock and Rangeland Management of Food Security and Environmental Sustainability.  
i) The Gambia’s Intended Nationally Dete rmined Contributions (INDC), submitted in October 2015, which puts a 
strong emphasis on the need to integrate national adaptation priorities into sectoral and cross -sectoral planning 
and legislation with concomitant investments in building capacity for cli mate change adaptation within government 
staff and the general public.  The proposed GCF project will contribute towards achieving the adaptation targets 
proposed in the INDC.  
j) The Sustainable Development Goals, to which Gambia is a signatory, particularly SDGs on Climate  Change 
Biodiversity , Poverty,  Food security,  and Gender Equality (SDGs 13, 15, 1, 2 and 5, respectively).   
 
In addition to national policies, strategies and programmes , the project is aligned with local -level planning activities. 
The proposed GCF project will integrate EbA into 5 - and 10 -year management plans for community co -managed areas 
such as Community Forests (CFs), Jointly Managed Forest Parks (JMFPs), Jointly Ma naged Wildlife Parks (JMWPs)


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
and Community Controlled State Forest Management Areas (CCSFMAs). Furthermore, the project will work with 
existing management structures to develop village -level land use maps, including: i) Village Development Committees; 
ii) Forest Management Committees (CF areas); and iii) Village Conservation Committees (CPA areas) (for addition al 
information on linkages to sub -national planning activities see section C.3 and E2.4).  
 
At the implementation phase, the project will adopt a stro ng focus on alignment with emerging national priorities 
related to climate change. For example, the project’s priority activities will be reviewed and, if necessary, updated to 
align with the future National Climate Change Policy (currently in draft phase,  to be finalized in 2016), which is being 
developed as a framework for mainstreaming climate change into development planning in The Gambia. In addition, 
the project’s activities will also be assessed and reviewed periodically to assess alignment and coher ence with the 
NAP process, which was initiated in The Gambia in June 2015 .  
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
6. Baseline  situation . The Gambia is a small, narrow, West African state (11,360  km2) situated along the Gambia 
River. The total population is estimated to be ~2 million2, with an annual growth rate of ~2%3. This population growth is 
attributed to a rapid birth rate and a decline in the infant mortality rate4. Approximately 41% of the population live in 
rural areas5. The Gambia is o ne of the poorest countries in Africa, ranking 165th out of 187 countries in the Human 
Development Index (HDI) in 20136. The country’s per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of ~US$428 is one of the 
smallest in Africa7, but has increased by an average of 4.5% per year from 2008 –20118. In addition, while the national 
incidence of poverty at 48%9 is great, it has decreased by ~10% since 200810.  
 
7. As The Gambia’s commercial mineral resources are limited, the national economy is mainly reliant on the 
agricultur al sector. Agriculture accounts for ~40% of national exports and contributes ~26% to the country’s GDP11. 
Over 70% of Gambian households rely on subsistence agriculture as a source of food and income12. However, the 
majority of rural households do not genera te enough produce or income from farming activities to meet annual needs, 
particularly during the wet season when the previous seasons’ produce has been consumed. These rural communities 
therefore rely heavily on ecosystem goods and services derived from w oodlands, savannas, wetlands, mangroves and 
rivers to supplement their livelihoods. These ecosystem services include water provision, maintenance of soil fertility 
and erosion control, while ecosystem goods include fuelwood and non -timber forest products ( NTFPs).  
 
8. Literature reviews and in -country consultations  (see Annex F  for summary of in -country missions)  clearly 
demonstrated the importance of natural resource -based products to the livelihoods of rural households, both for home 
consumption as well as f or sale. Natural products for which there is a well -established local demand and familiarity 
include products such as foods (baobab, kabba , netto , Ziziphus  as well as products such as honey), medicines 
(numerous species), building materials ( Rhun palm as w ell as semi -valuable and valuable timbers) and handicrafts 
(particularly furniture constructed from Rhun palm). Detailed descriptions of useful or commercially valuable plant 
                                                             
2 Available at: http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Gambia.aspx . Accessed on 18 September 2015.  
3 Available at: http://www.indexmundi.com/the_gambia/population_growth_rate.html . Accessed on 18 September 2015.  
4 Available at: http://www.columbia.edu/~msj42/pdfs/ClimateChangeDevelopmentGambia_small.pdf . Accessed on 18 
September 2015.  
5 Available at: http:/ /www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Gambia.aspx . Accessed on 18 September 2015.  
6 Available at: http://www.ifad.org/operations/projects/regions/PA/factsheets/gm.pdf . Accessed on 1 8 September 2015.  
7 Available at: http://data.worldbank.org/country/gambia . Accessed on 18 September 2015.  
8 Available at: http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/gambia/documents/about_us/page_2012_2015_en.pdf . Accessed on 18 
September 2015.  
9Available at: http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/2014/PDF/CN_Long_EN/Gambie_EN.pdf . 
Accessed on 18 September 2015.  
10 Available at: http://eeas .europa.eu/delegations/gambia/documents/about_us/page_2012_2015_en.pdf . Accessed on 18 
September 2015.  
11 Available at: http://www.columbia.edu/~msj42/pdfs/ClimateChangeDevelopmentGambia_small.pdf . Accessed on 18 
September 2015.  
12 Available at: http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/2014/PDF/CN_Long_EN/Gambie_EN.pdf


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
species, and examples of natural resource -based livelihoods and business opportun ities in The Gambia, are provided 
in the feasibility assessments in  Annex B13. All of the above -mentioned products are widely available and are traded 
within complex informal national and regional value chains. Although there are existing markets  for the above -
mentioned products, the se markets and supporting value chains  are currently under -developed  and do not make a 
significant contribution to the formal economy . The limited development of these value chains is not related to supply 
and demand, but rather is related to the minimal value and returns paid to rural households on the ‘supply’ side (see 
Annex B  for additional details). As a result of the lack of business and financial management capacity  among rural 
households , the limited skills for marketing, and near -total absence of value addition  activities , the returns paid to 
communities participating in natural resource -based businesses are so small as to undermine the incentives for 
supply -side stakeholders to participate in or invest in comme rcial businesses.  In the absence of  capacity -building 
activities to support the development of commercially viable natural resource -based businesses, the full commercial 
potential and socio -economic benefits of the country’s valuable  natural resources  will not be realized by Gambia’s rural 
communities.  
 
9. As a result of th e reliance of Gambia’s rural communities on natural resources and agriculture, the livelihoods and 
food security of these households is threatened by activities  which degrade the country’s e cosystems and natural 
resource base.  At present, w idespread environmental degradation and unsustainable land -use practices are reducing 
the generation of ecosystem goods and services that support both agricultural productivity and rural livelihoods in The 
Gambia. For example, unsustainable land -use practices such as overstocking of livestock  and reliance on 
slash -and-burn agricultural techniques has resulted in a widespread depletion of soil fertility, thereby reducing 
agricultural productivity14. Other sources of degradation, such as over-extraction of woodland trees , uncontrolled 
bushfires, and production of charcoal results in a considerable loss of vegetation cover15 which leads to widespread 
soil erosion and sediment transfer into the Gambia R iver16. Overall, the reduction in ecosystem goods and services is 
leading to negative effects on rural Gambian’s food supply, health, nutritional status, income streams and socio -
economic well -being.  
 
10. To address some of these challenges, the Government of The Gambia developed policies and established 
projects to protect the country’s environment and increase the effectiveness of natural resource management . The 
Agriculture and Natural Resources (ANR) policy (2009 -2015) identifies several priorities related to management of 
natural resources and wildlife , as well as the development of: i) value chains for natural resource -based products; ii) 
opportunities for micro finance; and iii) REDD+ projects. Similarly, the Forest Policy (2010 –2019) was formulated with 
the objective of  establishing an institutional framework  for the Department of Forestry  (DoF)  and non -governmental 
stakeholders to manage and implement natural resources programmes  within the country’s forests, woodlands and 
savannas . An important componen t of The Gambia’s existing ANR and Forest policies is the promotion of  
decentraliz ed natural resource management (including  inter alia community forests, forest reserves and conservation 
areas) to community -based committees . The Gambia has recognized the i mportance of the potential contributions that 
could be made by community -based management committees towards the country’s objectives of sustainable 
management of the environment and natural resources.  The principle of community -based management as a cost -
effective approach to support sustainable management of natural resources is widely recognized in The Gambia. The 
government’s decentralization programme is based on the observation that community -managed Forest Reserves 
have a greater forest canopy cover,  biomass content and biodiversity than other land use categories in The Gambia. 
Community co -managed areas have a lower incidence rate and severity of forest fires, and a lower rate of 
encroachment, compared to State Forest Parks. (FAO Report ‘Community Fo restry Enterprises – a case study of The 
Gambia’ states “ The condition of the MA&D community forests, with proportionally more than 60% closed and open 
forests, is better compared to the average condition of the national  forest cover where these two forests types just 
represent some 22% of the total forest area” . The reasons cited for the relatively good condition of community co -
                                                             
13 Business types assessed in Annex B  include various scenarios for community -managed businesses based on the following: i) 
firewood collection; ii) Rhun palm harvest and handicraft manufacture; iii) beekeeping for production of honey and wax; iv) 
sustainable harvest of medium - and high -value  timber; and v) value -adding/processing of wild -collected fruit products.  
14 Available at:  http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/2014/PDF/CN_Long_EN/Gambie_EN.pdf  
15 For example, 78% of The Gambia’s woodlands – which cover ~46% of the land area – have been degraded; and mangrove 
cover has decreased by 650 hectares per year since 1980.  
16 On average 12.5 tonnes of soil are lost per hectare per year.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
managed areas is that secure and long -term access to land tenure is believed to be the strong est incentive for 
communities to manage natural resources sustainably. For example, communities are more likely to respond to a 
forest fire in a co -managed area for the reason that there is a clear incentive to protect the remaining natural resources 
(such  as firewood and grazing land). Conversely, in areas where tenure arrangements are unclear or where 
communities have no access rights, there are limited incentives for communities to participate in natural resource 
management or to comply with by -laws and restrictions on natural resource use. In addition, the establishment and 
annual revision of management plans for CF and CPA areas – which includes delineation of community -managed 
areas, mapping of vulnerable or degraded areas to be restored, and undertaki ng inventories of natural resources to be 
managed – assures the sustainability of forest management by establishing transparent mechanisms for reviewing the 
status of natural resources in every CF and CPA areas.  
 
11.  At present, decentralized forest management rights have been awarded to a total of  458 communities across the 
country , the majority of which are located in Community Forest reserves . This process of transferring management 
rights and establishing Community Forest rese rves is  currently  governed by the Forest Act, 1998 (see section C.1 and 
Annex Q.1), and in future, once enacted, will be governed by the Forestry Bill . Through the establishment of a 
mechanism for collection of fees from forest user groups, the decentraliz ed forest management programme generates 
revenue for the National Forest Fund  (NFF). This fund  contributes significantly (~55%) to the operating budget of the 
DoF, and in particular is used to fund the ongoing activities of DoF related to forest protection , development and 
sustainable use of forest  resources , promotion of community forestry  (community forest management and joint forest 
park management), training of forestry staff, reforestation, and infrastructural development. However, because of a 
lack of  financial resources and limited technical capacity, many of the environmental management regulations and 
plans outlined in the above polices are not adequately enforced or implemented. For instance, within the DoF there are 
less than 170 staff members  distributed across five regional and one central office. Within the Department of Park and 
Wildlife Management  (DoPWM), there are less than 95 staff available to manage the country’s network of national 
parks and 13 Community Protected Areas. Consequently, th ere is an inadequate availability of staff, infrastructure and 
equipment to implement and enforce forestry regulations , provide extension services or undertake systematic 
monitoring and evaluation of DoF - and DoPWM -managed areas . An additional consequence of the limited availability 
of resources and technical staff within these departments is that rural  communities do not receive adequate support 
and training to effectively and sustainably manage their forest resources. In summary:  Gambian  policies promotin g 
effective and sustainable management of forests and natural resources to provide socio -economic benefits to 
communities participating in natural resource management  do exist, however,  at present the capacity of the GoG to 
implement these policies requires further strengthening .  
 
12. Climate change context:  The above -mentioned challenges related to the management of The Gambia’s 
environment and natural resources are further exacerbated by the ongoing effects of climate change – including wind 
storms, d roughts, floods, rainfall variability, coastal erosion and sea -level rise17 18 19. 
 
Observed effects of climate change  
13. Long -term meteorological records and observations of climate change in Gambia show: a) decreased average 
rainfall and duration of the rainy season; and b) increased frequency and length of droughts; c) increased 
temperatures; and d) increased frequency and severity of flashfloods20 in the period since ~1945. For example, the 
NAPA notes that the total national area that receives less than 800 mm  rain has increased from 36% to 93% of the 
national territory since the 1940’s. The observed reduction in mean annual rainfall is most apparent in the coastal and 
                                                             
17 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. First National Communication of the Republic of Gambia to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. Available at: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/gamnc1.pdf  
18 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. Second National Communication of the Republic of Gambia to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on C limate Change. Available at: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/gamnc2.pdf  
19 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. Gambia National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change. Available at: 
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/gmb01.pdf  
20 Malanding, S.J; an d Sarr, B. 2011. Climate Change and Development in the Gambia: Challenges to .Ecosystem Goods and 
Services. Available at: http://www.columbia.edu/~msj42/pdfs/ClimateChangeDevelopmentGambia_small.pdf . Accessed on 29 
May 2015.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
lowland regions of the country (west of 15◦30’W), where the volume of rainfall received in th e July -September ‘wet’ 
season has decreased by ~200mm21. The Second National Communication (SNC) notes that changes have been 
observed in average relative humidity (RH), which has  decreased from an annual average of over 75% in 1945 
dropping to ~55% in 2002 . With respect to increased temperatures, the NAPA and the Second National 
Communication report that the average minimum monthly temperature has increased by ~0.4 ◦C per decade since the 
1940’s22. Observations of the current effects of climate change also i ndicate an increase in the frequency of unusually 
heavy rainfall events (resulting in intense rainwater runoff and flooding) and an increasingly erratic spatial distribution 
of rainfall. Notably, groundwater levels have also been declining in the last deca de23, leading to the loss of many 
shallow wells that had been used for irrigating crops. As a result of these effects, Gambian farmers have reported 
multiple negative impacts as a result of climate change24 - for example, t he NAPA cites rural stakeholders as reporting 
that effects such as erratic and reduced rainfall, reduced duration of growing season, and increased temperatures, 
resulted in negative impacts such as: i) reduced crop yield; ii) reduced availability of forest  products; and iii) reduced 
livestock productivity. Recent studies have reported that groundnut yields in The Gambia are likely to decrease by 
40% because of increasing temperatures, with rice production also being negatively affected as freshwater resourc es 
are depleted25. The negative impacts reported in the NAPA are consistent with the observations and stakeholder 
comments received during the first of two in -country consultation missions (August 2015, Annex F). During the latter 
mission, the project devel opment team held interviews with eight agricultural communities in four of the country’s six 
regions. These interviews included questions on observed and perceived climate changes. Trends reported by the 
farmers included reduced total rainfall, increased a verage temperatures, an increased number of abnormally hot days, 
and an increasing duration of the ‘hungry’, dry season. All respondents reported negative effects on productivity of 
crop and livestock farming as a result of climate change.  
 
Predicted futur e impacts of climate change  
14. The existing negative socio -economic impacts of climate change in The Gambia are expected to be further 
exacerbated as a result of further climate change in the future. The modelled projections in the SNC indicate that 
mean annu al temperature will increase by ~1.7 - 2.1◦C .by 2050, and ~3.1 –3.9◦C by 2100, relative to historical mean 
annual temperature (1941 –2005). In comparison with the modelled effect of climate change on temperature, projected 
changes in mean annual rainfall ar e more variable between models – however all models predict a reduction in mean 
annual rainfall, ranging from a decrease of ~1 –25% by 2050 and a decrease of ~2 –54% by 2100. Irrespective of the 
projected net decrease in rainfall, all models predict a dramat ic increase in evapotranspiration as a result of the 
combined effects of reduced humidity and increased temperature. Models predict that evapotranspiration will increase 
by ~9 -29% .by 2050, and ~15 –45% by 2100, relative to historical means26. The SNC identi fies livelihood sectors such 
as agriculture (including both crop and livestock production), forestry and fisheries as being particularly vulnerable to 
the predicted effects of climate change. The cumulative impact of climate change effects such as: i) redu ced soil water 
content caused by increased evapotranspiration resulting from warmer air temperature; ii) increased frequency and 
severity of droughts; iii) reduced availability and quality of fresh ground water; and iv) increased erosion of fertile 
topsoil  during intense rainfall events; are anticipated to result in decreased productivity of the aforementioned sectors, 
                                                             
21 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. Gambia National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change. Available at: 
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/gmb0 1.pdf  
22 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. Second National Communication of the Republic of Gambia to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. Available at: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/gamnc2.pdf  
23 Further research is required to asce rtain the extent to which these declines are as a result of over -extraction versus climate 
change. It is, however, assumed that greater evapotranspiration as a result of increased air temperatures are a major 
contributing factor to reduced groundwater rech arge.  
24 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. Gambia National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change. Available at: 
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/gmb01.pdf  
25 AIACC. 2006. Making economic sense of adaptation in upland cereal production systems in T he Gambia. AIACC Working paper No. 
37 (August 2006). Available at: 
http://www.start.org/Projects/AIACC_Project/working_papers/Working%20Papers/A IACC_WP37_Njie.pdf .  
26 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. Second National Communication of the Republic of Gambia to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. Available at: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/gamnc2.pdf


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
thereby reducing household income and food security. In the agriculture sector, the potential benefits of elevated CO 2 
concentrations on pla nt growth are expected to be reduced by increased temperatures and crop water deficits27. The 
productivity of the natural ecosystems which support the forestry and livestock production sectors are also threatened 
by the predicted climate changes, which are anticipated to result in decreased biomass production, reduced 
biodiversity and a decline in spatial extent and density of vegetation cover. The IPCC 5th Assessment Report included 
multiple predictions related to the vulnerability of impoverished countries  in Africa (such as The Gambia), noting that 
poor countries in Africa (such as The Gambia) and Asia are expected to face a reduction in GDP of up to 1.2%28. 
Assuming a population of ~2,000,000 and a GDP of USD 488, the annual economic cost of climate change  is 
conservatively estimated to be USD~12,8 million29. In West Africa countries, the IPCC 5th AR predicts that temperature 
increases are likely to result in particularly negative consequences for production of cereals such as sorghum, millet 
and rice30. In recognition of the strong likelihood of negative impacts on rural households that are dependent on 
agriculture - and natural resource -based livelihoods, The Gambia’s NAP and SNC include recommendations of priority 
adaptation actions for each of the abo vementioned.  
 
National policies and plans related to climate change  
15. As described previously, The Gambia recognizes the severity and urgency of the national threats related to climate 
change, and has engaged actively in international initiatives related to  addressing climate change. However, at 
present, there is a need to revise and strengthen The Gambia’s institutional and policy frameworks to include 
consideration of future climate change risks and to develop sector -specific adaptation plans. In recogniti on of this need 
to integrate climate change into the country’s policies, strategies and cross -sectoral planning, several ongoing 
initiatives have been implemented. Firstly, the EU -funded project entitled “ GCCA support project to the Gambia for 
integrated coastal zone management and the mainstreaming of climate change ” aims to: i) establish processes for 
participatory and sustainable integrated coastal zone management; ii) strengthen the knowledge base for integrating 
climate change across multiple economic sectors; and iii) formulate a national climate change policy. Secondly, the 
UNEP -UNDP GEF -LDCF project entitled “ Strengthening of The Gambia’s climate change Early Warning Systems ” 
aims to strengthen the national hydro -meteorological network and develop in stitutional capacity of government 
institutions to better integrate climate change considerations into policies. Finally, the UNDP GEF -LDCF project 
“Enhancing the resilience of vulnerable coastal communities to climate change ” aims to inter alia  establish an 
institutional coordination mechanism for coastal -development planning and develop a national programme for coastal 
monitoring. A summary of these ongoing initiatives is presented in Annex G. Despite the efforts of these ongoing 
initiatives, climate chan ge is yet to be integrated into all sectoral policies. At present, the National Climate Change 
Policy is in a draft phase and as a result no national climate change strategies and action plans have been developed. 
Therefore, at present, the vulnerability o f The Gambia’s population and important economic sectors to climate change 
is exacerbated by the limited consideration of climate change in the country’s institutional framework and policies.  
 
16. The problem  that the proposed GCF project will consequently add ress is that the livelihoods of Gambia’s rural 
communities – particularly those that are dependent on agricultural, natural resources, and the sustained generation of 
ecosystem goods and services - are threatened by climate change and are anticipated to de cline further as a result of 
future climate change. The root cause of the vulnerability of these communities is that the sustained supply of 
ecosystem goods and services from agricultural landscapes and natural ecosystems (such as forests, woodlands and 
mangroves) that underpin the livelihoods of rural households is threatened by the predicted effects of climate change. 
Agricultural households are particularly vulnerable to climate change as a result of the  widespread reliance on the brief 
rainy season to m eet the majority of annual food and income needs, which increases the vulnerability of these 
                                                             
27 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. Second National Communication of the Republic of Gambia to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. Available at: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/gamnc2.pdf  
28 IPCC AR 5. Livelihoods and Poverty in Clima te Change 2014: Impacts Adaptation and Vulnerability. Part A. Global and 
Sectoral Aspects. Available at: http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment -report/ar5/wg2/WGIIAR5 -Chap13_FINAL.pdf  
29 Note that this figure is based on coarse regional estimates. Furthermore, t his analysis assumes that climate change impacts 
are evenly distributed between sectors, while in practice it is likely that impacts will be disproportionately distributed be tween 
sectors and livelihood types. Sectors such as agriculture, which are particu larly exposed to climate change -related risks and 
vulnerabilities, are likely to be disproportionately impacted by the effects of climate change.  
30 IPCC AR 5. Africa in Climate Change 2014: Impacts Adaptation and Vulnerability. Part B. Regional Aspects. Av ailable at: 
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment -report/ar5/wg2/WGIIAR5 -Chap22_FINAL.pdf


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
households to loss of income and food shortages in the event of a poor harvest or a crop failure  The vulnerability of 
these communities to climate change is furthe r exacerbated by the relative under -development of Gambia’s rural 
economy and the lack of alternative, climate -resilient livelihood options. As a result of the limited availability of 
technical expertise and financial resources to support the development o f alternative livelihoods and adoption of 
appropriate local adaptation practices, rural households in The Gambia will remain vulnerable to climate -related 
shocks such as reduced agricultural production and increased incidence of crop failure, which in turn  will exacerbate 
the challenges of rural poverty and food insecurity. In the absence of investments to diversify rural livelihoods away 
from inefficient agricultural practices and unsustainable use of natural resources, the effects of climate change will 
exacerbate the ongoing cycle of rural poverty and environmental degradation.  
 
17. Adaptation solution . To resolve the climate change problems facing rural Gambian communities, there is a need 
for a paradigm shift in the Gambia, from an economy caught in a cycle  of unsustainable natural resource management 
practices and climate -vulnerable subsistence livelihoods; towards a sustainable green economy based on 
climate -resilient livelihoods and rigorous, evidence -based management of natural resources. The proposed ad aptation 
solution is the largescale implementation of the  Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) approach in participation with 
vulnerable rural communities  in Community Forests (CFs) and Community Protected Areas (CPAs) . The EbA 
approach has been defined as the use of ecosystems – and generation of associated goods and services – as part of 
a strategy to adapt to climate change. Such an approach is increasingly recognized as a highly cost -effective and 
low-risk approach fo r adapting to climate change31,32,33. The proposed project will design and implement EbA 
interventions that will increase the generation of food and/or income during the dry/’hungry’ season that will 
supplement existing income from agriculture and reduce the severity of negative socio -economic impacts associated 
with climate change (e.g. crop failure). The project’s investments in EbA will: i) increase the generation of ecosystem 
goods and services through establishment of a climate -resilient natural resource base; and ii) identify and promote 
climate -resilient livelihood options for rural communities to survive the economic hardships caused by climate change, 
through establishment of natural resource -based businesses (e.g. sustainable production and marketing of natural 
products such as timber, firewood, honey and fruit). The integration of the EbA approach into The Gambia’s planned 
activities for agriculture, natural resources, climate change adaptation and socio -economic development will respond 
to multiple n ational adaptation needs, including inter alia the following:  
a) increase the generation of food and/or income during the dry/’hungry’ season to reduce the severity of 
negative socio -economic impacts of climate change on vulnerable rural households  
b) protect and restore ecosystem goods and services that underpin existing rural livelihoods, including generation 
of valuable natural products as well as provisioning services such as maintenance of soil fertility, fresh water 
and pollinators; and  
c) identify and demon strate sustainable, climate -resilient livelihoods based on the sustainable management and 
marketing of natural resource -based products as part of The Gambia’s long -term strategy to adapt to climate 
change.  
 
18. The proposed GCF i nvestment in EbA will benefit p articipating communities by increasing food security and 
generating new income streams through natural resource -based businesses despite the negative impacts of climate 
change.  
 
19. Barriers to implementing large -scale EbA .  
Barriers to the above solution include:  
                                                             
31 Rao et al. 2013. An economic analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation and engineering options for climate change adaptation 
in Lami Town, Republic of the Fiji Islands. A technical report by the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme. 
Apia, Samoa .Available at: http://ian.umces.edu/pdfs/ian_report_392.pdf . The highest benefit -cost ratio for the ecosystem -based 
options in the Lami Town study was FJ$19.50 benefit for every FJ$ spent over a 20 -year time horizon. In comparison, the 
benefit -cost ratio for the engineering options scenario was FJ$9.00.  
32 Blignaut et al. 2014. Restoration of natural capi tal: a key strategy on the path to sustainability. Ecological Engineering. Doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2013.09.003  
33 Binney J. Singh R. Anderson P. and Lee Long W. 2015. The cost of protecting our coastline and water supply - Benefit cost 
analysis of ecosystem -based management and climate change adaptation options in Lami Town, Fiji. Technical Report. UNEP 
and the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme.


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
a) Gambian institutions in both government and the private sector have insufficient technical capacity to implement 
EbA interventions as well as implement the existing policies promoting community -based management of natural 
resources;  
b) Private sector  investors, credit unions and financial institutions have an insufficient evidence base on the benefits 
of EbA to assess the commercial viability of natural resource -based businesses that could emerge from 
investments in EbA;  
c) At present, there is a limited  understanding of the monetary and economic value of functional ecosystems and 
natural resources, and in consequence there are insufficient funds allocated to natural resources in both 
government budgets and the private sector to enable large -scale investm ents in EbA across The Gambia;  
d) Rural Gambian smallholders are unwilling to invest in EbA interventions and natural resource -based businesses in 
the absence of security of land tenure and rights to access the natural resources; a nd 
e) Gambian government depart ments and private sector businesses have insufficient knowledge and technical 
capacity to promote natural resource -based businesses.  
 
20. The overarching objective of the project  is to build the climate -resilience of rural Gambian communities and 
facilitate th e development of a sustainable natural resource -based (green) economy by implementing large -scale EbA 
within and adjacent to agricultural areas, community -managed forest reserves and wildlife conservation areas of The 
Gambia.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
21. The proposed GCF project will achieve its overarching objective by restoring and building The Gambian natural 
resource base in transformed agricultural landscapes and degraded ecosystems (including deciduous and semi -
deciduous forests, savanna woodlands and mangroves) using climate -resilient tree and shrub species across an area 
of at least 10,000 hectares. This investment in EbA will be complemented by the establishment of natural resource -
based businesses managed by local communities. Such bus inesses will stimulate economic activity in Gambia’s rural 
areas and facilitate the transition of the country towards a green economy based on sustainable use of natural 
resources.  The Gambian Government is committed to this transition to a green economy a nd is in the process of 
increasing the area of forest under community management to at least 200,000 hectares.  
 
22. The project’s EbA interventions will take place within and adjacent to at least 125 newly established34 Community 
Forestry Reserves (CFs) and Co mmunity Protected Areas (CPAs), across four regions of The Gambia (Lower River, 
Central River South, Central River North and Upper River Regions – see maps in Annex H.1 and H.2). These 
community -managed areas were formally proclaimed in late 2015 as part o f the MoE’s renewed Participatory Forest 
Management Programme, which promotes community -based management of natural resources and development of 
Community Forest Enterprises through the MA&D process. The above proclamations provide the community -managed 
areas with secure and stable land tenure. Such tenure has been demonstrated in The Gambia to incentivize 
communities to adopt sustainable practices for natural resource management (described in Section C.2) . In addition to 
implementing EbA interventions, the  project will integrate an EbA approach into the management plans of the newly 
established community -managed areas . The three complementary components and associated Outputs of the project 
are presented below. A detailed list of activities and sub -activiti es is presented in Annex J.   
 
23. Component 1: Large -scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) to build a climate -resilient natural resource 
base  across The Gambia . 
 
Output 1: EbA interventions implemented in agricultural landscapes and degraded ecosystems to provide adaptation 
and commercial benefits for local communities, government and the private sector in The Gambia  
 
24. Component 1 will comprise the implementation of large -scale EbA interventions to increase the generation of 
climate -resilient natural resourc es and ecosystem services in community -managed forests (CFs) and protected areas 
(CPAs). The project’s activities will build directly on the existing baseline activities within the MoE’s three Programmes 
of Activities (Programme 1: Strategy, Policy and Man agement; Programme 2: Sound Environmental Management; and 
Programme 3: Biodiversity Conservation and Management) through which the activities of DoF and DoPWM are 
                                                             
34 The formal manageme nt rights to these community managed areas was granted as recently as November 2015.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
budgeted (detailed in Section C.4).  
 
25. As stated above, the proposed GCF project will implemen t EbA interventions in 125 CFs/CPAs across four regions 
of The Gambia, namely Lower River Region, Upper River Region, Central River South Region and Central River North 
Region. These four regions comprise ~62% of the land area of the country and include a wide diversity of vegetation 
types and land use types. The initial stages of project implementation will focus on 68 recently proclaimed CFs and 
CPAs in four regions (detailed in Annex H.4). By focusing on the participation of these newly established 
commu nity-managed areas, the project will capitalize on the opportunity to integrate EbA into community -level 
management plans through the scheduled MA&D consultations that will be held with these communities from 2016 
onwards. Table 1 (below) summarises the to tal spatial extent of the project’s EbA interventions, including the 68 
priority CFs (which will be included in the initial stages of the project) as well as at least 57 additional CFs/CPAs (which 
will be selected during the implementation phase following the selection criteria detailed in Annex K). Detailed lists of 
the specific CFs/CFAs, participating communities and spatial extent of EbA interventions in each region, are presented 
in tables in Annex H.4.   
 
26. Each of the project’s CFs/CPAs will require the development of highly specific EbA protocols  based on inter alia  
local soil types, soil depths, topography, land use practices, and natural plant communities. Detailed soil mapping, land 
use mapping, and botanical surveys at the scale of each CF/CPA will c onsequently be required prior to implementation 
to develop the CF/CPA -specific EbA protocols. To manage the bio -physical diversity of the 125 CFs/CPAs, the project 
will use a programmatic approach based on the replication of region -specific prototypes of E bA practices  (see 
Prototypes A –D in Annex H.3). These four prototypes will provide blueprints for communities, local authorities and 
project management staff to develop CF/CPA -specific EbA protocols in a particular region. Each prototype is 
representative  of the EbA interventions required in one or two of the predominant vegetation types in a project region. 
The prototypes will consequently be replicated across the regions for which they have been tailored. Four prototypes 
have been developed. Prototype A w ill be replicated across the Lower River Region where CFs/CPAs include 
predominantly forest vegetation types. Prototype B will be replicated across the Central River Regions (North and 
South) where CFs/CPAs include predominantly forest and mangrove vegetat ion types. Prototype C will be replicated 
across Central River Regions (North and South) where CFs/CPAs include predominantly savannah woodland and 
mangrove vegetation types. And Prototype D will be replicated across the Central River Regions (North and So uth) 
where CFs/CPAs include predominantly savannah woodland vegetation types.  Table 1 below provides a regional 
breakdown of the amount of land to be used for EbA interventions within the proposed GCF project, the predominant 
vegetation types, and the potentially applicable prototypes. Details on the region -specific EbA prototypes are 
presented in Annex H.3, with maps of the villages of Tabanane (Lower River Region; Prototype A), Jasobo (Central 
River Region South; Prototype B), Baro Kunda (Central Rive r Region North; Prototype C), and Belleh Mondeh (Upper 
River Region; Prototype D) used for illustrative purposes. Each of these prototypes will be validated during the 
inception stage of the project.  
 
Table 1. An overview of the proposed GCF project showin g a regional breakdown of the proposed project’s 
EbA interventions.  
Region  Number of 
Community 
Forest areas  Total area of 
EbA in 
transformed 
land inter alia  
agriculture, 
fallow land, 
roadside 
verges (ha)  Total area of 
EbA in 
natural 
ecosystems 
(ha) Predomi nant vegetation 
type Applicable EbA 
prototype (see 
Annex H.3)  
Lower River 
Region  6 144 458 1. Evergreen & semi -
deciduous forest;  
2. Mangroves  Prototypes A 
and B  
Central River 
Region (North)  35 840 1,439  1. Savannah woodland;  
2. Mangroves  Prototypes B 
and C 
Central River 
Region (South)  21 504 1,479  1. Savannah woodland;  
2. Mangroves  Prototypes B 
and C


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
Upper River 
Region  6 144 441 1. Savannah woodland  Prototype D  
Additional areas to 
be confirmed 
during 
implementation  57 1,512  3,641  All 
Total  125 3,000  7,000  
 
27. The programmatic roll -out of the region -specific EbA prototypes will include the following steps:  
 
 Engagement with local -level authorities inter alia  Village Development Committees, Forest Management 
Committees and/or Village Conservation Committees as applicable . 
28. Regional representatives of DoF/DoPWM – including members of the newly established regional EbA Technical 
Working Groups – will actively engage with participating communities in the development and implementation of the 
project’s activities. The initial ph ases of community engagement will include selecting the appropriate EbA prototype  
for the local village and introductory training on the EbA concept. The training will focus particularly on members of: i) 
Village Development Committees; ii) Forest Manageme nt Committees (CF areas) or Village Conservation Committees 
(CPA areas). Communities who have been granted formal management rights to CF and CPA areas, and who 
therefore have pre -existing management committees, by -laws and development plans established at  the village level35 
will be prioritised. The project will digitize (and make additional soft copies) of the existing village -level bylaws and 5 - 
and 10 -year management plans to be referred to during the process of engagement and training of participating 
communities.  
 
 Participatory mapping of land use and ecosystems in participation with village committees and trained 
DoF/DoPWM extension officers  
29. The development of village -level land use maps will be undertaken by DoF/DoPWM extension officers in 
participat ion with representatives of the Village Development Committee and Forest Management Committee/Village 
Conservation Committee. The extension officers will be provided with extensive technical support and training on the 
application of the EbA prototypes, in cluding by the regional technical working groups established by the project. The 
application of each EbA prototype will require the identification and mapping of dominant soil types, soil depths, land 
use types, topography, plant communities and local -level climate change vulnerabilities. GPS measurements will be 
taken to delineate the boundaries of the community -managed areas (i.e. CF or CPA area), agricultural land, 
paths/roads, degraded or fallow land and grazing management areas. Village -level maps will  be prepared using GIS 
software (QuantumGIS using Shape file formats) and converted to GoogleEarth imagery (.kmz file format).  
 
 Participatory mapping of village -level EbA interventions  
30. The village -level land use maps will be used as an interactive planning tool to guide the participatory design and 
validation of draft village -level EbA protocols by community representatives and regional extension staff. The protocols 
will include details on plant species to be used in a particular soil type and loca l plant community, methods of planting, 
and post -planting management plans.  
 
 Validation and revision of EbA protocols  
31. Following the participatory mapping, the draft EbA protocols will be reviewed, revised if necessary, and final 
versions of the protocols validated by the Village Development Committee. This detailed review of the choice of 
activities, scale of interventions, and variety of plant species, will be undertaken in participation with: i) community 
representatives; ii) regional DoF/DoPWM extension  staff, and iii) the project’s EbA technical working group members. 
The EbA protocols will consequently be informed by traditional knowledge, local and international best -practices, and 
ongoing scientific research. The implementation of EbA interventions a nd post -planting management arrangements 
will vary between villages and will be defined in the by -laws and annual updates of the CF management plans. 
                                                             
35 Prerequisites for formal recognition of CF/CPA communities include establishment of a Village 
Development Committee, Forest Management Committee/ Village  Conservation Committee (as applicable) 
and development of 5 - and 10-year management plans.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
Activities such as site preparation, provision of labour, forest patrolling etc. could for example be shar ed equally 
between members as unpaid responsibilities or could alternately be assigned to individuals for a wage.  
 
 Integration of EbA protocols into 5 - and 10 -year CF/CPA management plans  
32. CF and CPAs are required to establish 5 -year and 10 -year management plans which are reviewed annually by 
regional DoF extension staff. The project will use the opportunity of these annual reviews to formally integrate the 
validated final EbA protocols into mid -term (five years) and long -term (10 years) planning. In additio n, the project will 
digitize those management plans which are currently only available in hard copy. These plans will be stored on the 
online information platform currently being established by the Department of Water Resources through the ongoing 
LDCF EWS  project.   
 
33. The following activities  will be delivered under this component (detailed activities and sub -activities for the 
development of this Component are presented in Annex J):  
 
34. 1.1 Protocols for large -scale EbA in at least 125 community -managed forest  reserves and conservation areas to 
build climate -resilient natural capital in The Gambia . Activities within this result will focus on the establishment and 
training of a technical working group of national experts that will guide the development of the pr oject’s activities 
throughout the implementation period, including the development of village -level EbA protocols and management 
plans based on the application of regional Prototypes, in participation with beneficiary communities. The technical 
working gro up will adopt a multi -disciplinary approach such that social scientists, horticulturalists, wildlife biologists, 
ecologists, geologists and hydrologists etc. provide regular input into refining of the EbA protocols through time. The 
technical working group  will include representatives of the Gambia’s NAP development team, thereby ensuring that the 
interventions of the GCF project are well -aligned with and integrated into emerging national plans and strategies on 
climate change . The EbA intervention protocols will be tailored to the site -specific context of each of at least 125 
community -managed areas in  Lower River, North Bank, Central River and Upper River Regions , including 
consideration of environmental, including considerat ion of multiple criteria as outlined in sub -activities (Annex J).  
Examples of EbA interventions that will be implemented in Component 1 to increase the climate -resilient supply of 
ecosystem goods and services include: a) restoration, enrichment planting an d sustainable management of forest 
reserves and conservation areas, including ecosystems such as tropical forest, woodland, savanna and mangroves; b) 
planting a diverse variety of useful and commercially valuable plant species within and adjacent to farmla nds and 
households; and c) restoration of degraded, marginal or eroded land, with a particular emphasis on roadside verges, 
abandoned agricultural land and degraded riparian areas, using locally adapted and climate -resilient plant species that 
will generat e adaptation benefits and/or commercially useful products (potential EbA approaches are described in the 
Feasibility Assessment in Annex B and depicted graphically in Annex J).  The location of the project’s EbA 
interventions will be carefully selected to m aximize the return on investment. For example, priority interventions would 
include re -vegetation of soil types that are particularly erosive, and restoration of degraded riparian zones that are well 
positioned for trapping sediment before it enters rivers . Importantly, the restoration of the degraded ecosystems will be 
carefully tailored – based on rigorous scientific research, local knowledge and lessons learned from other initiatives – 
to manage the expected climate change conditions.   
 
35. 1.2 Nurseries established/expanded to support investment in a climate -resilient natural resource base across The 
Gambia . The increase the availability of planting material to supply the project’s EbA interventions as well as for use 
by communities that are not participa ting in the project, GCF resources will be invested in the expansion of the national 
nursery network. This will include the expansion of four Regional Forestry Office nurseries, and the t ransport and 
propagation of hardened seedlings of tree and shrub spec ies generated at RFOs to each of the four participating 
regions . The sustainability of this investment will be supported by the development of detailed training programmes 
and management protocols for nursery staff, the increased generation of revenue for the National Forest Fund through 
marketing of tree seedlings, and the development of revenue models to support the sustained operation of each 
nursery.  
 
36. 1.3 Training and support for regional extension staff, field officers and local communities to implement EbA 
protocols for establishment of a climate -resilient natural resource base . The proposed project aims to integrate the 
EbA approach into the ongoing business -as-usual approach of The Gambian government, particularly with respect to 
planning act ivities for climate change adaptation, agriculture and natural resour ce management. The availability and


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
level of technical capacity of staff within DoF and DoPWM was assessed during the funding proposal preparation 
phase and scored using a methodology bas ed on the GEF AMAT system (detailed in  Results Framework and  Annex 
L). The preliminary baseline score proposed for the capacity of the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Water, 
Forests, and Wildlife (MoECCWFW, henceforth ‘MoE)  line departments to des ign and implement EbA -related 
initiatives was estimated to be 2/10 i.e. a score of two out of a maximum score of ten. The project will seek to increase 
this capacity score to at least 6/10 at the end of the project implementation period.  In particular,  the activities within this 
result will focus on providing sustained training and capacity -building to increase the capacity of  at least 40  regional -
level extension  staff within DoF, DoPWM and DoCD to implement, replicate and upscale the project’s activities. In 
addition to providing training on the design and implementation of EbA protocols, capacity -building activities will 
include a strong focus on establishing clear and effective protocols for participatory communication with community 
representatives  who w ill in turn be able to implement EbA protocols . The increas ed capacity of regional -level 
government extension officers will support the identification and continued replication of successful approaches to 
adaptation promoted  by the project.   
 
37. 1.4 EbA implemented in agricultural landscapes and degraded ecosystems to build a climate -resilient natural 
resource base . Using the EbA protocols developed in participation with the technical working group, the project will 
implement large -scale EbA to build a cl imate -resilient natural resource base that yields goods for consumption and 
sale across The Gambia in at least  125 community -managed areas, including the aforementioned  78 CF areas which 
were proclaimed by MoE during 2015.  The intervention sites in Lower R iver, North Bank, Central River and Upper 
River Regions (including those sites identified in the map in Annex H) will include forests, savannas and woodlands in 
Community Forests (CFs), Forest Parks (FPs), Community Controlled State Forest Management Areas  (CCSFMAs), 
Protected Areas (PAs) and Wildlife Parks (WPs) (~7,000 ha), as well as agricultural lands (~3,000 ha). At a landscape 
scale, the project’s EbA interventions will restore priority degraded areas, thereby reducing the rate of soil erosion, 
increa sing the infiltration of rainwater by soils, increasing the recharge of groundwater and reducing the deposition of 
sediment into the Gambia River. In terms of ecosystem goods, the project’s EbA interventions will increase the supply 
of commercially valuabl e products such as  hardwood and softwood timber, firewood, fruits, honey, medicine, fibre, 
fodder, and handicrafts. These commercially valuable products will support the development of natural resource -based 
businesses that will be owned and operated by pa rticipating communities (under Component 2). Therefore the 
project’s activities will identify and promote locally appropriate, climate -resilient livelihood options as a supplement or 
an alternative to climate -vulnerable traditional livelihoods such as rain fed agriculture. By increasing the availability of 
forage in public and reserved grazing areas, the project will also increase the supply of livestock and venison for rural 
Gambian communities. In the vicinity of villages and agricultural land, the project ’s EbA interventions will include 
adoption of climate -resilient agricultural techniques such as conservation farming, demonstration of improved and 
locally adapted crop varieties, biodiverse agroforestry and ‘home gardens’36 of herbs, shrubs and trees. The diversity 
of local and exotic plant species in such home gardens ensures that there is consistent agricultural productivity 
through the year and during extreme climate events, thereby providing an important buffering effect against climate 
change. The dive rse EbA activities implemented by the project will consequently generate multiple direct and indirect 
adaptation benefits for vulnerable rural households . 
 
38. Component 2: Establishment and strengthening of  natural resource -based businesses in The Gambia.  
 
Output 2: Technical support provided and infrastructural investments made to strengthen local and international 
markets using goods produced from climate -resilient natural resource base.  
  
39. Component 2 will focus on establishing community -managed businesses  based on the natural resources 
generated under Component 1 in participation with ~125 communities through fast -tracking and upscaling of the 
MoE’s MA&D process, while strengthening the value chains and market access for products/services which are 
                                                             
36 Nguyen et al. 2013. Multipurpose agroforestry as a climate change resiliency option for farmers: an example of local 
adaptation in Vietnam. Climate Change. Doi. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584 -012-0550 -1.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
identified as being commercially viable (including inter alia the products assessed in the Feasibility Assessment, 
Annex B37). The proposed GCF project will adapt the good practice guidelines established by past initiatives (including 
the draft social, fina ncial and environmental criteria proposed in Annex K) to identify and provide technical and 
administrative support to applicable and commercially -viable natural resource -based businesses38. Beneficiaries of the 
project’s investments will receive packages of  equipment to support the establishment of community -managed 
businesses based on sustainable use of natural resources in each of 125 participating communities (described under 
Activity 2.3). These investments in natural resource -based businesses will be co mplemented by extensive technical 
and administrative support for the establishment of local financial management committees, management by -laws and 
mechanisms for conflict resolution, as well as training on business management and operation & maintenance o f 
procured equipment.  
 
40. The establishment of the project’s natural resource -based businesses will be supported with the provision of 
training and capacity -building activities for communities (including training on the technical aspects of operating each 
specific business but also including general business management and accounting skills). The provision of training 
and capacity -building will be delivered in situ by extension officers, as well as through the 21 Multi -Purpose Centres 
operated by the Depart ment of Community Development around the country. The project’s activities under Component 
2 will have a strong emphasis on promoting increased investment in the country’s natural resource base – both by the 
government as well as the private sector – throu gh strengthening the evidence base for EbA as a commercially viable 
investment as well as a cost -effective climate change adaptation response. The project will consequently identify 
natural resource -based products which could potentially be marketed to reg ional and international investors. Local and 
regional trade fairs such as those organized by the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and the Gambia Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry (GCCI)39 will also be used by the project to promote increased local, regional and  
international investment in the Gambian natural resource base and related products. For example, products which are 
in demand in regional and international markets include various honey and beeswax derivatives, processed baobab 
pulp for use as a food supp lement, and Rhun palm furniture.  
 
41. The following results will be delivered under this component:  
 
42. 2.1 Technical support for fast -tracking and scaling up the Market Analysis and Development (MA&D) process to 
develop natural resource -based businesses . Activit ies under this result will focus on providing funding, technical 
support and training to promote the fast -tracking of the emerging Market Analysis & Development process through 
DoF’s participatory forestry program. In each of the four regions, the project’ s activities will be coordinated by 
individual regional coordinators who will be responsible for coordination between relevant stakeholders involved in the 
administration of community -managed areas. These stakeholders will include inter alia  the Regional F orest Offices 
(RFOs), DoF, MoE, DoPWM, Ministry of Local Government and Lands (MoLG&L) and Ministry of Justice (MoJ). To 
increase the availability of extension staff within the DoCD, budgeted activities include the appointment and training of 
four additional Community Development officers (one in each participating region). Extension staff from the 
aforementioned departments will be provided with training on the updated implementation manual for the MA&D 
process, to guide the development of communit y business plans by the project’s beneficiary communities. The 
outcome of the MA&D process in each participating village will include the identification of priority natural resource -
based businesses to be established, as well as quantifying the required in vestments in training, capacity -building and 
procurement of equipment and infrastructure. Training programmes for representatives of participating communities 
will be undertaken through the DoCD Multi -Purpose Centres on topics including entrepreneurship an d business 
management, financial management and record -keeping as well as specific training on operation of the specific 
equipment procured for each business type. A total of four training sessions will be hosted at each Multi -Purpose 
Centre per year, trai ning a total of ~5,000 people through ~500 training sessions. Training activities will prioritise the 
                                                             
37 Business types assessed in Annex B include various scenarios for community -managed businesses based on the following: i) 
firewood collection; ii) Rhun palm harvest and handicraft manufacture; iii) beekeeping for production of honey and wax; iv) 
sustainable harvest of medium - and high -value timber; and v) value -adding/processing of wild -collected fruit products.  
38 Eligibility criteria will include inter alia considerations of commercial viability, te chnical feasibility, and potential to cause 
negative environmental/social consequences  
39 The GCCI is an independent non -governmental organization that focusses on promoting increased private sector 
investment in The Gambia


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
inclusion of members of Village Women’s Committees, and will support the participation of women by providing 
allowances for travel, subsistence and child care so that young mothers are not prevented from participating in the 
project’s activities. In line with the project’s objectives of gender -equitable benefits, the training provided to 
participating communities as well as government extension staff will i nclude modules which explicitly focus on raising 
awareness, and providing practical suggestions on how to include consideration, on issues related to gender equity 
and sectoral priorities related to women. As noted in the selection criteria proposed in Ann ex K, the project will 
prioritise the selection of activities which will support increased livelihood opportunities and access to assets for 
women. Consequently, at each participating site, the project will include at least one natural resource -based busin ess 
derived from the project’s EbA interventions that will explicitly prioritise the participation of women. For example, the 
project will prioritise the establishment of natural resource -based enterprises which have been identified as being 
culturally app ropriate and within the accepted norms for women’s societal roles which may include inter alia : i) 
collection and processing of wild and cultivated food products; ii) establishment of biodiverse home -gardens and 
horticultural plots; iii) manufacture of han dicrafts e.g. Rhun palm furniture and weaving; and iv) various artisanal skills 
such as oyster farming, fish processing and salt production. In addition to the above activities, female beneficiaries 
may be encouraged to participate in additional activities  which are traditionally within the domain of men’s 
responsibilities, for example collection and marketing of firewood, timber and honey.  
 
43. 2.2 Business plans, forums and financial analyses to catalyze private and public investment in a climate -resilient 
natural resource base . Within this result, the project will engage communities in the identification and development of 
business plans based on the generation and marketing of natural resources through the project’s EbA interventions. 
Business plans will be developed based on the existing MA&D process to support the establishment of 
community -managed, natural resource -based businesses. The identification and development of bankable business 
plans for sustainable use of natural resources by communities, and th e attendant protocols and procedures, are an 
important aspect of the GCF project’s exit strategy. Following the identification, establishment and operation of 
community -managed businesses, the project will engage the Gambian Chamber of Commerce and Industr y to 
organize at least four national and regional trade fairs to showcase and promote investment in the natural resource -
based businesses established by the project.  
 
44. 2.3 Investments in procurement and maintenance of infrastructure to develop natural reso urce-based businesses . 
To support the establishment of sustainable and climate -resilient livelihoods based on the EbA investments under 
Component 1, the project will procure equipment and infrastructure for the establishment of at least two 
community -manag ed, natural resource -based businesses at each of at least 125 villages. It is proposed that the 
business types to be established at each participating community should include at least two of the following four 
business types inter alia beekeeping, firewoo d marketing, basic timber collection and handicraft manufacturing and 
others identified as appropriate during the project implementation phase. All of the aforementioned business types are 
relatively well -established and widely practiced in The Gambia by i nformal enterprises within underdeveloped value 
chains. The community -managed businesses established under this component will include an estimated ~20 –50 
members per community. As detailed in the table below, the establishment of at least two businesses b y each of 125 
communities will result in direct benefits from ~10,250 community members.  
Business type  Assumed 
number of 
communities  Members 
per 
business  5-year cost per 
community (USD)  Total 
investment 
cost (USD)  Total number of 
beneficiaries  
Communal firewood 
marketing  75 50 10,000  750,000  3,750  
Rhun palm handicrafts  50 50 12,000  600,000  2,500  
Beekeeping  75 20 15,980  1,198,500  1,500  
Simple timber collection and 
marketing  50 50 10,000  500,000  2,500  
TOTALS  3,048,500  10,250  
 
In addition to the aforementioned business types, the project will also invest in regional facilities to support the 
establishment of at least three other types of  natural resource -based businesses  of comparatively greater complexity 
and investment size, including inter alia : i) food -processing facility established at one DoCD Multi -Purpose Centre in 
each of four regions (estimated ~200 direct beneficiaries at each); ii) maintenance and expansion of existing 
timber -processing facilities at each of four DoF Regional Forestry O ffice (estimated ~100 direct beneficiaries at each);


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
and iii) establishment and/or expansion of ecotourism facilities at one DoPWM Community Conservation Area in each 
of four regions (estimated ~25 direct beneficiaries each).  
 
45. The project’s investments in equipment for establishment of community -managed businesses will be supported by 
the provision of training for participating communities through 21 Multi -Purpose Centres managed by DoCD under 
Activity 2.1. Including those individuals selected for participa tion in the Multi -Purpose Centre training programmes 
(Activity 2.1), it is estimated that the project’s investments in natural resource -based businesses will directly benefit 
~11,550 participating community members (of which at least 50% will be women) as well as their direct dependents . 
 
46. Component 3: Policy support, institutional strengthening and knowledge generation to support large -scale 
implementation of EbA in The Gambia . 
 
47. Output 3: Institutional capacity of the Government of The Gambia strengthened to support large -scale 
implementation of EbA in The Gambia  
Component 3 will  focus on  strengthen ing the institutional framework and supporting base of knowledge  and 
information in The  Gambia to ensure  the sustained implementation of the project’s activities beyond the GCF project 
implementation period.  Activities under Component 3 will include inter alia integrating the EbA approach into: i) 
ongoing national -level policies pertaining to climate change (alignment with NAP process and draft Climate Change 
Policy), the agricultural sector, natural resource management (ANR 2016 –2020), and socio -economic development 
(Vision2020); and ii) village - and district -level land use planning (through CF and CPA manag ement plans). 𨢁The 
project will aim to increase the ‘EbA integration score’ of policies, strategies, plans and processes related to 
decentralized management of natural resources to a score of at least 6 (at least), measured using the tracking tool 
elements  of the Tracking Adaptation and Measuring Development (TAMD 2013) and Pilot Program for Climate 
Resilience (PPCR 2014)40 scorecard indicators for the integration of climate change into planning41 (detailed further in 
Results Framework). Component 3 will also  increase the quality and availability of information to inform policy -makers, 
researchers, investors and the general public on the relative effectiveness and commercial viability of large -scale EbA. 
The information generated over the course of the project  implementation period – including, for example, EbA 
protocols, Market Analysis & Development reports, village -level management plans and annual reports generated by 
DoF extension services under Component 1 – will be publicly available via an Online Inform ation Platform for 
environmental data that will be hosted by the DoWR, in participation with the LDCF -funded “Climate Information and 
Early Warning Systems” project. Long -term scientific research will also be undertaken at the GCF project sites, in 
partici pation with local as well as international research institutions, to assess the ecological and socio -economic 
effects of the project’s interventions. The experiences and information generated by the project will inform the 
development of a long -term EbA up scaling strategy, including identification of opportunities for upscaling, knowledge 
gaps to be addressed, and strategies to increase investments and funding. The EbA upscaling strategy will be 
developed in close participation with representatives of the Gambia’s NAP and INDC development teams as well as 
the technical working group established in Component 1, to align the project’s activities with emerging national 
priorities and strategies on climate change.  
 
48. The activities of this component will build on the baseline activities of LDCF EWS project implemented through 
DoWR, which will generate information and research that will inform the development of the project’s activities (such 
as information relating to local climate change observations and predictions). In addition, t he GCF project will build on, 
                                                             
40 See updated Results -Based Manag ement Framework for Adaptation to Climate Change Under the Least Developed 
Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change Fund. Available at: https://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/GEF -
LDCF.SCCF_.17 -05,%20Updated%20RBM%20Framework%20for%20Adaptation%20to%20Climate%20Change,%202014 -10-
08.pdf .  Accessed on 8 November 2014.  
41 The indicator is based on five criteria expressed as questions: i) d oes the policy/plan/process identify climate change risks 
and appropriate adaptation strategies and measures? ii) is EbA prioritized and specified with budget allocations and targets?  iii) 
does the policy/plan/process assign clear roles and responsibilities for the coordination and implementation of EbA? iv) does  the 
policy/plan/process provide for the continuous monitoring, evaluation, learning and review of EbA? v) is there evidence of th e 
effective implementation of the policy/plan/process? Each question is answered with an assessment and score for the extent to  
which the associated criterion has been met: not at all (= 0), partially (= 1) or to a large extent/ completely (= 2). An ove rall score 
is calculated, with a maximum score of 10 given five criteria.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
and be informed by the long term research and data generated and facilitated by the LDCF project. Activities in 
Component 3 of the proposed GCF project will inc lude the establishment of an information platform to support the 
development of natural resource -based livelihoods  in participation with the LDCF project , and the development of a 
strategic framework to promote long -term national research on EbA. Data gene rated through upgraded climate 
monitoring network established by the LDCF project will feed into the establishment of the GCF project’s strategic 
framework.   
 
49. The following results will be delivered under this component:  
 
50. 3.1 Strategic recommendations/technical support to: a) strengthen the implementation of existing policies for 
participatory management and benefit -sharing of a climate -resilient natural resource base; and b) integrate EbA into 
these policies . On an annual basis, the Knowledge Management  officer will be responsible for compiling summary 
reports to assess the relative impact of the project’s activities and the projected demand for assistance by 
community -based committees. In addition to summarising the current status of re quests by community -based 
committees to be engaged in participatory or co - management of natural resources, the Knowledge Management 
officer is also expected to report current capacity strengths and gaps within the participating government departments 
at a regional level with respect to the existing capacity gaps and logistical challenges to formally integrate EbA into 
land-use planning, including through decentralized management of natural resources in CFs, JMFPs, JMWPs and 
CCSFMAs. Based on these annual a ssessments, the investment needs and shortfalls for promotion of EbA will be 
estimated  annually at a regional level to inform the adaptive management of the project’s activities and targets and 
ultimately to guide the development of the EbA upscaling strat egy as part of the policy recommendations under 
Component 3.  
 
51. 3.2 Information platform to support the development of natural resource -based livelihoods and sectors . In 
association with the LDCF EWS project, the GCF project will develop an online informati on platform to increase the 
availability of information to support replication and upscaling of the projects activities, including by collating 
information generated by the project as well as other initiatives. Information that will be hosted on the online  platform 
will include case studies of successful natural resource -based businesses, including lessons learned on inter alia  
implementation arrangements, return on investment, and best practices. To support the development of a 
strengthened evidence base a nd knowledge on EbA, activities under this result will include undertaking short - and 
long-term research on the socio -economic and environmental impacts of the project’s activities, in association with 
local and international academics and research institu tions42. The project will actively engage with other related 
initiatives, for example through registering for accreditation on the EBAFOSA43 pan-African platform on EbA , to identify 
opportunities for collaboration, technical support and best practice example s. Through engagement with national -level 
technical stakeholders related to climate change, notably the NAP and INDC development teams, the project’s 
activities will be informed by emerging priorities for research.  
 
52. 3.3 Policy recommendations to support la rge-scale implementation of EbA and development of natural resource -
based businesses in The Gambia . As part of the exit strategy of the proposed GCF project, activities under this result 
will focus on developing a national EbA upscaling strategy  and generating policy recommendations to support the 
sustained replication and upscaling of the project’s activities beyond the implementation period. Opportunities for 
mainstreaming EbA into national development planning will include the upcoming revision s to the Agricultural and 
Natural Resource policy, Vision 2020 (the next phase of Vision 2016) and the ongoing articulation of The Gambia’s 
                                                             
42 Opportunities for collaboration with regional and international research institutions will be explored during the project 
implementation phase. Potential International and regional in stitutions to support academic research include the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Western African institutions such as Centre Suivie Ecologique in Senegal, regional adaptation networks 
such as African Adaptation Knowledge Network (AAKNet) and global researc h institutions such as the World AgroForestry 
Centre (ICRAF).  
43 Opportunities for collaboration with regional and international research institutions will be explored during the project 
implementation phase. Potential International and regional institution s to support academic research include the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Western African institutions such as Centre Suivie Ecologique in Senegal, regional adaptation networks 
such as African Adaptation Knowledge Network (AAKNet) and global research institu tions such as the World AgroForestry 
Centre (ICRAF).


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
national and sectoral responses to climate change (including the development of a National Climate Change Strategy 
and Plan). Policy recommendations will be informed by lessons learned over the course of the project implementation,  
and the identification of successful practices and approaches documented through systematic collation of regional 
reports by the Knowledge M anagement officer. Policy recommendations will be communicated to national -level 
stakeholders through  workshops undertaken in participation with the Gambia’s NAP team. The project’s approach to 
generating policy recommendations will be guided by the iterat ive National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and Intended 
Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) processes in the country. The development of an EbA upscaling strategy, 
aligned with the project’s policy recommendations, will include the identification of potenti al public, private and bilateral 
sources of funding to address financing gaps.  Potential models and financial instruments that will be investigated and 
validated during the project implementation period will include: a) increased allocation of municipal an d sectoral 
government budgets such as the NFF to EbA interventions; b) matching grants committed by public -private 
partnerships as well as private entrepreneurs to EbA investments; c) concessional loans to entrepreneurs investing in 
EbA; d) risk -sharing fa cilities (based on models such as USAID’s Development Credit Authority) for EbA investments; 
and e) creating financial value for carbon sequestration based on models such as REDD+ financing44. The project will 
maintain close coordination and cooperation wit h related initiatives and stakeholders with the objective of identifying 
emerging opportunities for technical and financial assistance, such as the World Bank -funded Forest Carbon 
Partnership Facility which supports preparation of REDD+ -readiness activitie s. 
 
53. The development of the Components described above was guided by an overall focus on maximizing the 
cost-effective and sustainable generation of climate change adaptation benefits  from the initial GCF investment, using 
an approach  that can be replicated and upscaled throughout the Gambia.  Several over -arching design principles which 
are fundamental to the  sustainability, replicability and upscaling of the proposed project ’s approach  are described in 
Sections D.1 and D.2 . 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  
54. The Executing Entity (EE) of the proposed GCF project is the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Water , 
Forests and Wildlife  (henceforth ‘ MoE’). This ministry has the core mandate to: a) promote sustainable management of 
the environment and natural resources ; and b) conserve  biodiversity ; and c) lead the national response to climate 
change45. The project’s i nterventions will be coordinated by MoE and implemented at a regional level by 
representatives of Department of Forestry  (DoF) and  the Department of Parks and Wildlife Management  (DoPWM) 
with implementation support from the Department s of Water Resources  and Community Development, respectively, 
and the Ministry of Agriculture.  For further details on the project’s implementation arrangements, see Section C.7 and 
Annex M .  
 
55. The work activities for MoE and the respective line departments are arranged according to three programmes 
(Programme 1: Strat egy, Policy and Management; Programme 2: Sound Environmental Management; and 
Programme 3: Biodiversity Conservation and Management ) through which the activities of DoF and DoPW M are 
budgeted . The distribution and technical capacity of staff within these two Departments, in each region of the country, 
is summarised in Annex L . The implementation of the project’s activities in each of the four project regions will be 
undertaken by the regional representatives of DoF and DoPWM, with the added su pport of sustained 
capacity -building, training and equipment. The availability and level of technical capacity of staff within DoF and 
DoPWM was assessed during the funding proposal preparation phase and scored using a methodology based on the 
GEF AMAT sys tem (detailed in Annex L ). The preliminary baseline score proposed for the capacity of MoE line 
departments to design and implement EbA -related initiatives was estimated to be 2/10 i.e. a score of two out of a 
maximum score of ten.  
 
                                                             
44 At present The Gambia is not participating in REDD+ and has not undertaken any REDD+ -readiness activities. However the 
project’s activities are strongly aligned with the REDD+ approach and could be eli gible for upscaling and replication using 
financial support from carbon credits generated through improved forest management. The project will coordinate closely with 
the ongoing NAP development process and elaboration of the country’s Climate Change Polic y, Strategy and Action Plan to 
identify opportunities to fund the replication of the project’s activities through alignment with emerging priorities related  to climate 
change, natural resource management and socio -economic development.  
45 Available at: http://www.moeccww.gov.gm/ . Accessed on 14 September 2015.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
56. The technical  capacity of these Departmental staff within MoE to implement the proposed activities will be  
dependent on the provision of sustained financial and technical support by the GCF project.  
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
57. The proposed GCF project will develop an enabling environment for the development of climate -resilient, natural 
resource -based businesses to supply local, regional and international markets. In addition to promoting  existing 
businesses – known as Community Forest Enterprises (CFEs) within the Department of Forestry – the project will 
focus on establishing community -based businesses for existing natural resource -based products that are locally 
available and for which there is an established demand46. Natural p roducts for which there is a well -established local 
demand and familiarity include products such as foods (baobab, kabba, netto, Ziziphus  as well as honey); medicines 
(numerous species), building materials ( Rhun  palm as well as semi -valuable and valuable t imbers); and handicrafts 
(particularly furniture constructed from Rhun  palm).  The feasibility and commercial viability of these natural resource -
based businesses have previously been assessed on a limited scale by the ongoing MA&D process, which is a 
stepw ise process for determining the practicality of establishing a CFE in the context of specific communities.  
 
58. The primary challenge to developing the various markets and value chains for the above -mentioned products is 
not related to supply and demand, but rather is related to the minimal value and returns paid to rural households on 
the ‘supply’ side. As a result of the lack of business and financial management capacity, the limited skills for marketing, 
and near total absence of value addition, the returns  paid to communities pa rticipating in natural resource -based 
businesses are so small as to undermine the incentives for supply -side stakeholders to participate in or invest in 
commercial businesses. Furthermore, there is considerable unexploited potential to increase the income generated 
from natural resource -based products through investments in value addition, processing, packaging and collective 
marketing.  Measures such as collective/communal marketing, improved packaging and addition of value to product s 
(such as drying or juice manufacture) have been identified as potential measures to increase the financial returns paid 
to rural stakeholders on the ‘supply’ side.   
 
59. In response to the above -mentioned constraints that prevent the realization of the comme rcial potential of various 
natural resource -based products in The Gambia, the project will take a phased approach to the development of 
markets and value chains for the various natural resource -based products. The initial part of the project will prioritiz e 
the development of value chains for locally marketed products, while the latter part of the project will identify 
opportunities and promote investment in products which can be exported to international markets. Concurrent with the 
establishment of busine sses based on existing natural resources, the project will increase the supply of goods from a 
climate -resilient natural resource base through large -scale investments in EbA using climate -resilient plant species 
that generate useful or valuable products. T hese EbA interventions will increase the supply of valuable forest products 
for subsistence consumption as well as for sale on local and international markets.  
 
60. Based on the findings of past MA&D reports, as well as information gathered during the project development 
phase (including through in -country observations), a number of natural resource -based products and business types 
were identified that could be established based on the project’s EbA interventions. The technical feasibility and 
commercial viabi lity of each of these products and business types was assessed, including the following:  
a) sustainable collection of fuelwood/firewood;  
b) sustainable harvest of medium - and high -value logs/timber for construction; e.g. Gmelina arborea, Khaya 
senegalensis, Pter ocarpus erinaceus, Danielia oliveri ; In particular, planting tropical hardwood trees to produce 
timber for local and export markets is an investment that is likely to provide attractive financial returns in the long -
term47,48.  
c) bee-keeping for honey and wax production;  
d) sustainable harvest of Rhun palm ( Borassus aethiopium ) splits for sale as a construction material or for production 
                                                             
46 Literature reviews and in country observations clearly demonstrated the importance of natural resource based products to the 
livelihoods of rural households, both for home consumption as well as for sale.  
47Varmola, M.I. & Carle, J.B. 2002. The importance of hardwood plantations in the tropics and subtropics. International Forestry 
Review 4, 1–20. Available at: http://www.fao.org/forestry/5016 -0a8cfacc097046086cd1147b1fa04924a.pdf.  
48 Wenbin, H. &  Xiufang, S. 2013. Tropical hardwood flows in China: case studies of rosewood and okoumé. Forest Trends, 
Washington D.C.


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
of handicrafts and furniture;  and 
e) sustainable harvesting, processing (e.g. drying, juicing and pu lp production) and marketing of wild fruit products 
such as baobab, netto (African locust bean, Parkia biglobosa ), kaba and Ziziphus.  
Full assessments of the  technical and commercial viability of the above -mentioned products and business types are 
presented  in the supporting Feasibility Assessments in Annex B . 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
61. The proposed GCF project will adhere  to Environmental Impact Assessment ( EIA) regulations  as defined by 
Gambian law . The project’s activities will only result in positive  environmental or social effects and are thus  not 
expected  to require  an EIA or Environmental Impact Summary (EIS) . The project has been classed as ‘low risk’ 
category based on an analysis using UNEP’s E nvironmental, Social and Economic Review Note (ESERN)  tool (see 
Section G and ESERN review template in Annex E ). 
 
62. With respect to the taxation of the requested project grant, Section 7 of the Convention on the Privileges and 
Immunities of the United Nations provides inter alia  that the United Nations, including its subsidiary organs, is exempt 
from all direct taxes, e xcept charges for utilities services, and is exempt from customs duties and charges of a similar 
nature in respect of articles imported or exported for its official use. For the specific activities promoted by the project,  
neither permits nor licenses are required but will be subject to the consensus and approval of participating 
communities. For goods and services procured directly by GoG, the standard national taxation rate of 15% is applied.  
 
63. With respect to the taxation of revenue generated by the proj ect’s activities, Gambian law provides for the taxation 
of revenue from forest areas at the standard national rate of 15%. The tax revenues collected from forest areas 
(including Community Conservation Areas, Forest Parks and Forest Reserves) are directed to the National Forest 
Fund which provides ~53% of the operating budget of the Department of Forestry. Consequently the project will 
emphasise the efficient and transparent collection of forest revenues as a measure to  increase the availability of public 
finance for replication of the project’s approach , including as part of the EbA upscaling strategy developed under 
Component 3.   
C.7 Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
64. The GCF -financed project will be implemented over a six -year period from 2017  to 2022. The project will be 
executed by the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Water , Forest  and Wildlife ( MoE) in coordination with 
UNEP, the GCF Accredited Entity (AE). As the national Executing Entity (EE), MoE will coordinate the implementation 
of the project primarily through the Departments of Forestry (DoF) and Parks and Wildlife Management ( DoPWM ) and 
will be accountable to UNEP (as AE) for project execution and for the effective and efficient use of resources . UNEP’s 
operating policies and p rocedures will follow the UNEP programme manual including those related to financial 
management and procurement (please refer to Section F.4 for more details).  As the AE, UNEP will be responsible for  
overseeing the implementation  and evaluation  of the proj ect in coordination with the Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
and the Project Management Unit (PMU ), including inter alia M&E reports, a Mid -term Review and a Terminal 
Evaluation . A UNEP Programme Officer  (PO) will be responsible for project supervision to  ensure consistency with 
GCF and UNEP policies and procedures.  The PO will formally participate in the following: a) Annual Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) meetings; b) the mid -term and final evaluations; c) the clearance of periodic Progress Reports and 
Project Implementation Reviews; and d) the technical review of project deliverables . UNEP will establish a Project 
Cooperation Agreement with the Executing Entity (Government of The Gambia – Ministry of Envi ronment, Climate 
Change, Water, Forests and Wildlife)  to establish clear roles and responsibilities for both parties for the delivery of the 
proposed activities, the schedule and conditions for installments, the determination of the prevailing fiduciary 
standards and terms and conditions for arbitrations and termination of contract. The Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Affairs (MoFEA) is the Designated National Authority (NDA). Its role – exercised through the participation on the 
Project Steering Committee  – is to provide oversight to submission of requests for GCF support on behalf of the 
Government of Gambia, and to ensure that GCF project activities are well -coordinated and in alignment with national 
priorities.  
 
65. The PSC will comprise representatives of the EE, the AE and the NDA, in addition to representatives of inter alia: 
the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA); Ministry of Local Governance and Lands (MoLGL) through the DoCD; the GCCI and 
the SDF. The chair of the PSC will be the Secretary of the MoE.  The P SC will primarily serve to provide project 
oversight and advisory support, including: a) overseeing project implementation; and b) reviewing annual workplans 
and project reports, including approval of any changes to the project’s targets, activities or tim elines. The PSC will


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
meet at least twice a year – with ad hoc  meetings held as and when necessary – to discuss the project's main 
performance indicators and provide strategic guidance. Any changes made by the PSC to the project’s results 
framework or timel ine will be communicated to the PMU by the PC.  The PMU will consist of a national Project 
Coordinator (PC), an international Project Manager (PM), a national Deputy Project Manager (DPM), a Procurement 
Officer (PO) and an Administration and Finance Officer  (AFO). The PMU will coordinate activities between the 
project’s AE, EE and various partners to oversee the implementation of the project’s activities.  
 
The project implementation arrangements are summarised in the diagram below.  
 
 
 
66. The PC will be a seni or representative of MoE seconded to the project on a part -time basis who will: a) lead and 
direct the PMU; b) oversee the daily responsibilities of the PM and DPM; c) provide administrative and technical 
expertise; and c) serve as the focal point for inte ractions between the project stakeholders and partner organizations 
(e.g. government departments, NGOs, civil society groups). The PM and DPM will be full -time employees of the 
project and will be responsible for the day -to-day implementation and managemen t of the project. The PM will: a) 
report to the PC; b) manage the project in line with the budget, work plans, and in accordance with GCF and UNEP 
guidelines; c) be responsible for in -country financial management and disbursements, with accountability to G oG and 
UNEP; and d) work closely with national and local authorities, as well as NGOs, to manage the project effectively at a 
local level. To achieve this, the activities of the PM will be fully supported by the national DPM, whose chief 
responsibilities w ill include inter alia : a) provide on -the-ground information for UNEP progress reports; b) engage with 
project stakeholders; c) arrange the PSC, PMU and other meetings; d) provide technical support to the project, 
including measures to address challenges t o project implementation; e) participate in training activities, report -writing 
and facilitation of expert activities that are relevant to the areas of expertise of the Project Management team. The PM 
and DPM will serve as a liaison among the members of th e PMU and PSC, the technical experts and the government 
staff involved in project activities. To assist with day -to-day administration tasks, the PMU will include two full -time 
officers, an Administration and Finance Officer (AFO) and a Procurement Officer  (PO), to provide the administrative, 
Accredited Entity: UNEPFunding source: GCF
Ongoing national and 
bilateral initiativesMoECCWFW (chair), MoFEA (NDA), DoF, 
DoPWM , MoA, SDF, GCCI, DoCD , NEAUNEP 
Programme 
OfficerPSCExecuting Agency : MoECCWFW
PMU International Chief 
Technical Advisor
Baseline and 
Evaluation ExpertProject Coordinator International Project 
Manager and Deputy 
Project Manager
Administration and 
Finance Officer
Technical working groups: Research 
fellows; national & international consultantsInternational and 
National consultantsFour Regional 
Coordinators
Participating Communities: community -based 
organisations such as Forest Management 
Committees, Protected Area Management 
Committees, Village Development CommitteesDoF and DoPWM
field staffProcurement Officer


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 66 
 
 
 C 
logistical and financial support/expertise to the PMU and under the direct supervision of the PM and DPM. The 
responsibilities of the AFO and PO will focus on ensuring that all financial and administrative issues, incl uding 
procurement of non -expendable equipment and infrastructure, are carried out according to UNEP standard 
procedures. The AFO will be responsible for administering the financial transactions for project outputs and activities to 
be delivered according t o the established work plan, while the primary responsibility of the PO will be to oversee 
transparent, timeous and cost -effective procurement of consultants, service providers and equipment for the project. 
The AFO and PO will assist the PC and the UNEP P rogramme Officer in all project reporting requirements. At a 
sub-national level, the project will be represented by four Regional Coordinators (RCs) who will be responsible for 
coordinating the implementation of the project’s EbA interventions in each of t he four targeted regions. The RCs will 
act as focal points between the PMU in Banjul and the supporting DoF and DoPWM extension staff assigned to the 
CFs and CPAs participating in the project.  
 
67. A Baseline and Evaluation Expert will be hired full-time to coordinate the M&E process of the project. The duties of 
the Baseline and Evaluation expert will include: a) establishing a performance monitoring framework to track the 
project’s progress towards the objective and targets defined in the project d ocument by; b) measuring the indicators to 
evaluate the progress of the project in meeting the targets; c) reporting to the PMU and PSC on the performance of the 
project towards targets; and d) supporting the PM  and DPM  in meeting the project objective. The first task of the 
Baseline and Evaluation Expert will be to undertake a baseline assessment at the project inception, to validate and 
update the targets in the project’s results framework. As part of his/her responsibilities, the Baseline and Evaluation 
expert will oversee and monitor the application of gender disaggregated indicators.  A team of consultants with skills on 
inter alia  ecosystems, adaptation, economics, private sector business development will also be put in place to support 
the implementati on of this project. T echnical oversight of the project’s delivery of climate change adaptation objectives 
will be provided by an International Technical Advisor (CTA). The  CTA will be employed as a part -time consultant to 
provide technical guidance on EbA  and ensure that project activities result in building climate resilience from local 
village level to national government level.  The CTA will coordinate and supervise the work of specialist technical 
consultants contributing to specific deliverables within each Component, including  in particular: a ) a Participatory 
Forestry Expert and an Adaptation and Restoration E xpert, under Component 1; and b ) a Business Development 
Expert and a Finance and Economics Expert under Component 2. In addition, the CTA will be  responsible for 
providing ongoing guidance and training to a Technical Working Group of national experts who will participate in the 
development of the EbA protocols. For further details on implementation arrangements see the diagram in Annex M . 
For a pro posed timeline of major milestones, please see the detailed activity -based workplan in Annex I. 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please see Annex I for the Timetable of the project.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 66 
 
 
 D 
 
D.1. Rationale  for GCF Involvement    
This proposed GCF project is fully aligned with the GCF’s focus of promoting a paradigm shift in developing countries. 
The scope and scale of the EbA interventions are, for example, without precedent in The Gambia  as previous 
ecosystem restoration initiatives in The Gambia have been conducted in an ad hoc manner over relatively small areas 
(a maximum of hundreds of hectares). The proposed GCF project will also make tangible c ontributions towards all six 
GCF Investment Criteria (described in Section E). In terms of project beneficiaries: it is estimated that 1 1,550 
participants (of which at least half will be women) will benefit directly from the adoption of diversified, climat e resilient 
livelihood options. In addition approximately ~ 46,200 individuals will benefit indirectly from the proposed EbA 
interventions , conservatively assuming a household size of four people , of which at least half of participating 
beneficiaries will b e women.   
 
68. The cumulative value of the GCF project’s investments will be the delivery of climate -resilient livelihood benefits 
through large -scale implementation of EbA that will supplement the income and increase the food security of 
climate -vulnerable rural households in The Gambia. By delivering a tangible economic benefit to participants (of which 
at least 50% should be women) that adopt climate -resilient land management practices, the project will stimulate 
economic activity in Gambia’s rural areas e ven under conditions of climate change. The project will c atalyze increased 
investments in a climate -resilient natural resource base and facilitate the development of a green Gambian economy. 
Existing policies and ongoing government initiatives within The Gambia are supportive of the objectives of 
socio -economic and rural development, climate change adaptation, and improved management of natural resources. 
However, these policies and initiatives are limited in scope and impact as a result of the limited ava ilability of financial 
resources and technical capacity to support their implementation. At present, the GoG does not have the financial 
resources or technical capacity to fully address the multiple socio -economic and environmental impacts of climate 
chang e on vulnerable sectors such as agriculture and natural resources. For example, as described in Section B.1 and 
Section C.2, The Gambia currently does not have the technical capacity, human resources or adequate funding to 
implement existing national objec tives related to climate change adaptation, natural resource management and 
socio -economic development. In particular, the government’s objectives of increasing the size of the country’s 
community -managed areas to at least 200,000 hectares by 2020 are unli kely to be achieved without significant 
technical and financial support. Furthermore, there is inadequate technical capacity, knowledge and expertise in the 
country – including within staff of MoE and other government agencies, as well within rural communi ties – to design, 
implement and manage EbA interventions. As described in Section C.2, analysis of the Fifth IPCC Assessment Report 
indicates that the economic impacts of climate change could result in an annual reduction of gross national GP of at 
least ~ USD 12.8 million. Consequently, in the absence of significant financial and technical support, the predicted 
effects of climate change  are likely to exacerbate the existing negative cycle of rural poverty, food insecurity and 
ecosystem degradation in the G ambia.  
 
69. The design of the proposed GCF project includes multiple considerations to increase the cost -effectiveness, 
efficiency and sustainability of the requested GCF grant to address the socio -economic, environmental and climate 
change -related challenges  and overcome the barriers to implementing large -scale EbA as described in Section C.  
 
70. Building on a well -established baseline of past and ongoing initiatives.  As described in Sections C.2 and C.3, the 
proposed GCF project will be supported by the investm ents of multiple relevant past and ongoing initiatives. These 
include initiatives focused on climate change adaptation and mitigation (for example, past and ongoing GEF -financed 
projects implemented by UNEP and UNDP) as well as national initiatives such as  the ongoing implementation of the 
MA&D process through the DoF. For instance, the UNEP -UNDP LDCF project ‘Strengthening climate services and 
Early Warning Systems in The Gambia for climate resilient development and adaptation to climate change’ will 
stren gthen the climate monitoring capabilities, early warning systems, and available information for responding to 
climate shocks and planning adaptation to climate change in The Gambia. It will achieve this through: a) improving 
national capabilities to genera te and use climate information in the planning for and management of climate induced 
risks; b) developing core skills and competencies; c) acquiring relevant technologies; d) improving early warning 
dissemination and advisory communications; and e) promoti ng uptake of the climate information at the local level.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 66 
 
 
 D 
                                                             
49 FAO. 2005. Empowering communities through forestry: community -based enterprise development. FAO, Rome. Available at  : 
ftp://ftp.fao.o rg/docrep/fao/008/j6209e/j6209e00.pdf  
50 Gambian Forest Management Concept 2001. Available at  : http://wrm.org.uy/oldsite/countries/Gambia/GambiaGFMC.pdf.  71. In addition to the above -mentioned baseline initiatives, the GCF project is designed to be integrated into the 
baseline activities of the MoE, including Ministerial Work Programmes 1, 2 and 3 (descr ibed in Section C.4). In 
particular, the project will be implemented by DoF and DoPWM through MoE’s existing mechanisms for providing 
regional extension services and undertaking natural resource management activities. The project’s approach to 
engaging com munities in the design and implementation of the project’s EbA activities, and establishment of 
associated natural resource -based businesses, will be based on the existing MA&D approach practiced by the 
Participatory Forest Management Unit (PFMU) in DoF. T he baseline co -financing leveraged by the GCF project 
consequently includes both the annual operating budget of MoE as well as the National Forest Fund (NFF), which is 
financed by forest user revenues and funds the activities of the PFMU.  As described in S ections C.2 and C.3, the 
environmental sustainability of the project’s investments in EbA will be supported by the existing mechanisms for 
community management of natural resources in CF and CPA areas, which includes: i) establishment of sustainable 
manage ment plans at the village level, based on periodic inventories of resources, updated on an annual basis; ii) 
establishment of local by -laws and conflict resolution mechanisms to support enforcement of management plans; and 
iii) emphasizing the importance o f secure tenure and clear rights of access to natural resources for communities, as an 
incentive for sustainable long -term management of natural resources (in line with experience of The Gambia and other 
developing countries in decentralized natural resour ce management).  
 
72. The total value of investments contributed by these baseline initiatives that this project will build on is estimated to 
be ~USD 27,851,000, including investments made before the proposed GCF project’s implementation period. The 
total value of co -financing in vestment s that will be made during the proposed project implementation period (2016 – 
2021) is estimated to be USD 4,974,611. A summary table which describes the linkages between the GCF project and 
these baseline initiatives  including a table outlining th e relevance of the co -finance from MoE CCFWW  to distinct 
project components and activities  is attached to this document as Annex G. A letter of co -financing from  the 
MOECC FWW is provided in Annex C. The project’s investments in building technical capacity a nd expertise on EbA in 
particular and climate change in general will be additional and complementary to the ongoing investments in capacity, 
expertise and experience generated by the abovementioned baseline projects, thereby responding to Barrier a) 
identi fied in Section C.2 (“Gambian institutions in both government and the private sector have insufficient technical 
capacity to implement EbA interventions as well as implement the existing policies promoting community -based 
management of natural resources”).   
 
73. Integration of project activities into existing short - and long -term national priorities and plans.  The ongoing process 
of decentralisation of natural resource management (including inter alia  community forests, forest reserves and 
conservation areas) t o community -based committees will provide a particularly important entry point for integrating 
EbA into land -use planning during and beyond the project implementation period. This will take place through the 
existing processes for establishment of 5 - and 1 0-year management plans for community co -managed areas. Of great 
relevance for the project is the precedent within The Gambia for promoting decentralized community -based 
management of forests. At present , and in -line with the objectives of the Forestry sub -sector policy (see section C1 
and Annex Q.2), MoE is committed to transferring management rights of at least 200,000 hectares of forests to 
decentralised Community Forest Committees by 202049,50, thereby providing a potential mechanism to integrate EbA 
into mid- and long -term planning at a landscape scale.  
 
74. The project will prioritise the inclusion of  at least 125  sites at which local communities have been granted formal 
management rights to Community Forests, Community Protected Areas and Joint Management F orest Parks, where 
ongoing government activities to decentralize natural resource management provide an ideal entry point to integrate 
EbA into land use planning at the landscape scale. As a result of recent initiatives within MoE, a total of 78 new CF 
areas have been proclaimed in 2015 and will be a major focus of the DoF’s planned activities in 2016, including 
development of CF management plans, establishment of community by -laws, providing training and capacity -building 
to members of the Forest Managemen t and Village Development Committees at each CF. The GCF project will


---
*Page 34*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 66 
 
 
 D 
                                                             
51 The Market Analysis & Development (MA&D) process is a tool that was developed by FAO to assist commu nities in planning 
small -scale forest -based enterprises. The MA&D is carried out in three consecutive stages: i) assessment of existing situation 
(i.e. evaluation of forest resources and commercial capabilities); ii) identification of products, markets and  means of marketing; 
and iii) enterprise planning. Through this process, four pillars of sustainability are assessed: i) market sustainability; ii) resource 
sustainability; iii) social/institutional sustainability; and iv) technical sustainability.  This to ol has been implemented in The 
Gambia since 2005.  
52 Access Pilot Program for Climate Resilience market studies through the following links: i) Mozambique - http://www -
cif.climatei nvestmentfunds.org/country/mozambique ; ii) Niger - http://www -cif.climateinvestmentfunds.org/country/niger ; Zambia 
- http://www -cif.climateinvestmentfunds.org/country/zambia   
53 Rao et al. 2013. An economic analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation and engineering options for climate change adaptation 
in Lami Town, Republic of the Fiji Islands. A technical report by the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Program me. 
Apia, Samoa. .Available at: http://ian.umces.edu/pdfs/ian_report_392.pdf  
54 Mills AJ, Turpie J, Cowling RM, Marais C, Kerley GIH, Lechmere -Oertel RG, Sigwela AM, Powell M. 2007. Assessing costs, 
benef its and feasibility of subtropical thicket restoration in the Eastern Cape, South Africa. Pages 179 -187 In: Aronson J, Milton 
SJ, Blignaut J (eds) Restoring natural capital. Science, business and practice. Island Press, Washington D.C.  
55 Blignaut et al. 20 14. Restoration of natural capital: a key strategy on the path to sustainability. Ecological Engineering . Doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2013.09.003.  consequently prioritize the latter CF areas for inclusion in the project’s activities, to capitalize on the current 
momentum within the DoF’s activities related to participatory forest m anagement. Maps of all confirmed forest 
reserves – including the 78 which have recently been transferred to community management – and lists of adjacent 
communities, are presented in Annex H. In addition, the project will prioritise the inclusion of at lea st eight (8) of the 13 
Community Protected Areas within DoPWM’s mandate, while it is anticipated that additional CPAs will be identified 
during the project implementation period.  The project’s approach to integration of EbA into long -term planning in 
commu nity co -managed areas addresses the challenge of ensuring security of land tenure and rights of access to 
natural resources, thereby responding to barrier d) identified in Section C.2, namely “Rural Gambian smallholders are 
unwilling to invest in EbA inter ventions and natural resource -based businesses in the absence of security of land 
tenure and rights to access the natural resources”.  
 
75. Development of credible financial models and strengthened evidence base on EbA : A cross -cutting focus of the 
GCF project that informs all of three Components will be the building of an evidence base of credible data to show the 
return on investment for large scale EbA interventions.  The project’s EbA interventions will be specifically tailored to 
increase existing income str eams for local communities and government revenue, and to create opportunities for the 
establishment of new natural resource -based businesses. Importantly, the return on investment on EbA interventions 
will be rigorously analysed for each proposed project site (at the village level) using the MA&D process51 currently 
applied by the GoG, which includes  analyses of: a) market sustainability; b) resource sustainability; c) 
social/institutional sustainability; and d) technical sustainability . This will include analysing the long -term returns and 
commercial viability of the natural resource -based businesses established by the project at the village level through 
rigorous scientific monitoring and periodic evaluation over the course of the project implementation p eriod.  
Precedents for such analyses include: market studies by the IFC within the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience52, 
cost-benefit analyses of EbA in Lami Town, Fiji project53, and IRR calculations for restoration of degraded subtropical 
thicket54, grass lands, wetlands, shrubland and forests55. The evidence base that emerges from these analyses will be 
used to leverage additional funds from public budget allocations such as the NFF as well as from private sector 
investors. It will also be used to develop b ankable business plans for large -scale EbA within The Gambia. The 
establishment of a strengthened evidence base for the effectiveness of EbA as an adaptation strategy responds to two 
barriers identified in Section C.2, namely “b) Pr ivate sector investors, credit unions and financial institutions have an 
insufficient evidence base on the benefits of EbA to assess the commercial viability of natural resource -based 
businesses that could emerge from investments in EbA” and “c) Limited understanding of the monet ary and economic


---
*Page 35*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 66 
 
 
 D 
                                                             
56 At present The Gambia is not participating in REDD+ and has not undertaken any REDD+ -readiness  activities. However the 
project’s activities are strongly aligned with the REDD+ approach and could be eligible for upscaling and replication using 
financial support from carbon credits generated through improved forest management. The project will coordi nate closely with 
the ongoing NAP development process and elaboration of the country’s Climate Change Policy, Strategy and Action Plan to 
identify opportunities to fund the replication of the project’s activities through alignment with emerging priorities related to climate 
change, natural resource management and socio -economic development. value of functional ecosystems and natural resources, and in consequence there are insufficient funds allocated to 
natural resources in both government budgets and the private sector to enable large -scale investments in EbA across 
The Gamb ia”. 
 
76. At a regional and international scale, the project’s investments in the development of an evidence base for EbA will 
generate data, information and knowledge that will benefit other countries and related initiatives. By coordinating and 
maintaining close c ollaborative relationships with stakeholders from related networks (e.g. regional networks related to 
adaptation such as AAKNet as well as thematic platforms focused on EbA such as the EBAFOSA platform), the best 
practices and lessons learned by the GCF pr oject will be communicated to other LDCs. The innovative approaches 
proposed by the GCF project will add to the existing information generated by case studies on The Gambia reputation 
as a global good practice example for participatory management of natura l resources.  
 
77. Leveraging of domestic and international funds for upscaling of EbA : Several complementary financial instruments 
will be used to promote the upscaling of the project’s approach to EbA across The Gambia. These will be based on 
approaches demo nstrated by other past and ongoing initiatives (including national, regional and international 
examples). Potential models and financial instruments that will be investigated and validated during the project 
implementation period will include: a) an increa sed allocation of municipal and sectoral government budgets such as 
the NFF to EbA interventions; b) matching grants committed by public -private partnerships as well as private 
entrepreneurs to EbA investments; c) concessional loans to entrepreneurs invest ing in EbA; d) micro -finance facilities 
for EbA investments; e) risk -sharing facilities provided to micro -finance institutions and credit unions (based on models 
such as USAID’s Development Credit Authority) for EbA investments; and f) creating financial v alue for carbon 
sequestration based on models such as REDD+ financing56. The project will maintain close coordination and 
cooperation with related initiatives and stakeholders with the objective of identifying emerging opportunities for 
technical and financ ial assistance, such as the World Bank -funded Forest Carbon Partnership Facility which supports 
preparation of REDD+ -readiness activities. The identification and development of appropriate financing mechanisms 
will be strongly dependent on accurate assessm ents of the rate of return of investments. The project will consequently 
focus on providing representatives of participating rural communities with technical support on business record -
keeping, profit and loss statements, cash flow analyses, market researc h, development of contracts and company 
structuring.  
 
78. In terms of allocation of government budget, the National Forest Fund will be an important source of public finance 
to sustain, replicate and upscale the project’s investments in EbA therefore demonstra ting the catalytic effect of the 
GCF funding to initiate and demonstrate such interventions that can be later replicated through the NFF. The project’s 
EbA interventions will directly increase the generation of revenue for the NFF by: a) promoting the esta blishment of 
community -managed natural resource -based businesses in community co -management forest and conservation areas 
(of which 15% of all revenue is paid to the NFF); b) upscaling the production and sale of commercially valuable tree 
species at Region al Forestry Office (RFO) nurseries; and c) re -establishing revenue -generating activities from state -
managed Forest Parks such as issuance of licenses for firewood collection by accredited collectors  
 
79. In addition to promoting increased allocation of public budget to upscaling of EbA, the development of viable 
natural resource -based businesses  through GCF investment  will provide a strengthened evidence base for promoting 
national and international private sector investments in EbA. The GCCI will play a leadin g role in promoting such 
investments via regional trade fairs and investment forums  to facilitate demonstration of successes and lessons 
learned , and in providing guidance  to emerging natural resource -based businesses.  This facilitating role that the GCCI 
will play between the businesses promoted by the project and potential investors from the domestic and international


---
*Page 36*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 66 
 
 
 D 
private sector will be supported by the advisory role played by the Social Development Fund (SDF), whi ch has a 
strong track record and extensive experience in building the capacity of communities to participate in the formal 
economy (including increasing access of rural smallholders and emerging businesses to access financial services).  
 
80. As described in Se ctions E and F, the proposed GCF project investment of USD 20.5 million is expected to 
generate tangible economic benefits totalling at least USD 87 million over a 20 -year project lifetime, indicating a cost -
effective return on investment of at least 4:1  for this GCF investment . 
D.2. Exit Strategy     
81. The project’s exiting and upscaling strategy is based on the integration of the EbA approach  and natural 
resource -based businesses into existing government plans and activities beyond the project implementation period 
through integration of the EbA approach into ongoing planning at the local, regional and national levels.  At a local 
level, the implementation and management arrangement s of village -level plans, including maintenance of EbA sites, 
will be updated annually as part of ongoing scheduled extension services beyond the project implementation period.  
The upscaling potential of the project’s activities is the implementation of Eb A over hundreds of thousands of hectares. 
The project will capitalize on the existing initiatives within MoE to decentralize the management of at least 200,000 
hectares of land to community -based organizations by 2020.  Considering that the proposed GCF pro ject will be 
implemented across an area of at least 10,000 ha, there is the potential to upscale the project by a factor of at least 20 
(as described in Section E.2).  
 
82. By providing capacity -building to facilitate this process, and by integrating the conce pt of EbA into decentralized 
land use planning at the village level, the most successful EbA activities identified by the project will be integrated into 
the existing government services for public outreach and extension, thereby ensuring that the project’ s activities will be 
replicated beyond the project implementation period. Furthermore, by establishing an evidence base for the 
effectiveness of EbA and the commercial viability of natural resource -based investments, the project will promote a 
paradigm shi ft across Gambian society such that decision -makers in government and the private sector invest in the 
natural resource base to address the challenges of climate change, rural poverty and ecosystem degradation.  
 
83. Several features of t he proposed GCF projec t approach are focused on promoting the sustained replication and 
upscaling of the project’s activities beyond the GCF project implementation as part of the GCF project’s exit strategy, 
including the measures described below:  
 Securing an enabling environme nt and building capacity  for rural households to participate in sustainable natural 
resource management . As described in Sections C.2 and C.3, the experience of The Gambia and other 
developing countries has demonstrated the importance of secure land tenure  and rights of access (for example, 
through establishment of CF and CPA areas) as an incentive for rural communities to participate in the sustainable 
management of natural resources. This approach is strongly aligned with existing national policy prioriti es which 
promote decentralized community -based management of forest reserves and community conservation areas and 
aim to increase the total area of Gambian forests under community management by at least 200,000 hectares by 
2020.  
 Establishment of an evidenc e base for EbA and sustainable natural resource management as an effective 
approach to climate change adaptation and development of rural livelihoods.  As described in Section C.2, the 
barriers addressed by the proposed project include the limited awareness  of the cost -effectiveness and potential 
benefits generated by the EbA approach. The project’s systematic approach to monitoring and evaluation of the 
impacts of project activities will generate information on the socio -economic and environmental benefits of the EbA 
approach that will guide the development of the project’s policy recommendations and EbA upscaling strategy. 
This will include the establishment of a framework for long -term research on EbA (under Component 3) and a 
publicly -available online inf ormation portal to increase the local availability of information on EbA. In addition to 
assessing and quantifying the climate change adaptation benefits of the EbA approach, Component 2 of the 
project will include a focus on demonstrating and rigorously q uantifying the commercial viability of natural 
resource -based businesses to promote further investment by government and the private sector beyond the 
project implementation period. The project will use forums such as regional trade fairs, facilitated by t he GCCI, to 
promote increased private sector investment in the market chains for  natural resource -based products and 
businesses developed by the project.  The GCF project will be strengthening the private sector in The Gambia to


---
*Page 37*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 66 
 
 
 D 
 the extent that Gambian comp anies and entrepreneurs will – during the course of the GCF project – be developing 
bankable business plans for natural resource -based businesses that will potentially be eligible for financing from 
local banks and microfinance institutions.  
 Increased gene ration and collection of tax revenue to support increased public investment in EbA and sustainable 
natural resource management. The project’s activities have been designed to address the identified barriers 
related to limited availability of public funds b y increasing the generation of revenue for the National Forest Fund 
(NFF). The NFF, which funds the operating expenses of the DoF’s participatory forest management programme 
and is therefore fundamental to the project’s upscaling and exit strategy, is supp orted by forest user fees paid by 
Community Forest Enterprises (set at 15% of the Enterprise’s gross revenue). It is estimated that the project’s 
activities will increase the generation of revenue for the NFF by USD~11 million over a 20 -year investment 
lifetime, thereby supporting sustained replication of the project’s activities.   
 Developing and implementing a national EbA strategy . The GCF project will develop an EbA upscaling strategy – 
to be implemented across the country – supported by the generation o f adaptation benefits including the 
establishment of natural resource -based businesses. The EbA upscaling strategy will be informed by the data, 
experience and knowledge products generated by the GCF project. Importantly, this strategy will be strongly 
aligned with and integrated into the ongoing NAP process, INDC (Intended National Determined Contributions) 
implementation process as well as existing national policies and priorities related to climate change and natural 
resource management.  The project will  host two workshops in participation with the INDC and NAP development 
teams to: i) identify potential synergies and harmonies between the proposed national EbA strategy and related 
national policies and commitments on cl imate change such as the INDC;  ii) propose concrete policy 
recommendations for the integration of EbA into emerging national policies and priorities ; and iii) integrate the 
activities and targets of the GCF project into The Gambia’s updated INDC. This commitment will result in the 
maintenan ce and/or growth of the businesses developed by the GCF project after the closure of the project . The 
inclusion of members of the national climate change coordination committee on the project’s steering committee 
will ensure that the project’s EbA upscalin g strategy is well -aligned with other ongoing initiatives and is effectively 
integrated into The Gambia’s national response to climate change. An important element of the national EbA 
strategy will be the identification of additional sources of financing t o support the implementation of a national EbA 
strategy, including public, private and bilateral sources.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
                                                             
57 Business types assessed in Annex B include various scenarios for community -managed businesses based on the following: i) 
firewood collection; ii) Rhun palm harvest and  handicraft manufacture; iii) beekeeping for production of honey and wax; iv) 
sustainable harvest of medium - and high -value timber; and v) value -adding/processing of wild -collected fruit products.  E.1. Expected Performance Against Investment Criteria  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
84. The targeted beneficiaries of the proposed GCF project are rural Gambian households within and adjacent to 
community -managed Forest Reserves and Conservation Areas. The primary adaptation impacts of the project will 
be to reduce the socio -economic impacts of increasing variability of rainfall on rural households who are reliant on 
livelihoods such as farming, fishing and livestock production . In particular, the project’s EbA interventions will 
increase the generation of goods and services from degraded natu ral ecosystems – including forests, savannas and 
woodlands in Community Forests, Forest Parks, Community Controlled State Forest Management Areas, Protected 
Areas and Wildlife Parks – and agricultural landscapes surrounding villages in The Gambia. The prim ary adaptation 
benefits of the project will be derived from an increased availability of ecosystem goods and services – under the 
current and future scenarios of climate change – delivered through targeted restoration of degraded ecosystems.  
 
85. The selectio n of appropriate EbA interventions – and selection of plant species to be used – will focus on  plant 
species which generate useful or commercially valuable products that can be marketed by community -managed 
businesses. Potential EbA approaches and natural resource products that will be promoted by the project are 
described in detail in the annexes to the proposal, particularly the Feasibility Assessment in Annex B57. The goods 
generated from the natural resource base established by the project will be harves ted, packaged and marketed for 
sale by community -based businesses, thereby diversifying and increasing the income of participating households. 
Furthermore, goods generated by the project – such as fruits, firewood and building materials – will also be dire ctly 
consumed by households, thereby improving household nutrition and food security while reducing household 
expenditure of cash . 
 
86. The direct adaptation benefits of the project will include increased availability of ecosystems goods for 
household consumpt ion, as well as the increased generation of cash income through the development of 
businesses based on natural resources. These benefits will increase the resilience of rural Gambian households to 
the negative effects of climate change, particularly with r espect to the effects of rainfall variability and drought on 
agricultural households. The direct beneficiaries of the project’s activities related to establishment of natural 
resource -based businesses will  be communities from at least 125 community -managed  CFs and CPAs.  To calculate 
the likely total investment required for the establishment of community -managed, natural resource -based 
businesses , the feasibility assessment (Annex B) estimated the costs for establishment of multiple natural 
resource -based businesses . At least four businesses were identified which could be established with an investment 
of USD 10,000 –16,000 over a five -year period which will be prioritized for establishment in participation with at least 
125 beneficiary communities. As detai led in the table below, the  project’s proposed investment of USD  3,048,550 
will support the establishment of at least two community -managed forest enterprises (CFEs) by at least 125 
communities. Assuming that the number of beneficiaries participating in ea ch business may vary from ~20 to ~50 
participants, the project’s investments will directly benefit ~10,250 community members.  
Enterprise type established by CFEs  Assumed 
number of 
CFEs  Members 
per CFE  5-year cost 
per CFE 
(USD)  Total 
investment 
cost (USD)  Total number 
of 
beneficiaries  
Communal firewood marketing  75 50 10,000  750,000  3,750  
Rhun palm handicrafts  50 50 12,000  600,000  2,500  
Beekeeping  75 20 15,980  1,198,500  1,500  
Simple timber collection and marketing  50 50 10,000  500,000  2,500  
TOTALS  3,048,500  10,250  
 
87.  In addition to the above -mentioned investments in equipment and infrastructure for distribution to participating 
communities, the project will also invest in the establishment of infrastructure and equipment to be installed at


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
                                                             
58 Per capita GDP is estimated to be US$ 488 per year.  government -managed facilities (including DoF Regional Forestry Offices, DoCD Multi -Purpose Centres and DoPWM 
Community Conservation Areas). These government -managed facilities will support the establishment and 
demonstration of additional natural resource -based business types which will be available for the use of participating 
beneficiary communities with the support and management of government extension staff. Proposed investments in 
infrastructure and equipment will include: i) e stablishment of food pro cessing facilities at one Multi -Purpose Centre 
in each of four regions (4 x ~200 beneficiaries); ii) upgrades of existing timber -processing facilities at each of four 
Regional Forestry Offices (4 x ~100 beneficiaries); and  iii) establishment and/or upgrades of ecotourism facilities at 
four DoPWM -managed Community Conservation Areas (4 x ~25 beneficiaries). Therefore, it is estimated that these 
investments in government -managed facilities will directly benefit an additional 1,300 p eople. Consequently the total 
number of direct beneficiaries that will participate in the project’s activities is estimated to be ~11,550 community 
members.  
 
88. The primary quantifiable adaptation benefits of the project to these CFE members will be to increa se the annual 
household income and food security by USD ~330 – 770, equivalent to an increase in GDP per capita of ~70%58. 
The climate -resilient natural resource -based businesses are intended to be complementary, rather than additional 
to, existing agricult ural livelihoods, and will provide a safety net of food security and income to households that are 
particularly vulnerable to crop failure or reduced crop productivity. Importantly, the food and marketable products 
generated within the project’s EbA invest ments will be available at various times of year, which will increase the 
resilience of impoverished farming households to the dry ‘hungry’ season which is anticipated to increase in duration 
and severity as a result of climate change.  
 
89. An additional indir ect impact of the project’s EbA investments which is difficult to quantify but which will 
contribute to the climate -resilience of project beneficiaries will be the increased physical protection against the 
negative impacts of climate change – including flo ods and storms surges, salt water intrusion, landslides, and soil 
erosion – through restoration of degraded and vulnerable areas. The increased physical protection against these 
impacts will reduce losses and damages to infrastructure, crops and livestock and decrease the risk of loss of 
human life caused by climate -related disasters such as floods. Additional indirect benefits which will accrue at the 
end of the project will include: a) increased economic growth catalyzed by new businesses based on the inc reased 
supply of the above -mentioned products; b) increased productivity of agriculture through adoption of EbA practices 
that increase topsoil retention and nitrogen fixation within and adjacent to agricultural land; c) improved 
management of water resour ces in the Gambia River; and d) increased ecotourism potential as a result of enhanced 
biodiversity and aesthetics of the landscape.  
 
90. It is estimated that ~ 11,550 individuals will benefit directly, and 46,200 individuals will benefit indirectly from the 
proposed EbA interventions over 10,000 hectares (see list of villages and map in Annex H ). Women in The Gambia 
generally experience a greater incidence of poverty relative to men and are consequently particularly vulnerable to 
the effects of climate change. The livelihoods of most Gambian women are dependent on natural resources from 
agricultural landscapes (e.g. crops) or ecosystems (e.g. fish). These natural resources provide income or 
supplement household food security. Large -scale EbA interventions that i ncrease the supply of these natural 
resources will consequently generate considerable direct benefits for women. In line with the objectives of Gambia’s 
Gender Policy as well as Gambia’s commitments to the Sustainable Development Goals (which includes gend er 
equality) , that project will aim to ensure that at least  50% of beneficiaries of the proposed GCF project will be 
women (i.e. ~ 5,775 direct beneficiaries and 23,100 indirect beneficiaries are women ).  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience); number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population (adaptation only)  Total  11,550 direct  beneficiaries, supporting 
~46,200 dependent household 
mem bers (indirect  beneficiaries ) 
Percentage 
(%) ~0.063 % (direct);  
~0.25% (indirect)


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Average increase in annual cash income 
among target beneficiaries  At least USD 330 per beneficiary household per year, 
assuming 1 1,550 beneficiary households.  
 Total area of degraded ecosystems restored 
by the project’s EbA interventions  7,000 hectares of degraded forest, woodland, 
savanna and mangrove;  
3,000 hectares of agricultural land.  
 Expected increase in generation and use of 
climate information in decision -making  
 Identification and integration of climate change 
adaptation priorities into village / community 
management plans for at least 125 Community 
Forestry (CF) and Community Protected (CPA) 
areas; and  
Integration of EbA, including priority actions and 
strategic options, into at least three national -level 
policies and strategies included the updated ANR 
policy, Vision 2020 and proposed nat ional Climate 
Change Strategy and Action Plan.  
 Increased capacity of MoE staff, including 
regional -level DoF and DoPWM extension 
staff, to identify, priorities, design and 
implement an EbA project. The project will aim 
to increase the technical capacity of these 
stakeholders to design, implement and 
monitor large -scale EbA projects relative to a 
baseline score measured using capacity 
assessment questionnaires.  Capacity of at least 40 regional -level extension staff 
in DoF and DoPWM increased to at least 8/ 12, 
relative to a baseline score of 4/12, measured using 
Capacity Assessment scorecards (described further 
in Section H.1: Logic Framework).  
 Degree to which national policies, plans and 
processes are strengthened to identify, 
prioritize and integrate adaptation strategies 
and measures for the integration of climate 
change into planning.  Sectoral policies, plans and processes for 
decentralized management of natural resources and 
community development that are in process of being 
modified through the GCF  project have an EbA 
integration score of at least 6 (described further in 
Section H.1 : Logic Framework).  
91. As described above, t he approach to calculating the number of project beneficiaries and quantifying the 
adaptation benefits that will be generated b y the project is based on the financial and economic analyses 
undertaken as part of the economic feasibility assessment in Annex B . Based on this approach, the number of direct 
project beneficiaries are defined as those households which benefit directly fr om increased household income and 
food security generated by the project’s EbA interventions and associated natural resource -based businesses. The 
number of Community Forestry Enterprise (CFE) members that will participate directly in the project is estima ted to 
be ~1 1,550 people. Conservatively assuming that each beneficiary supports a household of four people, the number 
of indirect beneficiaries will be ~ 46,200 people.  
 
92. The economic analyses in Annex B  also calculated the potential increase in cash inco me generated by the 
project’s EbA interventions and associated natural resource -based businesses, which is assumed to accrue directly 
to the project’s beneficiaries. The adaptation benefits for direct beneficiaries generated by the project’s investments 
are quantified accordingly as potential annual cash returns per capita per year, assuming an investment lifetime of


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
                                                             
59 The indicator is based on five criteria expressed as questions: a) d oes the policy/plan/process identify climate change risks 
and appropriate adaptation strategies and measures? b) is EbA prioritized and specified with budget allocations and targets? c) 
does  the policy/plan/process assign clear roles and responsibilities for the coordination and implementation of EbA? d) does the 
policy/plan/process provide for the continuous monitoring, evaluation, learning and review of EbA? e) is there evidence of th e 
effective implementation of the policy/plan/process? Each question is answered with an assessment and score for the extent to 
which the associated criterion has been met: not at all (= 0), partially (= 1) or to a large extent/ completely (= 2). An ove rall scor e 
is calculated, with a maximum score of 10 given five criteria.  20 years.  
 
93. The indicators relating to the degree to which national policies, plans and processes are strengthened to 
identify, prioritize and integrate adaptation strategies and measures are based on the TAMD (2013) and PPCR 
(2014) scorecard indicators for the integration of climate change into planning, as is used commonly in other 
adaptation projects such as under the Global Environment Facili ty (GEF)59.  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
94. The proposed paradigm shift in this GCF project is to change the behaviour and mindset of Gambian society 
such that Gambian decision -makers in government and the private sector invest intensively in growing their natural 
resource base to build resilience t o climate change and to strengthen economic sectors based on natural resources 
such as indigenous fruits/fibres/medicines, timber and other wild -collected products such as honey (described 
further under E.2.3). The change in perceptions will result in a pa radigm shift whereby local municipal budgets, 
national budget allocations (such as through the NFF) and private sector funds will be invested in the restoration of 
degraded ecosystems in a climate -smart manner to increase the supplies of commercially valua ble ecosystem 
goods and services. Rigorous modelling using data from large -scale EbA interventions will be undertaken to 
generate credible cash flow analyses of the overall investment. These analyses will be used to inform decision -
makers and private secto r investors of the potential returns on future EbA investments. The information and 
knowledge generated by the project will provide an improved evidence base to support further investment in, and 
promotion of, EbA as part of The Gambia’s response to climat e change. The upscaling of EbA by other initiatives 
will be supported through the integration of EbA and related approaches into various sectoral and cross -sectoral 
strategies and plans – including the Agricultural and Natural Resources Strategy (to be dev eloped in 2016), the 
National Climate Change Strategy (under development) and the NAP (under development).  In consideration of the 
complexities of customary land tenure systems in The Gambia, the project’s approach to prioritizing communities 
with formal a ccess rights to CF and CPA areas will minimize the risks related to uncertainties or conflicts over land 
tenure.   
 
95. The large -scale nature of this proposed GCF project distinguishes it from all other ecosystem restoration 
projects undertaken to date in The Gambia – all of which have been conducted over relatively small areas (a 
maximum of hundreds of hectares). Furthermore, t he project’s proposed approach to integrating the adoption of 
EbA into ongoing initiatives and development planning is inherently scala ble. For example, the selection of 
intervention sites and participating communities will focus on villages within and adjacent to community -managed 
forest reserves and conservation areas, particularly those 78 Community Forest (CF) areas which were proclaimed 
in September 2015 ( Annex H ). During the project preparation phase, over 400 CFs totaling an area of ~40,000 
hectares were identified. Given that each CF has several villages in close proximity, it is evident that EbA could be 
upscaled to include  hundreds of such villages across The Gambia (see maps in Annex H ). The EbA interventions 
within the proposed project will cover approximately 10,000 hectares. By the end of the project there will be a 
greatly increased supply of products/benefits from nat ural ecosystems, as well as from agricultural landscapes, 
across the project implementation area. Additional benefits from the project’s EbA interventions will include 
improved quality and quantity of fresh water supplies and reduced rates of soil erosion.  The upscaling potential, 
once the paradigm shift is achieved across Gambian society, is the implementation of EbA over hundreds of 
thousands of hectares.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
96. Lastly, and most importantly with regards to upscaling and replication, the project’s approach is i n strong 
alignment with ongoing initiatives and priorities in the country such as the renewed policy for decentralization of 
forest management to community -managed enterprises. The implementation of this policy will aim to transfer at 
least 200,000 ha of f orest reserves to community management by 2020. Considering that the proposed GCF project 
will be implemented across an area of at least 10,000 ha, there is the potential to upscale the project by a factor of 
at least 20.  
E. 2.2. Potential for knowledge a nd learning  
97. The GCF project will establish a knowledge base to support large -scale implementation of EbA (see Component 
3 in section C.3). Activity  3.2 of the project will, for example, collect, analyses and package information to promote 
the establishment  of natural resource -based businesses. This information will be made publicly available through an 
online information platform hosted by the Department of Water Resources (DoWR) and will include inter alia : a) 
market analyses and recommendations generated by past initiatives (such as the MA&D process) on natural 
resource -based businesses; b) maps of existing and proposed community co -managed areas; c) case studies of 
successful natural resource -based businesses, including lessons learned on implementation a rrangements, return 
on investment, and best practices; and d) a ‘state of the art’ publication on how to conduct large -scale EbA in 
different ecosystem types across The Gambia.  
 
98. Importantly, the potential return on investment of the project’s EbA interventions will be rigorously analysed for 
each proposed project site – at the village level – using the MA&D process. This process includes  analyses of: a) 
markets; b) resource sustai nability; c) institutional capacity; and d) technical knowledge . In addition to the MA&D 
process, the commercial viability of natural resource -based businesses selling goods generated from EbA 
investments will be assessed through intensive monitoring and e valuation (M&E). The evidence base that emerges 
from the MA&D and M&E will be used to leverage additional funds from Gambian public budget allocations such as 
the NFF as well as from private sector investors. The increased capacity of government stakeholde rs (e.g. DoF and 
DoPWM) to integrate EbA principles into ongoing departmental activities will further contribute to upscaling the 
proposed GCF project’s activities.  
 
99. In addition to knowledge and information generated through the MA&D process and M&E of th e project’s 
activities, respectively, the project will develop a strategic framework to promote long -term national research on 
EbA, including the large -scale EbA interventions implemented by the GCF project. This applied research will focus 
on assessing an d refining the efficacy of a wide range of EbA protocols. The proposed long -term research 
framework (LTRF) will also address identified information gaps and needs pertaining to EbA – particularly those 
identified through the NAP process. Importantly, this research will include a wide range of national, regional and 
international institutions and experts. Opportunities to collaborate with other developing countries in the context of 
South -South Cooperation will also be explored.  Additionally, regional adapta tion networks such as African 
Adaptation Knowledge Network (AAKNet) and the Global Adaptation Network (GAN) will assist in using and sharing 
project results.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
100. The proposed project focuses expli citly on creating an enabling environment that will build the climate -
resilience of rural Gambian communities and facilitate the development of a sustainable natural resource -based 
(green) economy. The cumulative effect of the project’s three complementary  outcomes will be to transform the 
present negative spiral of poverty, environmental degradation and climate change impacts into a virtuous cycle – 
based on well -managed natural resources – that builds climate resilience for rural Gambians. This virtuous c ycle will 
be underpinned by EbA interventions that generate goods for consumption and for the establishment of 
commercially viable businesses that will continue to run after the project has ended. The project will also build a 
knowledge base and raise publ ic awareness on EbA to promote a paradigm shift in mindset across The Gambia 
such that society seeks to maximize long -term rather than short -term adaptation benefits from natural resources.  
 
101. This change in behaviour and mindset will be undertaken by: a) de monstrating to the government and the 
private sector the value of public goods generated by large -scale EbA as well as the commercial viability of large -
scale EbA interventions; b) working with GCCI,  SDF, DoCD and other relevant stakeholders in country to create an 
enabling environment for natural resource -based businesses  to establish and expand (using products derived from 
existing ecosystems and the large -scale EbA interventions); c) strengthening institutional capacity to plan and


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
                                                             
60 UNEP -ROLAC & Frankfurt School of Finance & Management (2012 –2017). Available at: http://fs -unep -
centre.org/projects/microfinance -ecosystem -based -adaptation -climate -change . Accessed on 2 October 2015.  implement large -scale  EbA interventions; and d) strengthening policies, business models, governance mechanisms 
and funding instruments for promoting further large -scale EbA investment by government and the private sector. At 
present in The Gambia, investing in natural resource s is not perceived by government or the private sector as viable 
economically (for society as a whole) or commercially (for private sector businesses). The proposed GCF project 
aims to change these perceptions across Gambian society, from village -level thr ough to national government. The 
change in perceptions will result in a paradigm shift whereby local municipal budgets, national budget allocations 
(such as through the NFF) and private sector funds will be invested in the restoration of degraded ecosystem s in a 
climate -smart manner such that supplies of commercially valuable ecosystem goods and services are increased.  
 
102. An important aspect of the project’s emphasis on developing an evidence base to support investments in EbA 
will be the rigorous quantifica tion of the commercial viability of large -scale EbA interventions.In terms of innovation, 
the proposed GCF project approach is unique and without precedent in The Gambia. The EbA approach has not 
been adopted and promoted by past initiatives and is an emer ging field of climate change adaptation. Another 
innovative aspect of the GCF project is the investigation of several different financial mechanisms to catalyze  
additional  private sector investments in natural resource -based businesses across The Gambia. P otential 
mechanisms for increasing the domestic, international and multilateral investments in EbA and natural resource -
based businesses that will be assessed in Component 3 will include: a) matching grants committed by public -private 
partnerships as well as private entrepreneurs; b) concessional loans to entrepreneurs; c) micro -finance (building on 
research undertaken through the Microfinance for Ecosystem -based Adaptation to Climate Change project in Latin 
America and Caribbean) 60; d) risk -sharing facilities provided to micro -finance institutions and credit unions (based 
on models such as USAID’s Development Credit Authority); and e) REDD+ financing.  
 
103. The project’s approach to promoting equitable representation of women in the project’s activities w ill contribute 
towards an enabling environment for increased economic empowerment and participation of women in 
decision -making. Although Gambia’s existing policies on Gender Empowerment, as well as sectoral policies related 
to Forestry, Agriculture and Fi sheries, promote the equal participation of women in decision -making and the formal 
economy, in practice the traditional governance systems remain largely patriarchal and do not meaningfully include 
women in decision -making. Therefore the project’s activit ies include multiple measures that will guarantee that 
women will have an opportunity to participate in, and benefit from, the project’s activities  (see Section F.3 and 
Gender Analysis in Annex O). In line with Government policies to increase the economic empowerment and 
participation of women in decision -making, at least 50% of the project’s ~ 11,550 direct and 46,200 indirect 
beneficiaries will be women. The selection of natural resource -based businesses to be established at each 
participating village will  prioritise those business types which are likely to generate direct benefits for women, or 
which are traditionally within the accepted cultural norms of women’s roles in the community. This will be supported 
by the strengthening or establishment of repres entative Kafos (representative local committees) for women at each 
participating village, thereby ensuring the participation and ownership of women beneficiaries throughout the 
implementation phase. By ensuring that the participation of individual communit ies in the project’s activities is 
conditional on the establishment of appropriate village -level structures to represent the interests of women, the 
project will ensure that the design of the project’s activities includes the inputs of both men and women t hroughout 
the implementation period.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
104. Component 3 of the proposed project includes a strong focus on strengthening national policies and strategies 
related to climate change, natural resource management and sub -national governance to support the sustained 
replication and upscaling of the proje ct’s activities. To integrate the concepts of climate change and EbA into 
national policies and priorities, the proposed GCF project will build on existing synergies and momentum created 
through other ongoing and planned initiatives, rather than establishi ng new efforts and initiatives in parallel. The 
project will also develop a national strategy on EbA in consultation with a wide range of economic sectors and 
stakeholders.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
107. The economic co -benefits generated by the project will mainly be quantified in terms of real cash income 
generated by the project’s investments in EbA using commercially valuable or useful plant species. Detailed 
calculations to quantify the economic impac ts of the project are presented in the Feasibility Assessment ( Annex B ). 
The potential cash returns generated will be dependent on the types of businesses selected by participating 
communities. It is estimated that th e total GCF investment of USD 20.5 million will generate real cash returns of USD 
2.5 – 11 million within the project lifetime. Over the total investment lifetime (assumed to be 20 years), the real cash 
returns generated for the project’s beneficiaries range from USD 75 – 175 million. Assuming the most conservative 
scenario, the project will aim to generate cash returns of USD 2.5 million during the project lifetime and at least USD 
                                                             
61 FAO. 2005. Empowering communities through forestry: community -based enterprise development. FAO, Rome. Available at  : 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/008/j6209e/j6209e00.HTM   
62 Gambian Forest Management Concept 2001.  Available at: http://wrm.org.uy/oldsite/countries/Gambia/GambiaGFMC.pdf  105. The proposed EbA strategy will be developed with the eventual objective of integr ating specific national targets 
for EbA into the ongoing National Adaptation Plan (NAP) process in The Gambia. As a result, the project will 
support the adoption of EbA as part of the national approach to the combined challenges of climate change, rural 
poverty and environmental degradation. The integration of the project’s approach to EbA and promotion of 
sustainable natural resource -based businesses will be further supported by the project’s activities in Component 2. 
In Activity  2.2, for example, the pro ject will develop bankable business plans and financial mechanisms to promote 
increased investment in natural resources. These plans and mechanisms will be developed with explicit 
consideration of government priorities and targets related to inter alia  climate change adaptation (including the 
ongoing NAP process and drafting of a National Climate Change Strategy), natural resource management, 
agricultural development and economic growth. The aforementioned plans and mechanisms will be reviewed, and if 
neces sary revised, on an annual basis in response to information generated through monitoring and evaluation of 
EbA project sites, as well as in response to emerging national policies (including inter alia National Policies on 
Climate Change, Agriculture and Na tural Resources). This process of periodic reviews will provide a mechanism for 
adaptive management that will ensure that the approach promoted by the GCF project is relevant and responds to 
emerging national priorities.  
 
106. In-line with the objectives of the Forestry sub -sector policy (see section C1 and Annex Q.2),the Ministry of 
Environment, Climate Change, Water, Forests and Wildlife ( MoE) is committed to transferring management rights to 
at least 200,000 hectares of forest to decentralized Community Forest Committees61,62. At a sub -national level, the 
proposed GCF project will use this ongoing process of decentralization of natural resource management (including 
inter alia community forests, forest reserves and conservation areas) to community -based com mittees as an entry 
point for integrating EbA into village - and district -level planning. In particular, the project will provide technical and 
administrative support to fast -track the existing process for decentralization of management rights to community 
structures, which includes the establishment of 5 - and 10 -year management plans for community co -managed 
areas such as CFs, Jointly Managed Forest Parks (JMFPs), Jointly Managed Wildlife Parks (JMWPs) and 
Community Controlled State Forest Management Areas (CCSFMAs). In Component 1 of the proposed project, the 
existing process for drafting and annual review of the above -mentioned management plans will be revised to include 
the integration of priority activities and targets for EbA interventions. These activi ties and targets will be selected by 
participating community members with the technical support of regional -level forestry and agricultural extension 
staff. The development and adoption of these priority EbA interventions into community management plans wi ll be 
supported by extensive investments by the proposed GCF project in training, awareness -raising and capacity -
building on EbA for government extension staff as well community members. At the village level, detailed land use 
plans will be developed for i nclusion in the 5 - and 10 -year management plans, including details such as where: a) 
intensive agriculture should take place; b) ecosystems should be restored; c) community forests should be 
expanded; and d) land should be set aside for future infrastructu ral developments.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
75 million over the investment lifetime.  In addition, the total contributions to the NFF generated by taxes and li censing 
fees will be proportional to the total cash returns generated (taxation rate of 15%).  This will increase the contribution 
of NFF to the operating budget of the DoF, particularly for activities that include forest protection, development and 
sustain able use of forest resources, promotion of community forestry (community forest management and joint forest 
park management), training of forestry staff, reforestation, and infrastructural development.  The increased 
contributions to the NFF budget are conservatively estimated to be USD 380,000 during the project lifetime and USD 
11.3 million over the 20 -year investment lifetime. The project will generate short -term work opportunities for project 
benefic iaries who will contribute labour to the establishment and maintenance of the project’s EbA intervention sites. 
Furthermore, the establishment of community -managed , natural resource -based  businesses will employ an estimated 
11,550 project beneficiaries on a part -time or seasonal basis.  
 
Economic co -benefits  
 Total number of jobs created  11,550 
 Amount of foreign currency generated  USD 2.5 million (Year 6), USD 75 million (Year 20)  
 Amount of government’s budget deficits 
reduced  USD 11.3 million (Year 20)  
Environmental co -benefits  
 Enhanced biodiversity in natural 
ecosystems  Enhanced conservation and management of biodiversity across 
at least 7,000 hectares of forest, savanna and woodland  and at 
least 3,000 hectares of agricultural land.  
Gender -sensitiv e development impact  
 Proportion of men and women in jobs 
created  At least 1/ 2 direct (5,775) and indirect beneficiaries ( 23,100) are 
women  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1.  Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
108. The Gambia is ranked 168 out of 187 countries in the 2011 UN Human Development Index, with more than half 
of the population living below the US D 2 per day poverty threshold. Most Gambians rely strongly on livelihoods from 
natural resources and rain -fed, subsistence farming. Every year, most households in rural areas of The Gambia 
experience a “hunger season” between July and September, during which food stocks are low or depleted. To 
compen sate for income and food losses, these households usually depend on consuming and selling cash crops. 
Such hardships have been exacerbated by the global economic downturn and the drought of 2011  in The Gambia . 
Rural communities throughout The Gambia are th erefore extremely vulnerable to climate change effects that impact 
negatively on the production of food in agricultural landscapes and natural ecosystems. In particular, expected 
increases in air temperature and rainfall variability across  The Gambia will result in more frequent and severe 
droughts, floods63,64 and windstorms6566. Addressing the effects of these climate change -related events have been 
prioritised in The Gambia’s NAPA and S econd National Communication under the United  Nations Framework 
Conventio n on Climate Change.   
 
109. The above -mentioned climate change effects will greatly exacerbate existing environmental and economic 
problems experienced by rural Gambians. Agricultural productivity is, for example, expected to decline because of: a) 
reduced soil  water content with increasing temperatures; b) more frequent droughts; and c) greater erosion from 
                                                             
63 Gambia: Floods – Sep 2012. Available online at: http://reliefweb.int/disaster/fl -2012 -000175 -gmb. Accessed on 25 November 2015. 
64 Flash floods wreak havoc in rural Gambia. Available online at : http://kibaaro.com/flash -floods -wreck -havoc -in-rural-gambia . Accessed 
on 25 November 2015.  
65 Jaiteh, M.S. 2011. Climate change and development in The Gambia: challenges to ecosystem goods and service. Available online at: 
http://www.columbia.edu/~msj42/pdf s/ClimateChangeDevelopmentGambia_small.pdf . Accessed on 5 June 2015.  
66 The Republic of Gambia. 2003. First National Communication of the Republic of Gambia to the United Nations Framework Conventi on 
on Climate Change. Available at: http://unfccc.int/resour ce/docs/natc/gamnc1.pdf


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
intense rain events. The supply of ecosystem goods and services from natural ecosystems (e.g. venison, fruits, fibre, 
medicines and fish) will also be reduc ed by expected climate change effects on the distribution and growth rates of 
indigenous plants in Gambian woodlands, savannas, wetland s and mangroves. Recent studies, for example, show 
that ground nut yields in The Gambia are likely to decrease by 40% because of increasing temperatures67, with rice 
production also being negatively affected as freshwater resources are depleted. The production of fisheries in the 
Gambia River is also expected to be reduced because of a reduced flow of fresh water into the river, and 
concomitant increases in salinity. These decreases in productivity of agricultural landscapes and natural ecosystems 
will increase food insecurity and malnutrition, which is already widespread across the country68.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, s ocial and institutional needs  
110. As an LDC, The Gambia has limited financial resources without donor support to: a) implement large -scale EbA; 
b) transform markets to sustain climate -related, natural resource -based livelihoods; and c) strengthen policies, 
institutions and knowledge sharing for large -scale EbA. At a local level, rural Gambian communities do not have the 
financial resources, knowledge base, or technical capacity to: a) develop, implement, and maintain large -scale EbA 
across The Gambia; b) co -ordinate the regular, cross -sectoral, multi -stakeholder engagement that is necessary for 
EbA interventions; and c) capitalize on the EbA interventions by generating new private sector income streams from 
the sale of ecosystem goods and services produced by r estored ecosystems. As detailed in Section E.4.1 and in the  
description of the GCF project context above, the proposed project has been formulated to respond to urgent 
financial, economic, social and institutional needs identified by the GoG.  The Gambia’s constrained macro -economic 
environment is characterized  by one of the world’s lowest  GDP s per capita (USD ~488 in 2012)  and a high ratio of 
external debt to GDP (~43% in 2012) . Government’s budget deficit was ~68 million in 201369. Therefore the country  
requires significant external financial  support to adapt to the effects of climate change.  The economy -wide challenge 
of rural poverty and vulnerability to the impacts of climate change is likely to undermine past and ongoing 
investments in the socio -economic development of The Gambia.  
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
111. The project is well-aligned with national priorities related to climate change adaptation  (such as those NAPA -
identified priorities described in Section C.1). Furthermore, although the GCF project will not explicitly target climate 
change mitigation benefits, it is anticipated that the project’s emphasis on improved management of natural resources 
is likely to result in a net reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from land use and land use change (LULUCF). By 
promoting improved management of agricultural land and natural ecosystems, the project wil l reduce ne t GHG 
emissions by: a ) increasing the sequestration of soil carbon through enhancement of vegetation cover in degraded 
areas and through reducing the rate of clearance of natural vegetation f or conversion to agriculture; b ) increasing the 
sequestration of GHGs by increasing the total woody biomass in natural ecosystems such a s forests and woodlands; 
and c) reducing the loss of topsoil as a result of erosion in degraded areas. Therefore the project will contribute 
towards the national mitigation priorities e stablished in Gambia’s INDC submitted in October 2015.  
 
112. During the implementation phase, the proposed project will maintain a strong focus on alignment with emerging 
national priorities and other ongoing initiatives related to climate change.  The contribut ion of the GCF project, through 
engagement with the national climate change coordination committee and related stakeholders such as the INDC and 
NAP development teams, will be to provide information and guidance to promote the integration of EbA into natio nal 
                                                             
67 AIACC. 2006. Making economic sense of adaptation in upland cereal production systems in The Gambia. AIACC Working paper No. 
37 (August 2006). Available at: 
http://www.start.org/Projects/AIACC_Project/working_papers/Working%20Papers/AIACC_WP37_Njie.pdf .  
68 IFAD. 2014. Investing in rural people in The G ambia: rural poverty in The Gambia. Operation Fact Sheet. Available online at: 
http://www.ifad.org/operations/projects/regions/PA/factsheets/gm.pdf . Accessed on 5 June 201 5. 
69 Central Bank of The Gambia. 2014. Monetary Policy Committee: press release. Available online at: 
http://www.cbg.gm/research/pdf/Press%20Release/P RESS%20RELEASE%20%20January%2031,2014.pdf . Accessed 25 November 
2015.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
adaptation and mitigation plans. The GCF project’s activities contribute towards the adaptation priorities noted in 
Gambia’s Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC). For example, the INDC strongly emphasizes the 
need to integrate national a daptation priorities into sectoral and cross -sectoral planning and legislation, which is 
supported by the project’s focus on integrating EbA into land use planning at the village level and into sectoral and 
cross -sectoral policies at the national level.  In particular, the project will be closely coordinated with the development 
of mid - and long -term priorities related to climate change such as those priority activities and approaches promoted 
by relevant national strategies and action plans on climate chan ge, including the draft National Climate Change 
Strategy and the NAP process (both ongoing as of November 2015).  In addition to The Gambia’s priorities related to 
climate change adaptation, the GCF project will contribute to other national priorities relat ed to socio -economic 
development, biodiversity conservation, commitments to UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)  
(described in Section C.1).  Similarly, the GCF project will align with  the global priorities outlined by the  Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs, to which The Gambia is a signatory), such as SDGs on Climate Action, Life on Land, No 
Poverty, Zero Hunger and Gender Equality (SDGs 13, 15, 1, 2 and 5, respectively).  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and execut ing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
113. The executing entity (EE), MoE, is described in Section C.3. This Ministry will be responsible for the 
implementation of the project’s activities in each of the four project regions through the regional representatives of 
DoF and DoPWM. The capacity of MoE to undertake the proposed pro ject is dependent on the provision of added 
support in the form of sustained capacity -building, training and equipment. The availability and level of technical 
capacity of staff within DoF and DoPWM was assessed during the funding proposal preparation phas e and scored 
using a methodology based on the GEF AMAT system (detailed in Annex L ). The preliminary baseline score 
proposed for the capacity of MoE line departments to design and implement EbA -related initiatives was estimated to 
be 2/10 i.e. a score of t wo out of a maximum score of ten . The project will seek to increase this capacity score to at 
least 6/10 at the end of the project implementation period.  
 
114. As the accredited entity (AE), UNEP  will be responsible for: overseeing the project formulation, start up, 
implementation, evaluations (including M&E reports, MTR and TE) and closure . UNEP is the UN agency mandated to 
set the global environmental agenda, promote the integration of environmental concerns into sustainable 
development within the UN syste m and serve as an authoritative advocate for the global environment. To this end, 
UNEP’s work focusses on: a) assessing global, regional and national environmental conditions and trends; b) 
developing international and national environmental instruments; a nd c) strengthening institutions for the wise 
management of the environment. Climate change is expected to be the overriding environmental issue of our time 
and will lead to large -scale changes in global ecosystems. This threatens the livelihoods of local communities who 
largely depend on ecosystem goods and services for their subsistence, with impacts on inter alia health, food 
production, water security and economic welfare. UNEP’s role as a global normative organization for environmental 
concerns include s a strong mandate to monitor the impacts of climate change and provide technical support and 
advisory services on best practices for adaptation. UNEP fulfills this role by: a) supporting environmental monitoring, 
assessments and information for science -based policy - and decision -making; b) facilitating policy debate, 
negotiations and decision -making at the international level; c) supporting the strengthening of national, sub -regional 
and regional policies, laws and institutions; and d) promoting internatio nal collaboration to address global 
environmental.  
 
115. The comparative advantage of UNEP vis -à-vis other accredited entities lies in UNEP’s focus on providing 
technical advice – based on robust scientific evidence – related to planning and implementing measu res for 
managing environments in a sustainable manner to support national development processes. UNEP can provide the 
requisite scientific expertise and technical support needed to manage the complexities of the multiple socio -economic 
and environmental fa ctors affecting ecosystems.  UNEP has a significant global portfolio of  adaptation projects  on 
climate change funded through the Least Developed Countries Fund , Special Climate Change Fund , Adaptation Fund 
and bilateral funds such as BMU, IKI, European Comm ission, Norway, etc . Through these projects, UNEP supports 
national governments and local communities to adapt to climate change in an ecologically sound manner. All such 
projects comply with the mandate from the UNEP Governing Council, as detailed in the Bali Strategic Plan for 
Technology Support and Capacity -building. UNEP’s knowledge base derived from previous and ongoing projects


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
includes support on: a) methods and tools for decision -making; b) prioritizing, designing and implementing adaptation 
interve ntions; c) enhancing climate resilience by restoring vulnerable ecosystems that underpin community 
livelihoods; and d) monitoring the socio -economic and environmental benefits of adaptation interventions. The agency 
will draw upon this experience during th e implementation of the project.  
 
116. UNEP also has strong technical and scientific capacity in the field of climate change. Its Climate Change 
Adaptation Unit – within the Division of Environmental Policy Implementation – comprises 15 technical specialists wi th 
expert knowledge on the agency’s three main areas of expertise, namely: a) Science and Assessments; b) 
Knowledge and Policy Support; and c) Building the Resilience of Ecosystems for Adaptation. These specialists are 
thus well placed to provide technical  backstopping and support during project implementation.  UNEP is experienced 
in the implementation of projects that promote adaptation to climate change at global, regional and national levels. 
Through its EbA Flagship Programme70, UNEP has undertaken numer ous projects that demonstrate innovative 
solutions for climate change adaptation. This includes past and ongoing initiatives in The Gambia as well as 
elsewhere in West Africa. UNEP has a well -established relationship with the GoG and has previously support ed the 
implementation of national projects related to climate change adaptation. For example, UNEP recently implemented 
the GEF -LDCF project entitled “Strengthening of The Gambia’s climate change Early Warning Systems” in 
cooperation with MoE through the D epartment of Water Resources (2011 –2015).  At the present moment UNEP is 
implementing a second phase of this project, to build on the results of this LDCF project. The project is being 
implemented jointly with UNDP and is worth 8M USD entitled ‘Strengthenin g Climate Services and Early Warning 
Systems in The Gambia for Climate Resilient Development and Adaptation to Climate Change’.  As a result of the 
experience of these past projects, UNEP has established ongoing relationships within the national Executing E ntity 
(EE) MoE and other ministries and departments within GoG. Consequently, UNEP is well -placed as the GCF 
Accredited Entity (AE) to oversee the efficient and effective delivery of the project’s objectives through the EE.  
E.5.3. Engagement with  NDAs,  civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
117. The development of this GCF funding proposal was undertaken in close collaboration with multiple 
representatives of government, non -governmental organizations  and bilateral development agencies.  The 
consultations undertaken during the course of project preparation included two in -country missions in August -
September and November 2015  during which multiple national, regional and local stakeholders were consulted. 
These stakeholders included repres entatives from relevant ministries, departments, Community -Based Organisations 
(CBOs) and NGOs (e.g. GCCI, SDF, FAO).  Importantly, the stakeholder engagement process included close 
coordination with the NDA (Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs) and th e EE (Ministry of Environment, Climate 
Change, Water, Forests and Wildlife).  In Banjul (the capital city) , representatives from ministries, departments and 
NGOs were consulted to gather information on inter alia  the baseline, potential project intervention s and sites, 
implementation arrangements for the project, sustainability, financing and potential risks.  The in -country missions of 
the project development phase also included consultations with representatives of rural community -based 
organizations  (CBOs)  that are engaged or are interested in participating in community -based management of natural 
resources. Working group meetings were undertaken with CBOs and community members in four regions (Western, 
Lower River, Central River and Upper River). During th ese meetings, community representatives provided information 
on: a) current livelihood activities; b) climate change effects on livelihoods; c) local business and governance 
structures; and d) interests in alternative/additional livelihoods.  CBOs consulted  during these working group meetings 
included Community Forestry Committees, Community Protected Area Committees,  Village Development 
Committees; and  Women’s Village Development Groups (t hree in total, two  of which were mainly focused on 
vegetable gardenin g and one of which was focused on salt production ). Validation meetings were held at the end of 
these mission s, during which time the proposed project structure was presented to central (i.e. national -level) 
representatives from the relevant ministries and  departments.  
                                                             
70 Participants at COP 16 as well as the IUCN have noted that UNEP is an appropriate implementing agency in developing countries  and 
for further developing the EbA concept. At the 2010 Un ited Nations Climate Change Conference (COP 16) the EbA approach adopted 
by UNEP was noted as vital in playing a role in integrating EBA into the adaptation and development strategies of developing countries. 
It was also noted at this COP that investing in  EbA was one of the most effective ways to address the multiple challenges of vulnerability 
and poverty. (As reported in the article ‘Inspiring action towards a low carbon, climate resilient future’). Available at: 
http://www.cc2010.mx/en/press -center/pres s-resources/news_2010112340160.htm.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
 
118. As a result of the extensive stakeholder consultations undertaken during the project development phase, the 
project activities are strongly aligned with national priorities, policies and ongoing initiatives. The project Concept Note 
and the Full Project Proposal were presented to national stakeholders at dedicated validation meetings, both of which 
resulted in unanimous decisions to validate the GCF project approach. The GCF project has been endorsed by the 
National Designated Authority of th e Gambia, as evidenced by the No -objection letter dated November 18, 2015, and 
signed by Mr. Bai Madi Ceesay, Budget Directorate, Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs  (Annex A).  A letter of 
co-finance from the MoECCFWW  is provided in Annex C.  The stakeholder engagement process , including 
summaries of in -country missions  and a list of stakeholders  that were engaged , is presented in Annex F . The 
proposed approach for engagement and coordination of the project’s multiple stakeholders during the imple mentation 
phase is summarized in the implementation arrangements section, including in the organogram presented in Annex 
M. 
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
119. The proposed GCF project will primarily achieve cost -effectiveness by using an EbA approach.  A growing body 
of scientific research demonstrates that past initiatives which included EbA measures resulted in a greater ratio  of 
benefits to costs compared with the use of infrastructural measures for adaptation71,72. Similarly, in a recent in -depth 
review of strategies for sustainability, restoration of natural capital was deemed the most cost -effective approach 
when compared wit h both technology change and social behavioral  change73. An analysis of the commercial viability 
and likely rates of return on the GCF project investments indicates a net positive return on investment which will 
generate approximately USD 4 in net benefits for every USD 1 of GCF project investment (described further in 
Section F, and Annex B ). 
 
120. The proposed GCF project will maximise the cost -effectiveness of the EbA interventions as follows. Firstly, 
during the implementation phase of the project, analyses of the potential EbA interventions to be undertaken at each 
site will include consideration of cost -effectiveness and potential return on investment. Secondly, a dedicated project 
management unit will be established to ensure that all EbA interventions are  implemented in a rigorous and timeous 
manner according to detailed protocols for different landscapes. Thirdly, local communities and regional extension 
officers will be intensively trained in the implementation of EbA. And fourthly , the project will iden tify opportunities to 
increase cost -effectiveness by building on the capacities, information and infrastructure established by past and 
ongoing initiatives. For example: a) the identification of viable natural resource -based businesses will be informed by 
economic data generated by the MA&D process; and b) the ongoing implementation of existing policies to 
decentralize management of natural resources across an area of at least 200,000 hectares to community -based 
committees will provide a rapid and cost -effective means of integrating EbA into land use planning at the village level.  
 
121. The sustained cost -effectiveness of the GCF’s investments will be assured by the project’s management 
structure and implementation arrangements,  which will ensure that the propose d project is implemented in an efficient 
and timeous fashion with a strong focus on identifying and prioritising the most cost -effective approaches to delivering 
the project’s objectives. D uring the implementation phase of the project, detailed analyses of  the potential EbA 
interventions to be undertaken at each site will include consideration of cost -effectiveness and potential return on 
investment in the site -specific context. Only those interventions and activities which are assessed to be cost -effective  
and commercially viable will be considered eligible for inclusion in the project’s activities.  
 
122. An import ant design principle of the proposed project is the emphasis on building  on other past and ongoing 
                                                             
71 De Groot et al. 2013. Benefits of investing in ecosystem restoration. Conservation Biology  27: 1286 -1293.  
72 Rao et al. 2013. An economic analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation and engineering options for climate change  adaptation in Lami 
Town, Republic of the Fiji Island s. A technical report by the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme. Apia, Samoa. 
.Available at: http://ian.umces.edu/pdfs/ian_report_392.pdf  
73 Blignaut et al. 2014. Restoration of natural capital: a key strategy on the path to sustainability. Ecological Engineering . Doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2013.09.003


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
initiatives related to climate change adaptation, natural resource management and socio -economic development. The 
project will consequently identify  opportunities to increase cost -effectiveness by building on the capacities, 
information and infrastructure established by past and ongoing initiatives. For e xample, the identification of viable 
natural resource -based businesses will be informed by economic data generated by the MA&D process. L essons 
learned through the GEF/UNDP -funded project “Enhancing Resilience of Vulnerable Coastal Areas and Communities 
to Climate Change”74 will also inform the project’s approach to engagement of participating communities in the 
planning and implementation of EbA interventions. In addition, the interventions of the proposed project that are 
focused on strengthening instituti onal capacity and establishment of an enabling policy environment for EbA in The 
Gambia will build upon and upscale the work of projects such as  Phase 1 and 2 of the GEF/UNEP -funded project 
“Strengthening of The Gambia’s Climate Change Early Warning System s”. 
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
123. The economic analyses undertaken during the project development phase (see Annex B  and Section F, below)  
quantified potential income streams for rural communities from project investments. This informed the selection of 
activities for the project. As described in Section E.3.1, it is conservatively estimated that the project will generate 
revenues of at leas t USD 7 5 million that will accrue directly to the project’s direct beneficiaries over a 20 -year 
investment lifespan. Furthermore it is estimated that the project will generate at least USD 11 million in revenue for 
the national fiscus which will be directe d to the National Forest Fund. Consequently, the GCF investment of USD 20.5 
million will result in a net return of at least USD 86 million over the total investment lifespan, resulting in a return on 
investment (ROI) of 4:1. Therefore the proposed investme nt of GCF resources can be seen to be a cost -effective 
investment which will create net economic benefits that are several times greater than the initial GCF investment.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
124. The project’s activities have been developed with consideration of best practices and lessons learned from past 
and ongoing initiatives . Importantly, the MA&D process  will inform the project’s  engagement of communities in 
planning and designing activities for sustainable management of natural resources. This process  will result  in a 
methodical analysis of the constraints, opportunities and commercial viability of all community -based businesses to 
be supported by the GCF project. Furthermore, the development  of the EbA protocols during the project 
implementation phase will include a strong emphas is on integrating knowledge – including scientific and traditional 
knowledge – generated by past initiatives  at the project sites . The design of the project’s EbA int erventions will be led 
by technical task teams of experts who will review and analyses  information generated by: a) the MA&D process; b) 
decentralized  management of natural ecosystems; c) rural enterprise and business development; d) climate -resilient 
agricultural practices, livelihood substitution and strengthening; e) public -private partnerships; and vi) the Forest Farm 
Facility (FFF) 75. The project will identify those extension officers and government officials who have participated 
and/or benefited from  training and capacity -building through the above -mentioned initiatives to capitalize on the 
existing capacity within these individuals.  
 
125. The comparative advantage of UNEP in the fields of climate change adaptation in general, and EbA in particular, 
will support the identification and adoption of emerging best practices throughout the project implementation period. 
The experience gathered by UNEP in the field of EbA is growing co nstantly as a result of the findings and outcomes 
of multiple UNEP EbA project s funded by GEF , Adaptation Fund  and other bilateral funds.   
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
                                                             
74 Activities in this project inc luded community -based restoration and conservation of ecosystems.  
75 The Forest & Farm Facility (FFF) is a multi -donor programme that is housed within FAO. It was launched in 2012 with the 
objective to promote sustainable forest and farm management by suppo rting local, regional and international organisations and 
platforms for effective engagement in policies and investments that meet the needs of local people.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
N/A 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
N/A 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)  As described in E.6.3, the return on investment 
(ROI) for the GCF investment is estimated to be 4 
(i.e. net benefits of USD 4 for every USD 1 of GCF 
investment).


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
 
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
126. An analysis of the economic feasibility of the proposed GCF project investment was undertaken and is 
presented in Annex B . This analysis focused on the likely financial returns that could be generated from the GCF 
project investments under conservative, mod erate and optimistic scenarios. T he primary distinction between the three  
investment  scenarios is the assumed market price on products generated from t he natural resource -based 
businesses . In addition, the three scenarios differ in their  relative exposure to ‘high risk’ investments (such as fruit 
processing ), ‘medium risk’ investments (such as timber harvest ) and ‘low risk’ investments (such as beekeeping for 
honey production ).  
 
127. The conservative scenario  (Scenario 3  of the Feasibility Assessment ) assumes a low market price on products 
generated from the natural resource -based businesses and that the GCF project investments are used only for 
‘med ium-risk’ and ‘low -risk’ investments. The moderate scenario (Scenario 2) assumes a low market price on 
products generated from the natural resource -based businesses, but that GCF project investments are used for ‘high -
risk’, ‘medium -risk’ and ‘low -risk’ in vestments in a single geographic area. Finally, the optimistic scenario  (Scenario 1)  
assumes a high price on products generated from the natural resource -based businesses, and that GCF project 
investments are used for ‘high -risk’, ‘medium -risk’ and ‘low -risk’ investments in a several  separate locations .  
 
128. The outcomes of this analysis were used to estimate likely revenue s that would be generated for: a ) dire ct 
project beneficiaries; and b ) the national fiscus; within the project implementation period and also over an assumed 
20-year investment lifetime. The steps of this analysis can be summarized  as follows.  
a) Identification of potential EbA interventions that will reduce climate change vulnerabi lity and which will support the 
establishment of natural resource -based businesses (detailed in Feasibility  Assessment , Annex B ). 
b) Estimation of costs for several hypothetical investment scenarios (see above description of Scenarios 1, 2, and 3)  
to establish various kinds of community -based businesses. This included estimates of initial capital investments 
as well as ongoing operation and maintenance costs. These costings were based on a hypothetical scenario in 
which the number and scale of proposed  commun ity-based businesses is defined.  
c) Estimation of likely rates of return for hypothetical investment scenarios over the project lifetime and an assumed 
20-year investment lifetime . 
d) Calculation of potential ranges of revenues generated by hypothetical i nvestment scenarios.  
 
129. The latter step of the economic feasibility assessment was used to derive the total project lifetime and 
investment lifetime returns on the total GCF project investment of USD 20.5 million. Based on these analyses, it is 
conservatively estimated that the GCF investment will generate a real return on invest ment of at least USD 86 
million76 over an assumed 20 -year investment lifetime. This is equivalent to a return on investment of at least 4:1.  
F.2.  Technical Evaluation   
130. The project development phase included the identification of multiple potential approaches to EbA. The 
Feasibility  Assessment  (Annex B ) included assessments of those approaches to EbA which would be compatible with 
the project’s dual objectives of reducing climate change vulnerability while supporting a paradigm shift  that would 
promote the establishment and upscaling of community -based businesses based on the sustainable management, 
harvesting and marketing of commer cially valuable natural resources.  
 
131. The proposed interventions of the project, including both those activities focused on EbA in natural ecosystems 
(such as climate -resilient restoration of forest, savanna , woodland, and mangroves to increase the generation of 
commercially valuable products and ecosystem services) as well as agricultural landscapes (such as establishment of 
homegardens and enrichment planting of within and adjacent to agricultural plots) wer e all determined to be cost -
effective, technically feasible and aligned with the project’s stated objectives.  
                                                             
76 As described in Section E.3.1, it is conservatively estimated that the project will generate re venues of at least USD 75 million that will 
accrue directly to the project’s direct beneficiaries over a 20 -year investment lifespan. Furthermore it is estimated that the project will 
generate at least USD 11 million in revenue for the national fiscus whic h will be directed to the National Forest Fund. Consequently, the 
GCF investment of USD 20.5 million  will result in a net return of at least USD 86 million.


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
132. The project design has explicitly included consideration of potential env ironmental and social impacts of the 
project’s activities, as well as mitigating measures to reduce the likelihood and severity of any unforeseen negative 
impacts. The project’s activities were evaluated against  UNEP’s Environmental, Social and Economic  Safeguards 
(ESES) Framework using the Environmental, Social and Economic  Review Note (ESERN) as a screening tool to 
identify potential negative impacts. This process indicated  that the potential social and environmental risks of the 
project are low enough  to be considered negligible. Furthermore the ESERN tool  provides explanatory notes to 
describe the elements of the project’s design which will mitigate against any potential negative environmental or 
social impacts . This tool will be used throughout the p roject to guide discussions amongst project stakeholders and to 
ensure  that environmental and social safeguards are adhered to throughout the project.  For example, to mitigate the 
risk that the project will negatively affect land tenure arrangements, inclu ding communal and/or customary/traditional 
land tenure patterns, the project’s approach is to prioritise those areas which have clear and transparent tenure 
arrangements, as well as explicitly described local measures for conflict resolution. Another examp le is the project’s 
approach to minimizing  the risk that the proposed project will negatively affect livelihoods of indigenous peoples by 
influencing the rights, lands and territories claimed by these people. In response to this risk, the project will acti vely 
promote increased access to land and security of tenure for vulnerable indigenous rural communities by building on 
existing processes for decentralization of natural resource management to designated community -level authorities. 
The project will make use of existing social and environmental safeguards that are applied in terms of national 
policies on decentralized NRM and forest management to ensure that no negative unintended consequences occur 
as a result of the project’s activities. The results of t he ESERN tool  are included as Annex E. 
 
133. With regards to the  project’s contributions towards generating gender -equitable benefits, the project will 
emphasize  a gender -sensitive approach which considers the differential roles and responsibilities of men and women 
in Gambian society . This approach is in  alignment with national policies such as the Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Policy (ANR, 2006 –2015), the Na tional Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP, 2010 –2015), National Forest 
Policy (2009) and National Fisheries Policy (draft), all of which promote the increased participation of women in the 
economy, from promoting increased representation of women in decisio n-making at the village level, access to 
education, access to finance and participation in the formal economy. The refore, the  project has adopted gender -
disaggregated targets for beneficiaries and will aim to ensure that at least half of the project’s dire ct participants will 
be women . The project’s approach towards integration of gender considerations is informed by the Gender Analysis 
in Annex O. 
 
134. In most traditional Gambian communities, there are clearly defined divisions of labour between men and women.  
For example, in terms of the natural resource -based products and services that will be promoted by the proposed  
project, women tend to play a prominent role in the value chains of products such as fruit, fibre, firewood and 
medicines, whereas men are trad itionally more likely to participate in timber harvest/logging and beekeeping.  
Therefore, the project will include consideration of traditional roles and responsibilities of both men and women in the 
selection and prioritisation of activities at each site.  In particular, the project approach will rely on community -driven 
identification of priority natural resource -based businesses to be established in participation with communities. The 
selection criteria (Annex K) for  natural resource -based businesses to b e established at each participating village will 
prioritise those business types which are likely to generate direct benefits for women, or which are traditionally within 
the accepted cultural norms of women’s roles in the community. The project’s efforts to identify potential activities 
which are appropriate as livelihood options for women will be supported by the strengthening or establishment of 
representative Kafos (local committees) for women at each participating village, thereby ensuring the equitabl e 
participation and ownership of women beneficiaries throughout the implementation phase.  
 
135. Several  elements of the project’s design have included consideration of the achievement of these 
gender -equitable targets through the design of activities that would  benefit men and women equally. Firstly, the 
project has provided proposed selection criteria (to be validated at the implementation stage) for prioritisation of 
project participants. Several selection criteria have been included to promote the prioritisat ion of women as project 
beneficiaries – for example, the project will prioritise the establishment of natural resource -based enterprises which 
have been identified as being culturally appropriate and within the accepted norms for women’s societal roles. 
Furthermore, the project will prioritise those communities who have already established a representative committee or 
association for village women – for example, a Village Women’s Farmer’s Association or a Women’s Community


---
*Page 54*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
Forest Enterprise. Additional cri teria can be added in the inception phase as seen useful. Secondly, where a 
representative Kafo (community association or community) has not been established for women, the project will 
include measures to assist village women to establish a representative  association prior to participation in the 
project’s activities. Thirdly, the training activities provided to government extension officers under Components 1 and 
2 will include modules which explicitly focus on raising awareness, and providing practical s uggestions on how to 
include consideration, on issues related to gender equity and sectoral priorities related to women. Fourthly, the 
activities will include budgetary allowance to support payment for childcare facilities and after -school support for 
youn g children, thereby enabling mothers with dependent children to participate in training and skills development 
activities (including those women selected for training courses at the DoCD’s Multi -Purpose Centre training facilities). 
This measure will reduce  the inherent bias towards men in terms of benefits generated by the project  and will ensure 
that women are able to participate equally in the decision -making and implementation of the project’s activities.  
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement  
The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UN financial rules and regulations and 
UNEP’s programme manual77. UNEP is a Programme  of the UN Secretariat and is governed by UN regulations, rules 
and associated policies and procedures78. Furthermore the financial rules of UNEP are promulgated pursuant to the 
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. Within this context, funding allocation mechanisms are 
managed as per UN rules and procedures, including eligibility criteria,  proposal evaluation processes, quality 
assurance and control, project monitoring and supervision. UNEP is annually audited by the UN Board of Auditors. 
UNEP will set up a dedicated trust fund similar to other funds for which it is implementing agency. The  funding of a 
project will be established through a distinct grant within the Trust Fund, with the project itself being set up in the 
UNEP Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) as a “Work Breakdown Structure” (WBS), which is itself further broken 
down into “W ork Breakdown Structure Elements” (WBSEs) organized by output and outcome. The grant of the project 
will be linked to the WBSEs to fund the activities contributing to the delivery of specific outcome (as per disbursement 
schedule detailed in the term sheet ). The fee income will be managed through a dedicated Fund and grant 
independently and separately of the GCF project grants themselves.  In line with common practice applied in ongoing 
UNEP projects funded by other global funds such as the GEF, LDCF, SCCF a nd Adaptation Fund etc ., the project will 
appoint a Financial Officer within the PMU who will be responsible for monitoring, reporting on and approving 
requests for finance on at least a quarterly basis. Reports to summarize the disbursement and projected demands for 
project funding will be prepared and submitted to a UNEP Programme Officer who will  be in charge of project 
supervision, in line with reporting standards and methodologies applied in past projects such as those implemented 
using GEF modalities.  The UNEP accountability framework includes details on the segregation of duties, and 
safeguards to ensure compliance  with UN financial rules and regulations79. In addition, a n appointed Fund  
Management Officer will be appointed to assist the UNEP’s Programme Officer with all financial arrangements . The 
approach to procurement of expendable and non -expendable items such as stationery, office equipment and 
furniture, computers, printed signs, c onsultancy support etc. will be based on the national conventional modalities 
used by the MoE in similar donor -funded projects . UNEP’s modalities for project implementation , in the case of a 
national project , means that funds are transferred in tranches to  the EE under the conditions that are defined under 
the legal instrument (Project Cooperation Agreement) to be signe d between UNEP and the EE, following the projects’ 
approval by the GCF Board  and signature of the . The project’s investments in equipment for the establishment of 
natural resource -based businesses will  be undertaken through a transparent and best practices  procedure applying to 
procurement  (for example, including considerations of availability and cost of replacement parts, ease of 
maintenance, and opportunities to increase cost -effectiveness through bulk procurements or cost -sharing with other 
initiatives ). Finally, in line with the UNEP Programme Manual, the EE will be requested to provide an annual 
compl iance audit covering all aspects of the project execution including review of all expenditures incurred during the 
financial year.  
                                                             
77 UNEP Programme Manual is available from: 
http://www.unep.org/QAS/Documents/UNEP_Programme_Manual_May_2013.pdf   
78 UN financial Rules and Regulations: 
http://www.unep.org/10yfp/Portals/50150/UN%20financial%20rules%202013.pdf   
79 UNEP accountability framework is available from: 
http://www.une p.org/QAS/Documents/UNEPProgrammeAccountabilityFramework.pdf


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 49 OF 66 
 
 G  
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of r isk Probability  of risk occurring  
Limited information  sharing or collaboration  between 
government departments, research institutions and the private 
sector reduces t he timely delivery and effectiveness of the 
project.  Technical and operational  High (>20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
137. Government departments, research institutions and the private sector will be encouraged to share information through a number of technologies 
and systems that will be strengthened or established by the project. The  most appropriate technologies and systems will be  selected based on the 
most appropriate approaches to sharing information in the  local context. Examples include:  
 technical working groups for the development of EbA protocols , comprised of local scientists, extension officers, engineers, planners and village 
leaders (i.e. El Kalos);  
 protocols to ensure effective communication between staff from the DoF, DoPWM , DoCD and CBOs;  
 forums that will link private sector to other stakeh olders (e.g. CBOs) involved in natural resource -based businesses;  
 strengthening of synergies between relevant sectoral priorities and ongoing public investments; and  
 an information platform through which stakeholders involved in natural resource -based busi nesses can communicate and EbA knowledge can be 
shared.  
 
Communication and information sharing between stakeholders to support project activities will be promoted throughout the proj ect by the PC (see 
Section C.7).  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
Natural disasters undermine the implementation of large -scale 
EbA interventions  and result in economic loss and/or damage Social and environmental  High (>20% of project 
value)  Low G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be elaborated  in G.2.  
136. A summary of the identified risks to the project implementation and sustainability, associated impacts and mitigation measures is described in G.2 
below. The main risk that has been identified through the assessment – with a high level of risk and probability of occurring – is related to turnover of 
staff in implementing i nstitutions  and frequent  organizational  changes in government bodies, which would result in loss of  institutional memory  and built 
capacity . This operational risk would  result in a disruption of  and/or delay  to project implementation, and  may jeopardize the sustainability of the 
project. Other risk factors that have been identified as posing a ‘ high’ level of risk to the project  are: i) limited information sharing between stakeholders 
(Risk 1); ii) disasters undermine the implementation of large -scale EbA ( Risk 2); and iii) unwillingness of local communities to invest in EbA 
interventions ( Risk 4). However, these risk factors is are considered to be  improbable.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 50 OF 66 
 
 G 
to the interventions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project’s EbA interventions will target  areas that have been  identified  as being vulnerable to climate change impacts . For example, EbA will be 
implemented in sites that are prone to flooding as a measure to reduce the risk or physical impact of this type of  climate -related natural disaster.  
Furthermore, the project will  integrate information on local climate change vulnerabilities through maintaining a close collaborative relationship with the  
‘Strengtheni ng Climate Early Warnings Systems ’ project (Phase II) – implemented through DoWR – to integrate  up-to-date m eteorological predictions 
into the design of EbA protocols and processes for updating these protocols .  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
High turnover of staff in implementing institutions , frequent 
changes in government bodies and limited institutional 
memory results in a disruption and/or delays in the project 
implementation and may jeopardize the sustainability of the 
project.  Technical and operational  High (>20% of project 
value)  High  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
138. Decisions,  best practices and lessons learned will be documented throughout the project to support institutional memory that will sustain project 
activities. This memory will also be strengthened through the online platform that will be developed under Outcome 3. Protoco ls for EbA will be 
developed in both English and the main local languages to guide new staff who become i nvolved in EbA implementation during and after the project. 
Furthermore, technical working groups will be trained on updating these protocols using an adaptive management approach. Thes e technical working 
groups will include non -government stakeholders – such as scientists, engineers, planners and village leaders – thereby strengthening the institutional 
capacity to plan and implement EbA within and outside of implementing institutions and government bodies.  
 
Where possible,  the PSC will make use of established government structures to capitalize  on well -established practices and  systems  that are familiar 
to government staff . Importantly , the project’s investments in infrastructure at regional forestry offices and regional fo restry nurseries will improve the 
working conditions and job satisfaction for regional forestry officers , thereby encouraging these stakeholders to remain involved in EbA implementation 
and/or coordination . 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
Rural communities at the selected intervention sites are 
unwilling to invest in  EbA interventions because of insecure 
land tenure , which  will result in continued ecosystem 
degradation and failure of the  project activities.  Social and environmental  High (>20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
139. The project is designed to be integrated with existing land tenure arrangements and will not attempt to contradict or otherwi se influence existing


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 51 OF 66 
 
 G 
land tenure. The targeted  communities were selected for participation in the project by Gambian stakeholders, for the reason that successful 
implementation of EbA, as well as establishment of natural resource -based businesses, will require the security of land tenure, legal access to forest 
ecosystems, and local governance structures that are established to manage CFs. The project will actively promote increased access to land and 
security of tenure for vulnerable indigenous rural communities by building on  existing processes for decentralization of natural resource management to 
designated community -level authorities. Importantly, existing social and environmental safeguards related to  policies on decentralized Natural 
Resource Management ( NRM ) and forest m anagement will be considered to ensure that no negative consequences  occur . In addition, t he selected  
communities will be actively engaged during imple mentation and monitoring of large -scale EbA interventions.  In particula r, these communities will 
receive training to raise awareness and build their capacity on the benefits of EbA in activities they are undertaking. As a result, the probability of risk 
will be reduced from medium to low.   
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
Social tensions m ay arise as e xisting power relations within 
the community might disrupt equal opportunities to develop a 
nature -based business.  Social and environmental  Medium (5.1 -20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation  Measure(s)  
140. The project’s activities have been designed to be transparent and will maintain a broadly consultative approach throughout th e implementation 
period. The proposed approach to identifying communities to participate in the project’s activities will borrow from the ongoing approach used by 
Department of Forestry to identify potential Community Forestry Committees. This includes provisions such as minimum s tandards for establishing 
mechanisms for conflict resolution, registry of disputes and complaints, and other measures to ensure that the project’s acti vities are transparent and 
adhere to the principles of FPIC (Free, Prior and Informed Consent).  
Selected  Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
Limited technical capacity  among government authorities and 
local communities  to implement the EbA interventions.  Technical and operational  Medium (5.1 -20% of 
project  value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
141. Training  will be provided for government authorities and local communities that will be involved in project activities . In particular, topics will 
include: i) implementing EbA protocols in a scientifically rigorous manner, with a strong emphasis on ongoing monitoring and evaluation; and ii) 
implementing communication protocols. The technical capacity of these stakeholders t o implement, monitor and maintain interventions will also be 
strengthened through developing participatory methods for local communities to evaluate the effectiveness of the EbA interven tions in collaboration 
with extension staff from DoF, DoPWM  and the De partment of Community Development (DoCD).  
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
Infrastructure and equipment procured by the project is not 
maintained or operated effectively.  Technical and operational  Medium (5.1 -20% of 
project value)  Medium


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 52 OF 66 
 
 G 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
142. Long -term plans will be established for the monitoring and maintenance of equipment procured to support natural resource -based businesses. 
GCF resources will be used for: i) training extension staff from DoCD , DoF and DoPWM  on utilizing  and maintaining the procured equipment ; and ii) 
maintenance of machinery and equipment, and replacement of parts if necessary. Allocated budget for maintenance is ~10% of cost of investment.  
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
Unsustainability of rural business models and management 
capacities   Technical and operational  Medium (5.1 -20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
143. The project will approach the identification, establishment and operation of the community -managed businesses in a phased approach that will 
identify successful practices, provide training to address capacity gaps, and apply strict selection criteria to minimize exposure to  unsustainable 
business models and unintended negative socio -economic impacts.  The provision of sustained training and access to extension services through DoF, 
DoPWM and DoCD will focus on increasing the capacity of benefic iaries to manage the project’s investments beyond the project implementation 
period.   
Selected Risk Factor 9   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk occurring  
Behavioral change does not occur  or existing threats and 
unsustainable practices continue – for example, practices 
such as  overstocking of livestock, slash and burn agricultural 
techniques  Technical and operational  Medium (5.1 -20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
144. The project’s EbA interventions will not be sustained in the long term in the absence of community support and ‘buy -in’. Consequently, the project 
will maintain the principles of FPIC (Free Prior Informed Consent) with respect to the engagement of communit ies in the design of the EbA activities, to 
ensure that participants fully understand and are in agreement with the land use plans proposed. In the mid - and long -term, the project’s approach to 
addressing the ongoing degradation of natural ecosystems  will be to generate clear and measurable economic benefits from the sustainable 
management and marketing of natural resources, th ereby providing an incentive for rural households to protect and restore valuable ecosystems.  The 
project’s emphasis on prioritizing  formally designated CFs and CPAs will reduce the impact of this risk, for the reason that all participating communities 
are required to have developed local by -laws and conflict resolution mechanisms.   
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
145. Currency fluctuations could influence factors such as the commercial viability of natural resource -based businesses that are exporting products,  
as well as the costs of input and imported equipment . Businesses face risks like these on an ongoing basis and need to mitigate them by using


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 53 OF 66 
 
 G 
adaptive management. This will entail  continual assessment of projected cash flows of the businesses, and taking decisions according to t he results of 
these assessments. Such decisions could include for example adjusting the operations of the business to reduce costs or create economies of scale.  
 
146. Another risk to be managed by the project is that newly established commercially viable businesses will potentially over -exploit the natural 
resource base. This risk will be managed  through Forest Management and Village Development Committees which will oversee all business activities 
and will ensure that the businesses strictly adhere to the approved district - and village -level land use plans.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Results Monitoring and Reporting    
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level80 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development  The proposed GCF project will use large -scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) – a cost -effective and low -
risk approach for building climate resilience over large areas – to promote climate -resilient sustainable 
development. This will be achieved firstly by restoring degraded forests and agricultural landscapes with climate -
resilient plant species that provide goods for consumption or sale; and secondly, by facilitating the establishment 
of natural resource -based businesses and management committees to manage The Gambian natural resource 
base in a sustainable manner. The considerable economic value of the natural capital created by the GCF 
project’s EbA investments will be the main incentive for communities to cont inue investing in The Gambia’s 
natural resource base, rather than reverting to over -extraction of natural resources after the project has ended. 
Knowledge on implementing and monitoring large -scale EbA to support natural resource -based businesses will 
be g enerated and disseminated throughout the country. Additionally, the capacity of the Government of The 
Gambia will be increased to support large -scale implementation of this approach, and to mainstream EbA into 
policies, plans and processes.  
Expected Resul t Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term  
(if 
applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
A1.0 Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, communities 
and regions  Number of 
males and 
females 
benefiting 
from the 
adoption of 
diversified, 
climate 
resilient Household 
surveys and 
reports  
 
Capacity 
assessment 
and climate 
change 
vulnerability Baseline status of 
participating 
communities,  including  
quantitative  scores, 
will be assessed by 
the baseline study.   11,550 direct beneficiaries 
(50% women)  
 
46,200 indirect beneficiaries 
(50% women)  Enhanced 
livelihoods and 
income do not act 
as a perverse 
incentive for local 
communities to 
continue 
encroach ment  on 
fragile forest 
                                                             
80 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at  the following link (Please note that some 
indicators are under refinement) : http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
livelihood  
options 
(including 
fisheries, 
agriculture, 
natural 
resource -
based 
businesses  
etc.) scorecards  ecosystems.  
A.4.1 Coverage/ scale of 
ecosystems protected and 
strengthened in response to 
climate variability and  change.  Total area of 
degraded 
ecosystems 
restored by 
the project’s 
EbA 
interventions  Capturing 
GPS points 
and mapping 
EbA areas  
 
Aerial imagery  N/A  7,000 hectares of degraded 
forest, woodland, savanna 
and mangrove ; 
3,000 hectares of transformed 
land (including cultivated 
areas, fallow land and 
roadside verges).  The ecosystems 
are not in a state 
that is beyond 
restoration and 
will be managed 
sustainably during 
and after project 
implementation.  
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-term 
(if 
applicable
)  Final  
Project/  programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A.7.1 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  
 Extent to which 
vulnerable 
households,  
communities, 
businesses  and 
public -sector  
services of Fund -
supported  tools,  
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to - To capture evidence 
of the degree to which 
policies, plans and 
processes  are 
strengthened and/or 
developed to identify, 
prioritize and integrate  
adaptation strategies 
and measures (EbA); 
the tracking tool adapts 
elements of the - Protocols for 
EbA planning 
and 
implementation 
in The Gambia 
do not currently 
exist as a means 
to respond to 
climate change 
and variability.  
  - EbA protocols integrated 
into at least 125 local 
manag ement plans of 
targeted communities 
including inter alia  
Community Forestry plans 
and Village Development 
Plans . 
 
- Establishment and training 
of at least 125 kafos (i.e. - The tools,  
instruments, strategies 
and activities will be 
sufficient to respond to 
climate change.  
 
- Local communities 
will be willing to take 
part in developing new 
CFEs from climate -
resilient, natural


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
                                                             
81 See updated Results -Based Management Framework for Adap tation to Climate Change Under the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate Change 
Fund. Available at: https://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/GEF -LDCF.SCCF_.17 -
05,%20Updated%20RBM%20Framework%20for%20Adaptation%20to%20Climate%20Change,%202014 -10-08.pdf .  Accessed on 8 November 2014.  
82 The indicator is based o n five criteria expressed as questions: i) d oes the policy/plan/process identify climate change risks and appropriate adaptation strategies and 
measures? ii) is EbA prioritized and specified with budget allocations and targets? iii) does the policy/plan/pr ocess assign clear roles and responsibilities for the 
coordination and implementation of EbA? iv) does the policy/plan/process provide for the continuous monitoring, evaluation, l earning and review of EbA? v) is there 
evidence of the effective implementati on of the policy/plan/process? Each question is answered with an assessment and score for the extent to which the associated 
criterion has been met: not at all (= 0), partially (= 1) or to a large extent/ completely (= 2). An overall score is calcula ted, w ith a maximum score of 10 given five criteria.  respond  to climate 
change and 
variability.  Tracking Adaptation 
and Measuri ng 
Development ( TAMD 
2013) and Pilot 
Program for Climate 
Resilience  (PPCR 
2014)81 scorecard 
indicators for the  
integration of climate 
change into planning82. 
 
- Review of updated 
local management 
plans.  
 
- Business reporting on 
strengthened/ 
established CFEs.   - Although the 
M&AD process 
has been 
ongoing for 
more than a 
decade, markets 
for products 
from the natura l 
resource base 
are weak.  
 
- Policies, 
strategies, plans 
and processes 
related to 
decentralized 
management of 
natural 
resources and 
community 
development in 
The Gambia  do 
not currently 
integrate EbA  village -level committees) for 
Women’s Enterprises in 
targeted communities.  
 
- Business plans, forums 
and financial mechanisms 
based  on climate -resilient, 
natural re source -based 
products used to 
strengthen/establish at 
least 125 CFEs.  
 
- Policies, strategies , plans 
and processes related to 
decentralized  management 
of natural resources and 
community development 
that are in process of being 
modified through the GCF 
project have an EbA 
integration score of 6 (at 
least).  resource -based 
products  
 
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
EbA interventions 
implemented in 
agricultural landscapes 
and degraded Number of ha 
(and type) of EbA 
implemented  Capturing GPS points 
and mapping EbA 
areas  
 N/A  At least:  
 7,000 ha in  forests, 
mangroves, savanna hs and 
woodlands  Government 
representatives and 
communities are willing 
to engage with EbA


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
ecosystems to provide 
adaptation and 
commercial benefits for 
local communities, 
government and the 
private sector in The 
Gambia  Aerial imagery   3,000 ha in agricultural 
landscapes surrounding 
villages  and implement this 
approach in degraded  
ecosystems and 
agricultural lands  
Technical support 
provided and 
infrastructural 
investments made to 
strengthen local and 
international markets 
using goods produced 
from climate -resilient 
natural resource base  Number of 
enterprises based 
on a climate -
resilient natural 
resource base  
developed  through 
provision of 
technical support, 
development of 
business plans 
and procurement 
of infrastructure  Summary case studies 
of successful natural 
resource -based 
businesses   Summary 
reports on the 
results of the 
MA&D process, 
including case 
studies of 
successful 
enterprises, are 
available from 
2005 and 2007.   At least 5 enterprises based 
on a climate -resilient 
natural resource base ,  
including at least 3 
enterprise types to be 
managed by Village 
Women’s Committees,  
identified and developed .  Community -Based 
Organizations (CBOs) 
and other local 
community members 
are willing to participate  
in activities related to 
strengthening of 
markets based on 
goods produced from a 
climate -resilient natural 
resource bas e. 
 
A.5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation  Number of 
assessments and 
strategic/policy 
recommendations 
developed to 
support 
integra tion of  
large -scale EbA 
into sectoral 
policies, plans and 
processes for 
decentralized 
management of 
natural resources 
and community 
development  Review of strategic and 
policy 
recommendations  At present the 
EbA concept is 
not explicitly 
promoted by 
The Gambia’s 
policies and 
strategies.   By project end point, at 
least 7 assessments and 
strategic/policy 
recommendations  
including:  
 capacity gap assessment  
 investment needs 
assessment  
 recommendations for 
funding implementation of 
region -specific objectives 
for decentralized 
management of natural 
resources and 
implementation of EbA  
 state of the art’ 
publication on how to 
conduct large -scale EbA in 
different ecosystem types 
across The Gambia  The institutional  context 
is conducive to the 
learning and 
application of new skills  
 
There is willingness 
and an opportunity to 
modify legal and 
regulatory texts


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
 strategic framework to 
promote long -term national 
research on EbA  
 policy options for 
promoting large -scale EbA 
as a means of managing 
natural resources in The 
Gambia  
 national EbA upscaling 
strategy  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1 Protocols developed 
for large -scale EbA to 
build climate -resilient 
natural capital in The 
Gambia.  - Two updated stocktake reports (in Years 1 
and 6)  to identify  current resources, best 
practices and technical extension staff to 
guide development and implementation of 
protocols.  
- Establishment and training of four regional 
technical working groups comprised of local 
scientists, extension officers, engineers, 
planners and village leaders (i.e. alkalos ) – 
to design ecosystem -specific protocols for 
EbA in agricultural landscapes and forest 
ecosystems.  
- Four regional  prototypes  validated and 
updated  (as necessary)  for EbA 
interventions that will enhance goods and 
services from ecosystems under conditions 
of climate change across Lower River, North 
Bank, Central River and Upper River 
Regions in agricultural landscapes and 
degraded ecosystems.  
- Site-specific protocols for long -term EbA 
activities integrated into at le ast 125 CF and 
CPA management plans.  
- Three summary reports packaged for 
presentation to decision -makers – including 
relevant ministries and departments  – to 
promote an integrated approach to EbA and 
climate change adaptation (in line with the 
NAP process).  
- Appointment and training of eight additional - Technical c onsultancy 
(including training)  
- Consultation 
meetings/workshops with  
local scientists, extension 
officers, engineers, planners 
and village lead ers (i.e. 
alkalos) 
 - Consultancy  to conduct scientific research  
- Consultation with – and training – working groups on 
developing and updating EbA protocols and package 
protocols into effective knowledge -sharing tools to be 
used to integrate EbA into planning.


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
extension staff, including eight Conservation 
Officers, 8 Forest Officers, and eight Forest 
Rangers.  
- Five annual training workshops (one 
central workshop and one in each of four 
regions) for  DoF, DoPWM and DoCD  
- Detailed satellite -based maps of forest 
regions across 125 sites in four regions  
1.2 Nurseries 
established/expanded to 
support investment in a 
climate -resilient natural 
resource base across 
The Gambia.  - Expansion of nurseries at  four regional 
forestry offices . 
- Two u pdated propagation guideline for 
prioritized  tree and plant species  (to be 
updated in Year 5/6) . 
- Four long -term b usiness pl ans and 
revenue models  to support sustained 
operation of expanded nursery facilities , 
including through increased public budget 
allocation and increased generation of 
revenue by NFF.  - Technical consultancy  
- Equipment procurement  
- Transport  
- Consultatio n process  - Consultancy to develop: a) effective nursery design 
(including establishment/construction and 
management); and b) sustainable nursery systems  
- Equipment for nurse ry expansion/establishment  
- Consultation with Regional Forest Officer and local 
communities to assist effective: a) design of nurseries ; 
b) collection of seedlings.  
- Transportation to all nurseries for consult ation and 
delivery of equipment  
- Consultation with FD and NFF to develop 
sustainability plans for nurseries  
1.3 Training and support 
provided to  regional 
extension staff, field 
officers and local 
communities on 
implement ing EbA 
protocols for 
establishment of a 
climate -resilient natural 
resource base.  - At least 40 extension st aff from  DoF, 
DoPWM , DoCD  trained annually to support 
development and implementation of 
protocols  through five annual training 
workshops (one central workshop and one in 
each of four regions) . 
- One communication protocol  to ensure 
effective coordination/communication 
between  DoF, DoPWM , DoCD and CBOs – 
including CFUGs, WGs and FGs . 
- Trained extension staff provide annual 
training for 125 communities to implement, 
and assess the  effectiveness of , the 
project’s  EbA interve ntions (including  
income streams, supply of ecosystem goods 
and services, and resilience of rural  
communities to climate change ). - Training  
- Technical consultancy  
- Consultation process  - Training of government and local communities on 
EbA 
- Consultancy to develop communication protocols  
- Consultation process to d evelop participatory 
methods for involved CBOs to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the EbA  
1.4. EbA implemented in 
agricultural landscapes 
and degraded 
ecosystems to build a 
climate -resilient natural 
resource base.  - Implementation of diverse EbA activities in 
at least 125 sites, across ~10,000 hectares  
- Annual u pdate of EbA management plans 
for 125 project sites .  - Technical consultancy  
- Labour  
- Transport  
- Consultation p rocess  - Consultancy to coordinate  and oversee EbA 
implementation  
- Labour provided by local communities involved in 
project to assist with planting.  
- Transport of seedlings from nurseries to planting 
areas


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
- Consultation with communities and government 
representatives to update management plans for 
areas that are co -managed  
2.1 Technical support for 
fast-tracking and scaling 
up the Market Analysis 
and Development 
(MA&D) process to 
develop natural 
resource -based 
businesses . - Three updated capacity assessments 
(every two years)  of current  needs and 
coverage of extension services within the 
DoF, DoPWM  and DoCD to support the 
development and sustained operation of 
natural resource -based businesses.  
- Five annual training workshops (one 
central workshop  and one in each of four 
regions) for DoF, DoPWM and DoCD to 
support the development and sustained 
operation of natural resource -based 
businesses through MA&D process.  
- Initiation of MA&D consultation process 
with 125 participating communities , including 
summary assessment reports . 
- Train ing provided to participating 
communities on basic entrepreneurship 
skills to facilitate the establishment of natural 
resource -based businesses, including 
through development of revised training 
programmes hosted by the D oCD’s Multi -
Purpose Centres.  Four training sessions will 
be hosted at each of 21 Multi -Purpose 
Centres per year, training up to ~5,000 
people through ~500 training sessions  
- Establishment of village business bank 
accounts to be managed by community -
based associations , to support  the 
establishment of practices for communal 
savings, accounting and sustainable 
financial management.  - Technical support  
- Consultation process  
- Training  
 - Technical support to: a) assess and update the 
capacity need s and extension services within  DoF, 
DoPWM  and DoCD; b) implement the MA&D process; 
and c) establish ment of village bank accounts to 
manage the finances of community -managed  natural 
resource based businesses.  
- Consultation p rocess to validate CBOs.  
- Training o f communities on basic entrepreneurship 
skills.  
 
2.2 Business plans, 
forums and financial 
analyses to catalyze 
private and public 
investment in a 
climate -resilient natural 
resource base . - Two summary assessment reports on  
existing and new businesses based on 
processing, packaging and marketing 
natural resource based products and 
services  (commissioned at project inception 
and at Year 5, to inform policy 
recommendations) . 
- At least four trade fairs hosted to promot e - Technical con sultancy  
- Forums  
- Consultation process  
 - Consultancy to identify and assist development of 
businesses based on natural resour ce based products 
and services.  
- Forums to promote private sector investment in 
natural resource -based businesses.  
- Consultation process with: a) GCCI to identify 
innovative financial mechanisms to catalyze  private 
sector investment in natural resource -based


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
invest ment opportunities and products 
generated by  natural resource -based 
businesses.  
- Development, printing and dissemination of 
4 reports (1 per region ) on the outcomes 
and recommendations of the assessments 
for presentation to policymakers . 
 businesses; and b) government to strengthen 
synergies between sectoral priorities and public 
investments.  
2.3 Investments in 
procurement and 
maintenance of 
infrastructure to develop 
natural resource -based 
businesses . - Annual assessment reports on 
infrastructure needs for strengthening 
existing and developing new businesses 
based on processing, packaging, storage 
and marketing of goods  (collation of annual 
reports generated by regional -level MA&D 
consultations ). 
- Appointment of NGO service provider to 
develop and facilitate Multi -Purpose Centre 
training programmes.  
- Maintenance and upgrades, including 
procurement o f equipment, for 21 existing 
Multi -Purpose Centres to support community 
training programmes.  
- Establish long -term plans for monitoring 
and maintenance of equipment procured to 
support nat ural resource -based businesses.  
- Annual training programmes for DoCD 
Multi -Purpose Centre staff on utilizing  and 
maintaining the procured equipment.  
- Investments in infrastructure and 
equipment to support the establishment and 
demonstration of natural resource -based 
businesses, including at least the following 
in each of  four regions: i) one food -
processing facility established at DoCD 
Multi -Purpose Centre; ii) maintenance and 
expansion of existing timber -processing 
facilities at DoF Regional Foresty Office; and 
iii) establishment and/or expansion of 
ecotourism facilities  at DoPWM Community 
Conservation Areas.  
- Investment in equipment for establishment 
of Community Forest Enterprises based on - Technical consultancy  
- Procurement of 
infrastructure  
- Training  - Consultancy to: a) identify infrastructure needs for 
developing new businesses; and b) establish long -
term plans for maintenance of equipme nt. 
- Procurement of i nfrastructure for MPCs , DoF 
Regional Forestry Offices and DoPWM Community 
Conservation Areas.  
- Procurement of equipment for establishment of 
community -managed natural resource -based 
businesses within at least 125 communities.  
- Training o f extension staff on using and maintaining 
infrastructure .


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
enhanced natural resource base, identified 
in Activity 2.1, in participation with ~125 
communities. The project’s investments will 
include the procurement of equipment for 
the establishment of at least two of the 
following natural resource -based business 
types:  beekeeping, firewood marketing, 
basic timber collection and handicraft 
manufacturing and others identified as 
appropriate dur ing the project 
implementation phase.  
3.1. Strategic 
recommendations/  
technical support 
provided to: a) 
strengthen the 
implementation of 
existing policies for 
participatory 
management and 
benefit -sharing of a 
climate -resilient natura l 
resource base; and b) 
integrate EbA into these 
policies.  - Annual summary reports of  existing 
requests and claims by community -based 
committees to be engaged in co -
/participatory management of natural 
resources  (collation of regional MA& D 
reports and DoF/DoPWM claims) . 
- Undertake national and regional 
assessments of existing capacity gaps and 
logistical challenges to formally integrate 
EbA into land -use planning, including 
through decentralized  management of 
natural resources in CFs, JMF Ps, JMWPs 
and CCSFMAs.  
- Two investment needs assessments  to 
promote optimal return from co -/participatory 
management of natural resources and EbA 
investments , to inform EbA upscaling 
strategy and policy guidance ( including 
elaboration of operational and m aintenance 
costs, required infrastructural investments 
and staff budgets ). 
- Two participatory workshops to guide the 
development of policies for participatory 
management and benefit -sharing of a 
climate -resilient natural resource base.  - Technical consult ancy and 
support  - Technical consultancy and support for: i) strategic 
recommendations and strengthening existing policies 
for participatory management of  a climate -resilient 
natural resource base; and ii) integrating  EbA into 
policies.  
3.2. Information P latform 
established to support 
the development of 
natural resource -based 
livelihoods and sectors.  - Operational online information platform to 
increase the availability of information on 
EbA, climate change adaptation and natural 
resource management (in association with 
LDCF EWS project).  Including:  
- - updated maps of existing and - Technical consultancy  
- Public awareness 
campaign/tools  - Technical consultancy to: a) undertake market 
analyses; b) update maps of co -managed areas and 
assist with sharing these maps on  online information 
system; c) generate summary case studies of 
successful natural resource -based businesses; d) 
produce a publication on how to conduct large -scale


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
proposed community co -managed 
areas – particularly with respect to 
CFs, JMFPs, JMWPs and 
CCSFMAs ; 
- summary case studies of 
successful natural resource -based 
businesses  
- lessons learned on inter alia 
implementation arrangements, 
return on investment, and best 
practice principles.  
- One ‘state of the art’ publication on how to 
conduct large -scale EbA in different 
ecosystem types across The Gambia , to be 
revised for a second edition  at the end of the 
project implementation period  and will be 
strongly aligned with the country’s NAP 
process.  
- A strategic framework to promote long -term 
national research on EbA, including the 
large -scale EbA interventions implemented 
by the GCF project as well as other 
initiatives, established through a 
Memorandum of Understanding between 
MoE and supporting academic research 
institutions.  EbA in different eco system types across The Gambia; 
e) develop a strategic framework to promote long -term 
national research on EbA; and f) refine large -scale 
EbA protocols.  
- Public awareness campaign/tools to raise awareness 
on social -economic and environmental benefits of 
large -scale EbA.  
3.3. Policy 
recommendations 
proposed to support 
large -scale 
implementation of EbA 
and development of 
natural resource -based 
businesses in The 
Gambia.  - Two workshops undertaken in participation 
with the Gambia’s NAPs Team on climate 
chang e and land -use change effects, EbA 
interventions, lessons learned through the 
GCF project and proposed policy revisions 
to promote and upscale EbA.  
- Identify local as well as national policy 
barriers to planning, financing and 
implementing large -scale EbA  based on 
lessons l earned through the GCF project.  
- Identify policy options for promoting large -
scale EbA as a means of managing natural 
resources in The Gambia and 
simultaneously developing businesses from 
a climate -resilient natural resource base.  
- A national EbA upscaling strategy - Technical cons ultancy  
- Workshops  
- Consultation process  Consultancy to: a) identify policy barriers to 
implementing large -scale EbA; b) document the socio -
economic results from businesses; c) identify policy 
options for promoting large -scale EbA . 
- Workshops with the NAPs Team on : a) climate  
change and land -use change effects ; b) EbA 
interventions ; c) lessons learned through the GCF 
project ; and d) proposed policy revisions to promote 
and upscale EbA . 
- Consultation process with: a) stakeholders from 
business that bene fit from large -scale EbA to identify 
socio -economic results; b) policy - and decision -
makers to pi lot the mainstreaming of large -scale EbA 
into national policy and legislative processes in The 
Gambia.


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
 developed, including identification of long -
term financing options and opportunity for 
collaboration and external technical support,  
- Pilot the mainstreaming of large -scale EbA 
into national policy and legislative processe s 
in The Gambia , including the upcoming 
revisions to the Agricultural and Natural 
Resource policy, Vision 2020 (the next 
phase of Vision 2016) and the ongoing 
articulation of The Gambia’s national and 
sectoral responses to climate change .  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
147. The project’s progress towards delivery of the project targets described in the Results Framework will be formally assessed t hrough the 
results of a baseline study, a Mid -Term Evaluation (MTE) at the project’s midpoint and a Terminal Evaluation  (TE) at the end of the project 
implementation period. UNEP will be responsible for managing  and covering the costs for  the mid-term evaluation , terminal evaluation 
assessments  and respective M&E reports from the AE fee , with the assistance and participati on of the Project Manager and other project staff and 
partners. The mid -term and terminal  evaluations will be undertaken by an independent consultant , who will be recruited by the UNEP independent 
Evaluation Office . 
 
148. The baseline study will be undertaken a t the project inception to generate an updated assessment of the project context, particularly with 
respect to the various indicators and targets proposed. The results of the baseline study will be used as the reference point  by which progress 
towards achi evement of the project’s targets will be assessed. The Mid -Term Evaluation (MTE) will provide an independent assessment of project 
performance at mid -term, to analyse whether the project is on track, what problems and challenges the project is encountering , and which 
corrective actions are required so that the project can achieve its intended outcomes by project completion in the most effic ient and sustainable 
way. The PSC will participate in the MTE and develop a management response to the evaluation recom mendations along with an implementation 
plan. It is the responsibility of the UNEP Programme Officer to monitor whether the agreed recommendations are being implemen ted. An 
independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place at the end of project implemen tation. The EO will be responsible for the TE and liaise with the 
UNEP Programme Officer throughout the process. The TE will provide an independent assessment of project performance (in terms  of relevance, 
effectiveness and efficiency), and determine the l ikelihood of impact and sustainability. It will have three primary purposes:  
 to provide evidence of results to meet accountability requirements;  
 to promote learning, feedback, and knowledge sharing through results and lessons learned among UNEP and execu ting partners; and  
 to assess the major socio -economic, environmental and policy -level impacts of the project.  
 
149. While a TE should review use of project funds against budget, it would be the role of a financial audit to assess probity (i. e. correctness, 
integrity etc.) of expenditure and transactions. The TE report will be sent to project stakeholders for comments. Formal comments  on the report will 
be shared by the EO in an open and transparent manner. The project performance will be assessed against standar d evaluation criteria using a


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
 six point rating scheme. The final determination of project ratings will be made by the EO when the report is finalised. The evaluation report will be 
publically disclosed and will be followed by a recommendation compliance pr ocess. The direct costs of and the MTR and TE will be charged 
against the AE fee for the project.


---
*Page 72*
---

 
ANNEXES  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 66 
 
 
 I 
 
 
 I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter – Annex A  
☒ Feasibility Study and Integrated Financial Model – Annex B  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment – Annex C  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule,  etc.) – Annex D  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
- Annex E  
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations for The Gambia and UNEP – Annex F  
☐ Evaluation  Report of the baseline project (If applicable) – N/A. Annex G  contains summary table of baseline  
and co -financing  initiat ives 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme – Annex H  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation – Annex I  
☒ Detailed list of activities  – Annex J  
☒ Proposed selection criteria for participating communities  – Annex K  
☒ Capacity Assessment for Executing Entity, MoECCFWW  – Annex L  
☒ Implementation Arrangements – Annex M  
☒ Theory of Change – Annex N  
☐ Project Confirmation  
☒ Gender analysis – Annex O  
☒ Procurement plan – Annex P 
☒ The Gambia Forest Act (1998) – Annex Q.1; Forest Policy of The Gambia  2010 -2019  – Annex Q.2  
☒ Term Sheet  – Annex R


---
*Page 73*
---

 
GFC/B.13/16/ Add. 03 
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 74*
---

 
GFC/B.13/16/ Add. 03


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GFC/B.13/16/ Add. 03 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Large -scale Ecosystem -based Adaptation in The Gambia: Developing 
a Climate -Resilient, Natural Resource -based Economy  
Accredited entity  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category C  
 Note:  Environmental and social report disclosure not required for 
Category C and Intermediation 3 projects and programmes.  
Environmental and social report disclosure information  
Description of 
report/disclosure  N/A  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website   
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  http://  
Other link(s)  http://