=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20160607152758+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
/ModDate: D:20160608230220+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP 010 GCF/B.13/1 6/Add.02 
8 June 2016  Meeting of the Board  
28 – 30 June 2016  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem 12(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ De-risking and scaling -up investment in energy efficient
building retrofits (in Armenia) ” submitted by United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure .
The documents  are presented as submitted by the accredited entity,  and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.13/16/Add.02  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point  
                 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 Section G  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section H  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the  funding proposal template  
• Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”  
 
FP-UNDP -2203 16-5684


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 69 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme title  De-Risking and Scaling -up Investment in Energy Efficient 
Building Retrofits  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country  (ies) / region  Armenia 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Ministry of Nature Protection 
A.1.5. Accredited entity United Nations Development Programme  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒ International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary   
Executing Entity: Ministry of Nature Protection  
 
Direct b eneficiaries include  
-30,000 people living in s ingle -family individual buildings  and 
52,200 in multi-family apartment buildings, including at least 
6,000 members of women- headed households; and 
- 23,000 users of  large public buildings  and 105,000 users of 
small public buildings , including at least 90,000 women.  
 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☐ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☒  Mitigation  
A.1.9. Date of first submission  
          Date of last submission   
30 July 2015  
8 April 2016  
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Robert  Kelly, Technical Advisor  
Organization  UNDP  
Email address  robert.kelly@undp.org  
Telephone number  +251 91250 3306  
Mailing address  UNDP – Global Environment Finance  
Bureau for Policy and Programme Support  
Kirkos Sub City; Kebele 01, House No. 119  
P.O.Box 60130, Addis Ababa  
Ethiopia


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 69 
 
 
 A 
 
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation   
(E.g. on- grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport   
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☒ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk  associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. Armenia is a small, poor, land -locked country in the heart of Eurasia, and is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. Unsustainable energy use in buildings underpins Armenia’s closely intertwined development, security and 
climate -related challenges :  
 
• Approximately 30% of Armenian households are energy -poor, where energy poverty (often called ‘fuel 
poverty’) is defined as households spending more than 10% of their budgets on energy1. 
•  45% of apartments in multi -family buildings have indoor temperatures  in win ter below 19 °C (i.e. below 
established international standards for human occupancy ).2,3 
• 50% of energy use in buildings depends on import ed fossil fuels .  
• 24% of CO 2 emissions come from energy use in buildings . 
• Over 50% of energy can be saved via energy efficient retrofits (Figure 1).  
 
2. Improving energy efficiency (EE) in buildings has been assigned the highest priority in Armenia’s housing, energy 
and climate strategi es, including the country’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC),  its Third National 
Communication to the UNFCCC and its UNFCCC Technology Needs Assessment.   
 
3. The project aims at creating a favourable  market environment and scalable business model for investment in EE 
building retrofits in Armenia, leading to siz eable energy savings and GHG emission reductions  (up to 5.8  million  tCO 2 
of direct and indirect emission savings over the 20- year equipment lifetime s), green job creation and energy poverty 
reduction. It will directly benefit over 200,000 people and catalyse private and public sector investment of 
approximately US$ 100 million.  
 
 
                                                             
1 This definition of energy poverty, which focuses on energy expenditures relative to income, is sometimes also referred to as fuel 
poverty, to distinguish it from the broader concept of energy poverty that is also concerned with a lack of access to modern energy 
services, irrespective of their affordability.  
2 ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55- 2004: 'Thermal environmental conditions for human occupancy'  
3 http://www.nature -ic.am/wp -content/uploads/2014/12/Analytical_Report_2014_ENG -VER-1.pdf , pp. 43 -45


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 69 
 
 
 A 
Figure 1. EE retrofit of a Typical P anel Multi-Apartment Building  in Armenia ( Before and After) 
   
Source: Summary of UNDP -GEF Pilot EE retrofit project in Yerevan, Armenia  
 
4. UNDP will work with the Government , city administrations , the European Investment Bank , private sector 
stakeholders, ESCOs and local banks to deploy the most cost -effective combination of policy and financial de -risking 
instruments and targeted financial incentives to address market barriers and achieve a risk -return profile for EE 
building retrofits that can attract private investments.  
 
5. The project builds on UNDP’s long experience supporting the Government of Armenia and on UNDP’s de- risking 
framework for low -carbon investment .4 It has the full backing of Armenia’s N ational Designated Authority (NDA) for 
the GCF , the UNFCCC National Focal Point, and the Municipality  of Yerevan (home to one-third of Armenia’s 
population). The project is fully consistent with Armenia’s INDC.  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  The project was approved by UNDP Local Project Appraisal 
Committee (LPAC) on 27 July 2015. See  Annex VII.   
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Not applicable.   
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start:  01/09/2016  (to be confirmed  / not before the FAA becomes 
effective)  
End:   31/08/2022  
Project/programme lifespan  20 years5 
 
                                                             
4 UNDP  (2013), Derisking Renewable Energy Investment. A Framework to Support Policy -Makers in Selecting Public Instruments to 
Promote Renewable Energy Investment in Developing Countries : www.undp.org/drei   
5 The lifespan of the programme, understood to be the period over which direct benefits take place, matches the estimated lifet ime 
of the buildings retrofitted by the project. UNDP is open to supporting post -project implementation and/or monitoring of results during 
the project lifespan, provided there is more guidance from the GCF Board on what is expected, including details on how many y ears 
after project closure this support is to be carried out, and what form it will take. In the context of potential post -implementation 
project support, UNDP can develop a post -project implementation plan and budget in the fifth year of the project for discussion and 
approval by the GCF.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 69 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
6. The project involves a combination of investment and technical assistance. For investment (Component 4), GCF 
financing in the amount of US$ 14 million is being requested to address the needs of vulnerable households and 
remove financial barriers by making loans for EE building retrofits more affordable.6 This will be complemented by 
US$8 million in co -financing from the Municipality of Yerevan. For technical assistance (Components 1, 2 and 3, and 
for Project Management) the requested GCF funding is US$ 6 mi llion to remove market and policy barriers to EE 
building retrofits , and the co- financing will be provided by the Ministry of Nature Protection (MoNP) in the amount of 
US$ 0.4 million and the accredited entity, UNDP -  US$ 1.42 million (See overview of proj ect financing structure in the 
table below).   
 
Component  Financiers  Required financing (MUSD)  
Investment  GCF  14.000  
Yerevan Municipality  8.000  
Sub-total 22.000  
Technical A ssistance  GCF  6.000  
UNDP  1.420  
MoNP  0.400  
Sub-total 7.820  
Total Project Cost  29.820  
 
7. In addition, the project has a potential to leverage a sizeable volume of additional resources . To maximize this 
potential, UNDP  is working  closely with the European Investment Bank ( EIB) on securing concessional loan for public 
and residential sector  (See Annex IV b and IVe) . The EIB is currently in the process of conducting the due diligence 
process on the potential first phase (EIB loan - US$12 million ) that would target public sector buildings. The loan 
resources for the first phase are expected to be provided upon appraisal in Q3 2016. The potential second phase is 
subject to further due diligence by EIB and the amount is up to US $86 million. Overall, US$ 20 million of GCF financing 
is expected to leverage over US$ 80 million of private investment  and US$ 20 million of public investment  in energy 
efficiency retrofits.  
 
8. The technical assistance provided in Components 1, 2 and 3 need grants since they address and remove systemic 
risks and overcome market barriers7: 
 
• Component 1 will establish building sector Measur ement , Reporting and Verification ( MRV ) and knowledge  
management. One of the identified barriers is a lack of information and awareness: energy efficiency is not 
a major concern for most people in Armenia. There is a low level of awareness among building owners, real 
estate agencies and occupants about operational costs and potential energy - and money -saving 
opportunities. There is also a misinformed perception that full c ompliance with efficient building codes and 
energy -efficient buildings would be prohibitively expensive in Armenia.  The market for EE products and 
services is immature.  Robust MRV will build the investment case for energy efficiency retrofits and,  together  
with the dissemination of information,  will support the communication of the financial and development gains 
to be made from energy efficiency investments, thus improving information availability and awareness of the 
benefits of buildings with improved energy performance.  
 
• Component 2 will support national, sub- national and local authorities to adopt and implement an enabling 
policy framework for energy efficiency retrofits. This will remove a number of policy, legal and institutional 
                                                             
6 The US$ 20 million GCF budget total includes project management costs but excludes the fee of the GCF Accredited Entity (see 
Section B.3).  While not included in this proposal on the instructions by the GCF Secretariat, an additional cost of 9% of the value of 
the GCF project  budget  will be necessary to cover quality assurance and oversight services performed by UNDP as a GCF 
Accredited Entity over all phases of the project cycle. This includes: (i) oversight of proposal development; (ii) appraisal (pre - and 
final) and oversight of project start -up; (iii) supervision and oversight of project implementation; and (iv) oversee project closure. 
UNDP awaits confirmation from the GCF Board on this matter and expect s that the AE fee, over and above the project cost, will be 
approved by the GCF Board prior to implementation.  
7 Detailed analysis of systemic risks and market barriers to EE investment in buildings in Armenia -  please see Section 1.2 of the 
UNDP  Project Document, pp. 7- 17, presented in Annex  II.


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 69 
 
 B 
barriers through supp orting legal reform, the introduction  and implementation  of regulation , and the 
modernisation and enforcement of standards . Component 2 will also remove technical and capacity barriers 
by providing technical assistance to selected market players, such as building owners / managers / owner 
associations and local government.  
 
• Component 3 will provide access to affordable capital for energy efficiency retrofits. This will help remove 
financial barriers , such as the fact that home- owners and public sector enti ties lack the financial resources 
necessary to undertake EE building retrofits without loans and the reluctance of local commercial banks to provide loans for EE renovation.  
 
9. In Component 4, grants from the GCF will be offered as a temporary targeted incentive. They  will be targeted and 
will address the needs of the most vulnerable households. The financial analysis (Annex II
8 and Annex III ) shows 
that, for those earning less than the median household income of US $ 400 per month,  building retrofits are not 
affordable. For middle-  and higher -income households , grants are not needed from an affordability point of view, and 
will only be used at a low level to overcome early -mover barriers. The grants will support poor and vulnerable  
households to secure access to improved thermal comfort and cost / energy savings.  Incentive grant s for low-income 
households  are also needed to unlock building- level investments , as these households might otherwise block 
building- level investment decisions in multi -apartment buildings .   
 
10. Incentives in the form of grants are common in developed countries – both in the EU and USA , sizeable grants are 
common practice. KfW , for instance, provides loans together with incentive grants for energy efficiency retrofits in 
Germany of between 7.5 and 22.5% ; consequently , the proposed incentive grants in Armenia (in the similar range of 
7-22%) can be considered  modest  (given that median household income in Germany  – US$ 2,600 per month9 – is 
6.5 times higher than that of Armenian households) . A total of US$ 12.5 million in incentive grants will be used to 
support vulnerable households in the residential sector.  
 
11. In the public sector, a small incentive (totalling around US D 1.5 million) is needed to provide necessary stimulus to 
support higher energy efficiency standards than required under ‘business as usual’. Also, the market and lending will likely increase much more rapidly  with a small grant (up to 5% of investment cost)  to incentivise first movers amongst 
municipalities.  The funds will be applied as a grant towards the financing of measures alongside potential lending 
from EIB and cash investments from the municipality.  In addition , the modest incentive will also serve t o accelerate 
the renovation of buildings, thus improving the quality of public facilities such as  hospitals and kindergartens  servicing 
the population.  
 
12. The breakdown by component of the GCF funding is given below . For further details on how the financial instruments 
will address barriers and achieve project objectives , please see Sections E.6 and F.1.  
 
13. Component 1: Establishment of B uilding Sector MRV (GCF grant funding US$ 890,000) . Grant resources will be 
provided as technical assistance to the relevant national authorities to establish and operationalise MRV systems for 
the building sector  
 
14. Component 2: Policy D e-Risking (GCF grant funding US$ 890,000) . GCF  grant funding will be used to cover the cost 
of developing enabling policies for EE retrofits.  
 
15. Component 3: Financial D e-Risking  (GCF grant funding US$ 3,420,000) . GCF grant funding will be used for technical 
assistance to coordinate the design of financial de- risking instruments with UNDP’s partners, and to identify a cost -
effective and harmonised set of instruments. GCF grant funding will also be required to suppor t complementary 
activities that ensure take- up of the financial de- risking instruments by the domestic financial sector.  
 
                                                             
8 Feasibility study including detailed technical, economic, financial and GHG analysis of the project is included in the Annex D of the 
UNDP Project Document on pp. 65- 96, which is presented in Annex II to this GCF Funding Proposal. The i ntegrated financial model 
which underpins this analysis is provided in Annex III  to this GCF Funding Proposal.  
9 http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/countries/germany/


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 69 
 
 B 
16. Component 4: Financial Incentives (GCF Grant funding US$ 14,000,000) . GCF grant funding will be used for direct 
incentives to building owners (primarily residential home / apartment owners). This is necessary to jump- start the 
market  and address the issues of affordability for the upfront cost of EE retrofits, in some cases to improve the IRR 
of EE retrofit projects and in other cases as a behavioural incentive to stimulate the initial demand from building 
owners.  
 
Component  Sub- component  Financing institution* (MUS$)  Total 
(MUSD)  Total /component 
(MUSD)  GCF  Govt  UNDP  
Component 1:  
Establishment of Building 
Sector MRV  1.1 MRV systems for the 
buildings sector in Armenia  0,650 0,050 0,303 1,003 
1,595 
1.2 Knowledge management 
and MRV information 
dissemination  0,240 0,050 0,303 0,593 
Component 2:                          
Policy De -Risking  2.1 Public instruments for the 
promotion of investment in EE  0,140 0,040 0,121 0,301 
1,695 2.2 Support to ongoing legal 
reform in the field of energy 
efficiency  0,200 0,040 0,121 0,361 
2.3 Support for the creation of 
an enabling policy framework 
for EE retrofits in multi -owner 
residential buildings  0,120 0,040 0,121 0,281 
2.4 Support to building 
owners / managers / owner 
associations / ESCOs  0,280 0,040 0,121 0,441 
2.5 Exit strategy  0,150 0,040 0,121 0,311 
Component 3:                          
Financial De- Risking  3.1 Technical assistance to 
banks and other financial 
institutions  0,850     0,850 
11,420 3.2 Technical assistance to 
banks for Home- Owner 
Association (HOA) market 
facilitation  1,270     1,270 
3.3 Technical assistance to 
local government to develop 
EE retrofit projects for 
publicly -owned buildings  0,870     0,870 
3.4 Access to affordable 
capital for energy efficiency 
retrofits*    8,000   8,000 
3.5 Marketing platform  0,430     0,430 
Component 4:                          
Financial Incentives  4.1 Targeted financial 
incentives provided to 
vulnerable groups  14,000     14,000 14,000 
Project Management**  Project Manager, assistant, 
travel, office running cost s and 
office equipment, meetings of Project Board and Technical Advisory Committee, 
independent evaluation, 
financial audit and other 
project management costs.  0,800 0,100 0,210 1,110 1,110 
Total  20,000 8,400 1,420 29,820 29,820 
 
* In addition to the confirmed co-financing  from the Yerevan Municipality , the Ministry of Nature Protection and UNDP , potential 
parallel financing is expected to come: 1) after the appraisal by EIB – in the first stage : loan for public buildings –  US$ 12 million; 
in the second stage : loan for public and residential buildings –up to 86 million USD – to be appraised in 2016 -2017 ); 2) along with


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 69 
 
 B 
an additional US$ 6 .75 million  from residents / building owners . The amounts for the two stages of EIB loans are subject to EIB’s 
due diligence.  
** Project Management Cost will be incurred first by UNDP (under UNDP’s NIM  Direct Agency Implementation modality) and , 
later, by the PIU of the Municipality of Yerevan (once established and operational) . 
 
17. UNDP’s currency hedging mechanism is based on matching cash flows (i.e. revenues and expenses) in non-
US$ currencies and bank account balances are targeted not to exceed approximately one month’s disbursement 
requirements to minimi se risk. 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  29.82 million USD ($)   
(b) 
Requested 
GCF amount   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable grants  
(vi) Grants  
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
20 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD ($)  (  )  years  
(  )  years  
 
 
 
 (   ) %  (   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
   
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  20 million USD ($)   
(c) Co -
financing  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amoun
t Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Grant  
 
Grant  
Grant  
 8.00 
 
1.42 
0.40 
 million USD ($)  
 
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)   
       Municipality of 
Yerevan  
UNDP10 
Ministry of 
Nature 
Protection  (  )  
years  
(  )  
years  
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
 Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: N/a 
Confirmation letters from co -financing partners are provided in the Annex IV . The status of co -financing 
as of December 2015 is the following:  
 
a) Yerevan municipality: co- financing confirmed (Annex IVc) . 
  
b) UNDP: co -financing has been confirmed, consisting of UNDP’s TRAC (grant) resources in the 
amount of US$ 240,000 and US$ 1,000,000 of grant from the UNDP -GEF ‘Sustainable Cities ’ 
project. This GEF project has been prioritized by the Government of Armenia to receive funding 
from the Armenian GEF -6 STAR allocation and is currently under development, with an expected 
starting date in July 2016.  
 
c) Ministry of Natural Resources (MoNP): co- financing (grant) has been confirmed, see Annex IVd . 
 
 
B.3. Fee Arrangement  
                                                             
10 UNDP’s grant co -financing will be provided in cash.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 69 
 
 B 
18. The fee arrangement for the proposed project will be aligned with the GCF Board’s decision on fees, taken at the 11th 
meeting of the Board . 
 
19. The budget figures presented in this proposal exclude the fee: i.e. the resources required to cover quality assurance 
and oversight services performed by UNDP over all phases of the project cycle as follows: (i) oversight of proposal 
development; (ii) appraisal (pre and final) and oversight of project start -up; (iii) supervision and oversight of project 
implementation; and (iv) oversee project closure.  
B.4. Financial Market Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 69 
 
 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
20. Armenia’s Third  National Communication to the UNFCCC (2015)11 identifies public , residential and commercial 
buildings among the country’s top priorit ies for climate change mitigation: GHG emissions from buildings grew  five-
fold between 2000 and 2010, from 345 ktCO 2 in 2000 up to 1,723 ktCO 2 in 2010. Armenia’s UNFCCC Technology 
Needs Assessment12 (2003) identifies heat supply to buildings as one of the main sources of GHG emissions and as 
having a large potential for energy saving and emission reduction.  
 
21. Improving energy efficiency (EE) in the building sector has been assigned a high priority in Armenia’s climate, energy 
and housing strategies. In particular , achieving thermal modernisation through energy efficiency retrofits is outlined 
as a national development priority, particularly for multi -apartment buildings. This is particularly clear in the provisions 
of the National EE Programme (2007), the National Security Strategy (2007), the Concept for Ensuring Energy 
Security (2013) and the Energy Security Strategy Action Plan (2014) , which all identify the EE potential for the 
buildings sector and provide outlines of technical measures  / solutions to be taken. In addition,  the Covenant of 
Mayors (a 10- city joint agreement)  outlines building EE goals.  Since 2004,  Armenia has been involved in the 
European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). The ENP Action Plan was approved in 2006 and is support ing the 
harmoni sation of Armenian legislation, norms and st andards with EU EE criteria.  
 
22. Last year,  the Government of Armenia and UNDP prepared the ‘Energy Efficient Public Buildings and Housing in 
Armenia NAMA’ (2014)13. This Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) will promote energy efficiency in 
public buildings and social housing, with a particular focus on energy efficiency measures in new construction, capital 
renovation and in management of public buildings.  
 
23. The general legal -regulatory framework governing energy efficiency in buildings in Armenia was reviewed in 2013 in 
the report , ‘Results of Analysis and Recommendations for Overcoming Barriers to Increased Energy Efficiency in 
Residential Buildings: Str ategy Report , which  was one of the outputs of EBRD’s ‘ Armenia - Improving Energy 
Efficiency in Residential Buildings ' Programme. The legal -regulatory framework includes the cross -cutting framework 
governing energy efficiency in buildings , as well as legislation on construction.  The National Programme on 
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency  identifies the sectors with the largest energy efficiency potential and 
proposes 16 categories of energy efficiency measures to be taken to reduce energy  use, which includes  the building 
sector14.  
 
24. Analysis of the World Bank RISE indicators15 shows that while Armenia has made good progress towards establishing 
enabling environments for investment in energy efficiency, there is still much room for improvement in the areas of 
planning and of policies and regulations  in the buildings sector . 
 
25. A number of initiatives have targeted energy efficiency retrofits in Armenia, but none of them offer targeted finance 
for building -level retrofits of multi- owner residential buildings. Furthermore, whilst there are several commercial banks 
with energy efficiency lending portfolios for SMEs and individual entrepreneurs, the building retrofit sector has not 
been addressed due to its perceived high risks, such as risk s associated with collective decision- making / payment 
enforcement for multi -owner apartment buildings  (detailed analysis of risks and barriers to EE investment in buildings 
in Armenia is provided in Section 1.2 of the UNDP Project Document, pp. 7- 18, pres ented in Annex II) . 
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
26. Market Overview . Achieving thermal modernisation  through energy efficiency retrofits in all building sectors is a 
national development priority, particularly for multi -apartment buildings. Energy efficiency retrofits are targeted by  the 
first NAMA prepared by the country, and will assist cities of Armenia to meet their commitments  presented in the 
INDC, as well as  under  the Covenant of Mayors initiative to reduce GHG emissions from energ y consumption by 
20% by 2020. Retrofits will also mitigate  the negative social impact of future increases  in energy tar iffs and increasing 
                                                             
11http://www.nature -ic.am/wp -content/uploads/2013/10/1.Armenias -TNC_2015_ENG.pdf , p. 21  
12http://unfccc.int/ttclear/misc_/StaticFiles/gnwoerk_static/TNR_CRE/e9067c6e3b97459989b2196f12155ad5/19789a07b4de493cb7
2e43c47fd4db1e.pdf   
13 http://www4.unfccc.int/sites/nama/SitePages/Country.aspx?CountryId=8   
14 Detailed overview of governmental policies, legislation and by -laws on energy eff iciency in building sector is presented in Annex 
II, pp. 12- 15 
15 Armenian RISE Indicators are presented on pp. 52- 53 (Table 6) in Annex II


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 69 
 
 C 
energy demand  as a result of climate change16. Average electricity tariffs for residential customers increased by a 
factor of  1.8 between 2008- 2014, and natural gas tariff s by a factor of  2.6 between 2007- 2014.  A decision on 17 June 
2015 by the Public Services Regulatory C ommission to raise electricity prices  further  by 17 -22% led to protests in 
Yerevan and other cities that are ongoing as of the date of writing (July 2015). The extensive unrest demonstrates 
the significance of fuel  poverty and has raised the issue to the top of the G overnment’s agenda.  
 
27. The buildings sector  is one of major energy consumers in Armenia. According to the 2010 GHG inventory , almost 
28% of primary energy resources are consumed in buildings, mostly in the residential sector . Globally , GHG 
emissions from the building sector have more than doubled s ince 1970 and now represent 19% of all global GHG 
emissions. Middle- income countries in Eastern Europe & Central Asia (EECA) , such as Armenia,  account for almost 
40% of all non- OECD GHG emissions in the buildings sector17. 
 
28. Due to Armenia’s continental climate , with a long heating season , average winter temperatures around - 5°C and 
winter extremes as low as  -42°C, energy consumption and GHG emissions in the Armenian building sector are 
primarily  associated with space heating.  
 
29. One sub- set of buildings  with significant energy -saving potential in Armenia are concrete panel  multi- storey  buildings  
(Figure 1) , of which there are approximately  4,300. In such buildings alone , the energy -saving potential of thermal 
modernisation is over 1.250 TWh/year , with a GHG reduction potential of 250 kt CO 2eq/year , and annual savings of 
about US$ 63 m (based on gas and electricity tariffs of 2014).  
 30. Previous projects in Armenia on energy efficiency in buildings have targeted new buildings and energy efficiency 
retrofits mainly in public sector buildings, whilst residential, commercial and industrial retrofits have been largely 
overlooked due to the higher levels of financial risk they pose. Furthermore, whilst there are several commercial 
banks with energy efficiency lending portfolios for SMEs and individual entrepreneurs, the building energy efficiency 
sector is not addressed. Interest rates for commercial loans are very high (up to 22%  per year ) and with short 
repayment periods.  
 
31. Barriers/Risks:  Due to the presence of policy, financial, market and technical  / capacity barriers , the overall 
investment risk profile of EE building retrofits is prohibitive in Armenia, deterring private and public investment despite 
the vast potential for highly cost -effective energy -saving and GHG emission reduction opportunities. These barriers 
are explained in the Section 1.2 of the UNDP Project Document (Annex II to the Funding Proposal) . By specifically 
targeting these  barriers and investment risks , the project will contribute towards a commercially -driven EE building 
retrofit market.  
 
32. Main goal: Scale -up investment in EE building retrofits in the cities of Armenia, and reduce the overall investment 
risk profile of EE building retrofits to encourage private sector investment and alleviate  poverty.  
 
33. Anticipated outcomes: 
 
 Component 1 -  Establishment of building sector MRV:  Robust MRV for the building sector established  
 Component 2 –  Policy de- risking:  National, sub -national and local authorities adopt and implement an 
enabling policy framework for EE retrofits  
 Component 3 –  Financial de- risking:  Access to affordable capital for EE retrofits provided  
 Component 4 –  Financial incentives:  Affordability of EE retrofits for the most vulnerable households ensured 
through targeted financial incentives to building / apartment owners  (directly or via private- sector ESCOs )  
 
34. Expected Impacts : The overall impacts of the GCF project have been estimated using the data from the technical 
and financial analysis . The overall impacts are summarised in the tables below  and take into consideration a potential 
leverage.  
 
                                                             
16 UNDP (2009), The Socio- Economic Impact of Climate Change in Armenia: 
http://www.am.undp.org/content/dam/armenia/docs/Report%20SOI%20of%20CC.pdf  
17 IPCC (2014), Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.  Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: http://mitigation2014.org


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 69 
 
 C 
  Average cost 
per retrofit 
(US$) Number of 
buildings  Total investment 
(US$) 
Single -family individual buildings  10,000  6,000  60,000,000  
Multi -family apartment buildings  120,000   290  34,800,000  
Public buildings (complex demand - and supply -side renovation, such 
as for a hospital)  250,000  23  5,750,000  
Public buildings (simple demand -side measures, such as for a 
school)  95,000  150  14,250,000  
Total    6,463  114,800,000  
 
35. The energy savings (in GWh per year) and GHG emissions savings (in tonnes of CO2eq per year) are given in the 
table below:  
 
  Energy savings 
(GWh) per year  Monthly 
financial 
savings 
(US$/house -
hold or 
building) * GHG 
savings 
(tonnes) per 
year Lifetime GHG 
savings  
(20 years)  
Single -family individual buildings  110.3  58    27,239      544,783  
Multi -family apartment buildings  93.1 26    22,997      459,942  
Public buildings (complex demand and supply side 
renovation, such as for a hospital)  7.7 2,578      5,005      100,093  
Public buildings (simple demand side measures, such as 
for a school)  53.2 992    14,243      284,860  
Total  264.3      69,484   1,389,677  
* The savings for residential buildings are per household  and, for public buildings , per building . The full savings are 
only reali sed after repayment of loans. For  a household living in an apartment , the saving of $26 represents 6.5% of 
median income ($400), and would reduce energy costs from 10.5% to 3.5% of median incomes  
 
36. The project will undertake a number of activities beyond simple investments that will also stimulate the market for 
energy efficiency in the residential and public building sectors. Therefore, there will be indirect energy savings triggered by investments not within the di rect control of the project. These are estimated using bottom -up and top-
down approaches based on the GEF methodology. The overall GHG emission results are as follows:  
 
  Cumulative  
 Total  2016-2021  2022-2041  
Direct Total Energy Savings (GWh)  5,285  5,285  0 
Direct GHG Emission Savings (tCO 2) 1,389,677  1,389,677  0 
Indirect Bottom -up Emission Savings (tCO 2) 4,169,032    4,169,032  
Indirect Top-down Emission Savings (tCO 2) 4,437,382    4,437,382  
 
37. Based upon a total GCF grant of US$ 20 million, the cost per tonne of direct CO 2 reduction would be US$ 14.4. 
Additionally, significant indirect emissions savings can be expected – between 4.2 and 4.4 million tonnes of CO 2 
reduction due to the project interventions ( 5.6 – 5.8 MtCO 2e, combining direct and indirect estimates) – yielding a 
total estimated cost per tonne of CO 2 reduced of between US $3.43 and US $ 3.60.  Based on these calculations, the 
project is very cost -effective.   
 
38. In addition to these impacts, it is estimated that 1,700 jobs will be created through the project.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 69 
 
 C 
39. The impact analysis is presented in  detail in  Annex D ( Section D.3) of the UNDP Project Document , which is provided 
in Annex II of  this GCF f unding proposal .  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
 
40. Project Components, O utcomes and Outputs  (for detailed information at the activity -level, please refer to Annex 
II, UNDP  Project Document) .  
 
41. The Project will use UNDP’s de- risking methodology and framework for low -carbon energy investments. This 
methodology takes a systematic approach to identifying and quantifying investment risks, and then assembles 
packages of targeted public instruments to address these risks. Modelling is then performed to assess the impact of 
the instrument packages. The overall aim is to identify the most cost -effective package of public instruments to 
achieve a risk -return profile that catalyses private sector investment  at scale. More information on the de- risking 
methodology can be found here: www.undp.org/DREI   
 
42. The de- risking methodology identifies three types of public instrument. Each of the three types of public instruments 
addresses the risk -return profiles of energy efficient investments in a different way, either reducing, transferring  or 
compensating for risk. Components 2 to 4 are structured around these categories.  
 
• Policy de -risking instruments  refer to public interventions that reduce  risk, by removing the underlying barriers 
that create investment risk. Policy de- risking measures are typically in the form of new government policies, 
regulations and/or programmes. An example of policy de- risking could be the introduction of standards i n energy 
efficiency materials for building retrofits.  
• Financial de -risking instruments  refer to public interventions that transfer  the financial impact of investment 
risks from the private sector to the public sector. These are typically financial product s offered by development 
banks. An example could be a loan guarantee from a development bank, in order for the commercial bank to lend to building owners to perform energy efficient measures.  
• Recognising that not all risks can be reduced through policy de- risking or transferred through financial de- risking, 
efforts to reduce risks can be supplemented by financial incentives to compensate for residual risks and thereby 
to increase returns. An example could be a targeted financia l subsidy for certain househo ld categories 
undergoing energy efficient upgrades.  
 
43. Investments in energy efficiency building retrofits face different risks and barriers for each building category. The 
main building categories targeted in this project will be public buildings (schools,  hospitals, municipal  / government 
offices) and, in the residential sector, individual houses and multi -owner apartment buildings. These categories have 
been selected for this project due, on the one hand,  to the specific barriers they face in investing in EE retrofits, the 
removal of which will increase the paradigm shift potential of the project; and, o n the other hand, because the target 
population will include vulnerable groups such as low -income households. Technically, the measures for residential 
buildings are thermal cladding of outer walls, window replacement, roof insulation, and the use of thermostatic valves with hydraulic balancing;  for public buildings , measures will include thermal insulation of walls, window replacement, 
roof insulation, new doors, efficient lighting (compact fluorescent or LED lighting), and the replacement of electrical 
heating systems with a natural gas heating systems (where demand- side measures are addressed)
18. These 
meas ures reduce the need for heating or improve the efficiency of heating and lighting, thus saving energy and 
reducing GHG emissions  by at least 50% compared to baseline.  For each targeted building stock , a package of 
relevant policy and financial de- risking instruments will be implemented to address the specific circumstances and 
barriers in the country and in the targeted building sub- sector. This specificity will create an easily scalable model for 
subs equent replication of energy efficiency retrofits and market growth.  The activities of the project will be structured 
around four main components.  
 
44. Component 1 – Establishment of building sector MRV and knowledge management. Component 1 aims to 
establish r obust MRV for the building sector to enable monitoring of energy use in buildings, prioritisation of buildings 
for energy efficiency retrofits, and quantification and monetisation of the resulting energy savings. Robust MRV is 
necessary to build the invest ment case for energy efficiency retrofits . The project will support the development of an 
                                                             
18 Detailed description of proposed energy efficient retrofit measures and their technical, economic and environmental analysis is 
provided i n the Annex IIa pp. 64- 95


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 69 
 
 C 
MRV framework, including guidelines and methodologies and building on UNDP’s extensive experience with 
establishing Energy Management Information System s (EMIS)19 for buildings .20 The project will then disseminate 
information on the cost -saving potential of energy efficiency retrofits to commercial banks and potential borrowers via 
the project website and stakeholder workshops.  This aim is strongly supported by stak eholders in the field of energy 
efficiency in Armenia, who concluded recently at a roundtable meeting on models for supporting energy efficiency 
approaches in Armenia that finding and using a common set of strategic and powerful metrics for measuring resul ts 
will be critical, both to communicating broadly on the financial and development gains to be made from energy 
efficiency investments, and to mobilis ing additional resources and support.  The GCF p roject will contribute to the 
creation of knowledge and collective learning processes through promoting better information dissemination to 
stakeholders , including the private sector,  and sharing lessons learned.  Activities will be implemented / supported by 
private sector consulting companies and individual experts. The potential role of women in implementation of 
Component 1 is significant. Women can be agents of change in creating awareness on the benefits of EE investments.  According to the Armenia Country Gender Assessment (July 2015) of the Asian Development Bank , 
many women are interested in energy -efficient and renewable energy projects, and know examples of pilot projects 
that they thought successful
21. Indicators of women participation i n this area will be monitored during implementation.  
The desired outcome of Component 1 is Outcome 1: Robust MRV of GHG emissions from the building sector established. The outputs and activities that will contribute to achieving this outcome are described below.  
 
45. Output 1.1 MRV systems for the buildings sector in Armenia established . Under Component 1, technical 
assistance will be provided to market stakeholders in order to undertake MRV and report on energy savings. This 
technical assistance will include t he following Activities:  
 
1.1.1 Development of  the MRV framework, including guidelines and monitoring methodologies for the various 
categories of buildings . 
1.1.2 Support to full implementation of building EMIS in selected buildings for demonstration and capacity building 
purposes . 
 Results:  
Indicator:  Development and coverage of MRV system and database  
Baseline:  N/A 
Mid-term target:  Developed & in use for renovated buildings: full coverage of buildings retrofitted in this project  
Final target:  Developed & in use for renovated buildings: full coverages of buildings retrofitted in this project  
 
46. Output 1.2 Knowledge management and MRV i nformation disseminated . Disseminati on of information, including 
that gained from EMIS for buildings , will help to establish the business case for energy efficiency building retrofits : 
i.e. monitor building energy use, spot the immediate and most cost -effective opportunities , and effectively monitor 
performance and improvement. Without a good EMIS it is i mpossible to advance  with any market -based instruments , 
because savings need to  be objectively monitored in order to be moneti sed. The knowledge management plan will 
be detailed at project inception, according to the most up- to-date local context and the experience of project managers 
and other contributors. A communication and dissemination strategy will be developed (based on scoping, 
consultation with local stakeholders, understanding the baseline of awareness and the types of information needs) 
and will include the following Activities:  
 
1.2.1 Identify appropriate formats for reaching the relevant stakeholders:  
• The general public (this will be through a nationwide media campaign on building energy efficiency 
retrofits in which selected retrofit case- studies will be featured).  
• Municipal staff in charge of the allocation of resources in areas of urban planning and development, energy services, as well as municipal procurement.  
• National Government officials.  
• Companies in the buildi ngs, renovation and energy services sectors.  
                                                             
19 An Energy Management Information System (EMIS) refers to a computer -based system for collecting, storing and analysing 
information on the energy performance of the monitored objects. Energy use data for individual objects (buildings) can be 
aggregated and monitored at sectoral, regional and national level, depending on the eventual set -up of the system.  
20 UNDP first piloted and scaled- up EMIS in public sector in Croatia  where the project freed up US$18 million of public budget 
annually as a result of nation- wide introduction of EMIS.   
21 http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional -document/162152/arm -country -gender -assessm ent.pdf


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 69 
 
 C 
• Financial institutions.  
1.2.2 Establish a website that will provide information and a platform for communication between the different 
stakeholders, thus enhancing cooperation and learning through the exchange of knowledge and skills.  
 Information about the project, activities and outputs will be made available and linked to building energy 
efficiency retrofit efforts in other countries. It will be updated regularly to reflect content created, developments 
during project implementation and case- studies. The site will collect resources relating to EE building 
renovation and make it possible to keep up to date with developments. The site will be regularly updated on 
activities, best practices and latest thinking.  
1.2.3 Information dissemination to maximize the impact potential of the project in Armenia and beyond. Appropriate 
formats for information presentation and sharing will be developed based on their likely effectiveness for 
raising awareness, facilitating information access and providing actionable guidance and support to the sector. The following formats will be considered:  
• Seminars , including themed national workshops focusing on best practice in building energy efficiency 
retrofits, potentially on an annual basis.  
• Tours of buildings  in which energy efficiency retrofits have been conducted. Presentations will be given 
by relevant project promoters to provide a powerful example of how these investments were achieved, 
and open up discussion regarding replication in other buildings.  
• Municipal EE corners  to provide information to the general public about the newest EE systems, products 
and materials available in Armenia  
• Promotional material – e.g. case studies, brochures and briefings.  
• Harvesting lessons learned  – including through after -action reviews across project activities.  
In addition, to maximi se the impact potential of project results internationally, in particular in countries from the 
region with similar policy and market environment and barriers, the project will communicate and make publicly 
available related knowledge and best practices (e.g. examples of legislation and framework s for building codes, 
procedures for home owner associations, legislation regarding multi -owner buildings, business models f or EE 
investments, etc .) via the following channels:  
• The existing portal , ‘Energy Efficient Buildings in Central Asia and Armenia’  at www.beeca.net
 (in 
English and Russian) , will present and share all relevant materials and case studies with EE 
practitioners in Armenia and other transition countries with similar climate and policy conditions. In 
particular , the potential for EE market transformation in building sectors in Central Asia is vast and 
barriers are similar –  hence GCF -supported work will be of high relevance to those countries as well;  
• Presentation of project work and results at the annual Sustainable Energy Forum organi sed jointly by 
UNECE, UNDP and other international partners on a regular basis, as well as at other relevant 
international fora and initiatives, such as those of  SE4ALL.  
1.2.4 Provision of information to consumers: Economically attractive measures for energy efficiency are often left un-
implemented becaus e stakeholders are simply unaware that such measures exist. If they are aware, they may 
have unreliable information. Hence, the availability of information on the availability and features of energy 
efficiency measures is an important precondition to enabl ing them to act on these opportunities. In Armenia, 
consumers currently do not receive information on ways to use electricity more efficiently22. Provision of such 
information is common practice in many countries and the project will work to develop such a mechanism with 
the national energy utility, Electric Networks of Armenia, and work with this counterpart to develop modalities 
for the provision of information on energy efficiency to customers.  
 
Results:  
Indicator:  Existence and implementation of a plan for sharing lessons learned  
Baseline:  N/A 
Mid-term target:  Created and implemented  
Final target:  Number of beneficiaries: 250,000 , including at least 50% women  
                                                             
22 World Bank Group (2013). Pilot Report: RISE Readiness for Investment in Sustainable Energy -  A Tool for Policymakers


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 69 
 
 C 
 
47. Component 2 – Policy de -risking . The policy de- risking component will support national, sub- national and local 
authorities to adopt and implement an enabling policy framework for energy efficiency retrofits. D e-risking instruments 
will directly and indirectly address investment risks for commercial lenders of energy efficiency retrofit finance.  This 
Component will support on- going legal reform in the field of energy efficiency. It will also support the gradual 
introduction of binding legislation on energy auditing, energy passports  / certificates and labelling for existing 
buildings. This work will leverage the results of the UNDP -implemented, GEF-financed ‘Improving Energy Efficiency 
in Buildings ’ project23 (see Annex VII  for more on this project) . Policy de -risking tools will include the modernisation 
and enforcement of energy efficiency standards and mandatory energy performance standards for retrofitted 
buildings , as well as monitoring and enforcement of associated construction norms and standards; development, 
introduction and enforcement of adequate secondary legislation for providing a clear and effective set of functional 
models and a standard set of rules for all multi -apartment building management bodies to undertake energy efficiency 
retrofits; implementation and improvement of exi sting legislation and formulation of secondary legislation that will 
assist management of energy efficiency building retrofits for different types of building; and assistance to residents 
and common- share building organisations on collective decision -making  on the complex issues of energy efficiency 
retrofit investment.  Significant capacity building will take place through this component. UNDP’s approach to capacity 
building addresses capacity at the individual, organisational and systemic levels. At the individual level, capacity 
building takes place through imparting knowledge and skills. At the organisational level, UNDP focuses on supporting 
organisations to develop mandates, tools, guidelines and information management systems that allow organisat ions 
to adopt best practice and adapt to change. At the systemic level, UNDP supports the creation of enabling environments through policy, economic, regulatory and accountability frameworks within which organisations and 
individuals operate. For all three levels of capacity building, UNDP will identify  and hire international and local 
specialists that will work along- side local legislators providing on- the-job training on  best practices.  Specialists, 
working together with the national and municipal legislators , will prepare studies and reviews that underpin the 
creation of knowledge and the building of skills.  In some cases , training courses may be provided to communicate 
knowledge to wider audiences.  
 
48. The policy component will also include elements of market de- risking (removing technical and capacity barriers) by 
providing technical assistance to selected market players , mostly from the private sector, such as building owners  / 
managers  / owner associations and local government , in order to help identi fy, develop and aggregate technically 
and financially feasible energy efficiency retrofit projects. Activities will be implemented / supported by private sector 
consulting companies and individual experts. The desired outcome of Component 2 is Outcome 2: N ational, sub -
national and local authorities adopt and implement an enabling policy framework for EE retrofits . The Outputs that 
will contribute to achieving this Outcome are described below.  
 
49. Output 2.1 Public instruments for the promotion of investment in  EE selected  
 
2.1.1 The project will make use of UNDP’s framework to support policy -makers in selecting public instruments to 
promote energy efficiency investment in developing countries
24.  
 
The framework is organised into four stages.  
 
Stage 1: Risk Environment  identifies the set of investment barriers and associated risks relevant to the 
technology, and analyses how the existence of investment risks can increase financing costs.  
Step 1: Determine a multi -stakeholder barrier and risk table for the energy efficiency investment.  
Step 2: Quantify the impact of risk categories on increased financing costs.  
 
Stage 2: Public Instruments  selects a mix of public de- risking instruments to address the investor risks and 
quantifies how they, in turn, can reduce f inancing costs. This stage also determines the cost of the 
selected public de- risking instruments.  
Step 1: Select one or more public de- risking instruments to mitigate the identified risk categories.  
Step 2: Quantify the impact and the public costs of the public de -risking instruments.  
 
                                                             
23 https://www.thegef.org/gef/project_detail?projID=3935   
24 Waissbein, O., Glemarec, Y. et al. (2013) , Derisking Renewable Energy Investment. A Framework to Support Policy -makers in 
Selecting Public Instruments to Promote Renewable Energy Investment in Developing Countries : www.undp.org/drei


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 69 
 
 C 
Stage 3: Cost determines the degree to which the reduced financing costs impact the investment’s life -cycle 
cost.  
 
Stage 4: Evaluation assesses the selected public de- risking instrument mix using four performance metrics, as  
well as through the use of sensitivity analyses. The four metrics are: (i) investment leverage ratio, (ii) 
savings leverage ratio, (iii) end- user affordability and (iv) carbon abatement.  
 
The instruments for the promotion of investment in EE to be considered include:  
• Assist at the national and sub- national level in developing on- going funding sources for energy efficiency 
improvements.  
• Assist in developing fiscal policies that will improve the financial attractiveness of energy efficiency (e.g. 
reduced VAT rate specifically for energy efficiency measures), particularly as they address the needs of very low income households currently rec eiving state benefits.  
• Assist in tariff reform where necessary for specific heating sources (notably electricity and district heating) 
to reflect actual costs of production –  potentially including environmental externalities
25. 
• Assist at the national and sub -national level in developing incentive programmes to encourage energy 
efficiency measures and/or building stock renewal (e.g. concessional loans, grant programmes, etc. 
particularly for low -income households).  
• Assist in developing utility -run programmes for energy efficiency – especially via large electrical utilities 
and district heating companies.  
 
Results:  
Indicator:  UNDP’s framework to support policy -makers in selecting public instruments to promote energy 
efficiency investment in developing countries  used, adapted as necessary  
Baseline:  Framework not used for EE in Armenia  
Mid-term target:  Number of public instruments selected: 3  
Final target:  Number of public instruments selected: 3  
 
50. Output 2.2 Support provided to on -going legal reform in the field of energy efficiency . Technical assistance on 
legislative reform , including binding legislation on building codes, adequate secondary legislation on multi -owner 
building management, and retained savings in public buildings. In the UNDP -implemented, GEF-financed ‘Improving 
Energy Efficiency in Buildings’ project  (2010 – ongoing ), a component aim s at achieving the design and enforcement  
of new energy efficiency building codes and/or standards  for new buildings . This project has resulted in legal reform  
in housing legislation , including various upcoming legislative amendments to the law “On energy efficiency and 
renewable energy”, the law “On urban development”, and the law “On developing the smaller centre of Yerevan”. In 
addition,  standards for new bui ldings  were successfully developed including National S tandard AST 362- 2013 
“Energy efficiency. Building energy passport. Main provisions. Typical forms” (enacted 1 January 2014), and Standard 
N40- V enacted on 1 November 2014, a direct result of UNDP’s project26. This project has reinforced UNDP’s working 
relationship with key stakeholders in the national, regional and municipal building sectors, and provides a solid 
platform for the GCF project. UNDP’s approach to supporting legislation has been proven to be effective. Noting that 
the number of existing buildings far exceeds the number of buildings being constructed (See Section C.5 for building 
market overview) , the potential for energy use reduction in existing buildings is much larger than the potential in new 
buildings. It is, however, much more complicated to create an enabling environment for large- scale EE retrofits than 
it is to implement higher standards in building construction. Activities will include:  
 
2.2.1 Support to national, sub- national and local authorities to adopt and implement an enabling policy framework for 
energy efficiency retrofits. In view of the recommendations developed in Activity 2.1.1 , and if needed , support 
                                                             
25 The energy regulator is responsible for tariff setting within the policy / regulatory framework set by the Government, and the 
Ministry of Energy and Nature Resources is leading on energy efficiency policies. Both will be closely involved in the project work 
under this Output.  
26 In addition to the legislative results of the UNDP -GEF project, other results include construction of an energy efficient 3- story 
social building of 950m2 in the city of Goris (resulting in 60% energy savings over the baseline), renovation of an apartment building 
in Avan district of Yerevan with 58% savings, work with the Al Hamra Real Estate Armenia LLC in a new residential complex in 
Yerevan leading to energy savings over baseline of 35%, ongoing design o f the first LEED -certified building in Aremnia (in the 
Malatia- Sebastia district of Yerevan) with 30% savings. A laboratory for testing thermal and physical characteristics of construction  
materials has also been created. Further information about the results of UNDP -GEF project is provided in the Annex IIb “Energy 
Efficiency Upgrade of Multi -apartment Panel Building in the Republic of Armenia”, Annex VIII “Mid- term evaluation of UNDP -GEF 
Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings in Armenia Project”, as well  as in Annexes XIIIa, XIIIb, XIIIc, XIIId.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 69 
 
 C 
will be provided for the adoption of additional by -laws applicable to building retrofits. Adoption and enforcement 
of the new Building Code in relation to building retrofits  will be ensured.  
2.2.2 Support to the gradual introduction, according to an explicit and transparent timetable,  of binding legislation on 
energy auditing, energy passports  / certificates and labelling for existing buildings.  
2.2.3 Support to the introduction of legislation specific to EE retrofits in public buildings , including required 
amendments in the public procurement rules .  
 
Results:  
Indicator:  Binding legislation on building codes and adequate secondary legislation adopted.  
Baseline:  Level 3. Policies proposed and consultation ongoing.27 
Mid-term target:  Level 4. Strong policy adopted  
Final target:  Developed & in use for renovated buildings: full coverages of buildings retrofitted in this project  
 
51. Output 2.3 Support provided for the creation of an enabling policy framework for EE retrofits in multi -owner 
residential buildings: L egal status  of Home -Owner Associations (HOAs) , payment enforcemen t, professional 
management  and consensus levels. The project will support the development, introduction and enforcement of 
adequate secondary legislation to provide  a clear and effective set of functional models and a standard set of rules 
for multi -owner building management bodies to undertake energy efficiency retrofits. A ctivities will include:  
 
2.3.1 Support to policy -makers in developing policy relating to HOA legal status, payment enforcement, professional 
management  and consensus levels : 
• Support the establishment of a proper regulatory system (including secondary legislation) to address multi -
family buildings. This will include establishing mechanisms for enforcement via “carrots” and “sticks”28.   
• Consensus levels to be made consistent with international best practices.  
• Ensure all multi -owner buildings have HOAs that collect appropriate minimum payments from owners and 
enforce sufficiently clear, timely and effective mechanisms to enforce payment discipline.  
• Introduction of a mechanism to assist poor households in covering payment obligations for the 
improvement (and, in some cases, ongoing maintenance) of buildings.  
• Work with municipalities and Housing Management Companies to carry out awareness campaigns to 
encourage – and, where necessary, require – the engagement of professional building management 
services.  
 
Results:  
Indicator:  Adequate secondary legislation providing a clear and effective set of functional models and a 
standard set of rules for multi -owner building management bodies to undertake EE retrofits 
developed, introduced and enforced  
Baseline:  Secondary legislation lacking  
Mid-term target:  Level 6. Sub -sector plans reflect key policy targets  
Final target:  Level 7. Regulatory frame -work developed  
 
52. Output 2.4 Support provided to building owners / managers / owner associations / ESCOs on legal matters 
related to energy efficiency retrofit projects . The absence of business models for repayment of energy efficiency 
investment is considered the major barrier to private sector investment in energy efficiency retrofits in the public and 
residential sector s. The project will roll-out aggregative models for  energy efficiency retrofits through ESCOs and 
through innovative legal structures for owner associations in multi -owner buildings. Private sector entities or Public -
Private Partnerships ( PPPs  – ESCOs  in this context ) will be supported in establishing robust repayment schemes for 
their services ( through, for example,  legal and financial advice on structuring Energy Performance Contracts ( EPCs ) 
with building owners  / owner associations).  The main Activities under this Output will be:  
 
2.4.1 Provide support on legal matters related to energy efficiency retrofit projects for multi -owner buildings:  
• Collective decision -making processes.  
                                                             
27 The indicators for 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 use GEF definitions (as defined in Annex II of the Climate Change Mitigation Focal Area 
Strategy in the GEF -6 Programming Directions) for the baseline and targets.   
28 A stick could include setting up a mandatory payment scheme for all apartment owners to be administrated by a municipality. A  
carrot could include Government support for HOAs (with conditions that they would have to prove 3 months or more of payment 
discipline to a combined bank account).


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 69 
 
 C 
• Clarification of ownership and responsibility for all parts of the building, including commonly -owned areas.  
• Business models and payment mechanisms.  
• Available solutions for helping poorer households to pay for energy efficiency retrofits.  
• How to deal with absentee owners and empty apartments.  
 
For HOAs specifically, the following legal and mediation support will be provided:  
• Support municipalities in setting up resource centres for information provision on starting/managing an 
HOA.  
• Work with municipalities and HMCs to motivate existing and functioning HOAs to take decisions regarding 
investments and loans via awareness -raising, education activities and technical analysis of potential 
investments.  
• For large investments, work with HMCs to support HOAs in identifying their investment requirements 
through consultations and the preparation of Energy Audits, and/or Rational Energy Utilisa tion Plans, 
and/or Energy Performance Assessments, and/or Energy Performance Certificates.  
• Assist in preparing building- level projects based on standard requirements for Conceptual Design 
documentation of each eligible building- level measure.  
• Answer inform ation requests and provide technical advice to prospective HOAs.  
 
2.4.2   Provide support for establishing ESCOs: Current energy efficiency legislation does not fully support the ESCO 
modality and there are no fully operating energy service companies in Armenia29. An example of an ESCO -
type arrangement that is currently being set up in Yerevan with UNDP support is the special account (fund) that will receive funds from savings generated by investments in energy efficiency lighting improvements and will use  these funds for further target financing of new energy efficiency projects. Lessons will be learned from 
the operation of this fund, and the possibility of setting up a similar fund for energy efficiency building retrofits will be examined. Ultimately, the project aims to introduce the ESCO model, where appropriate, to Armenia in 
partnership with existing building sector stakeholders, public and private companies providing EE services 
and/or building management services.  
 Results:  
Indicator:  Business models for repayment of EE investments implemented  
Baseline:  Level 1. No business models for repayment of EE investments in buildings in place  
Mid-term target:  Level 3. Strong proposal defined with buy -in from stakeholders confirmed  
Final target:  Level 5. Financial mechanism in operation with evidence of stability  
 
53. Output 2.5 E xit strategy measures implemented . The GCF project will overcome systemic barriers to energy 
efficient retrofits of public and residential buildings in Armenia and this catalyse impacts beyond the end of GCF’s 
funding. The approach taken of policy and financial derisking will provide a lasting impact and lies at the heart of the project’s exit strategy as outlined in section D.2. Furthermore,  the financial incentives for public buildings address 
first-mover barriers, but since investments in energy retrofits in public buildings are generally already financially viable 
further incentives are not likely to be needed. On the other hand,  for residential buildings where financial viabil ity is 
not the main driver of building renovation, and where household poverty is a significant barrier, ongoing funding, 
targeted at poor households , is likely to be needed beyond the end of the project. The strategy of working via the 
existing social sup port mechanisms aims to ensure that ownership of this support shifts to internal Armenian social 
security funding.  
 
All these core elements supporting long- term sustainability have been built into the project design. Nevertheless, 
since the project is 6 years long and not all needs can be fully anticipated at this state,  this output has been included 
to take into account any remaining needs for the creation of a sustainable market.  Activities that will contribute to 
achieving this Output are:  
                                                             
29 Final Report: Energy Efficiency Orbits for Transition Economies , Prepared for: Copenhagen Centre on Energy Efficiency (C2E2), 
2015.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 69 
 
 C 
 
2.5.1 Development and implementation of exit strategy: Arrangements providing for long- term and financially 
sustainable continuation of project outcomes and results beyond completion of the project will be identified, 
discussed with stakeholders and implemented before the end of the project’s lifetime. Components 1 and 2 of 
the project are designed to have a lasting impact by overcoming the existing barriers to investment in EE retrofits 
in buildings in Armenia. During project implementation, Components 3 and 4 offer additional financial de- risking 
and financial incentives. It is expected that private and public sector financing will be attracted to the sector as a 
result of the implementation of these de- risking instruments, resulting in the development of a mark et for EE 
building retrofits in Armenia. As a Government institution, the project’s Executing Entity – the Ministry of Nature 
Protection of Armenia – will remain involved in the sector. An analysis of the remaining needs for financial de-
risking and financ ial incentives beyond the scope of the project will be performed and recommendations made 
for how this need might be met.  For residential buildings, where the incentive will be targeted at vulnerable 
households, the project will work through the existing Family Benefit Scheme of the Republic of Armenia. By 
following this approach, the project will demonstrate how the funding that the Government currently uses to 
compensate vulnerable households against past energy price increases can be redirected to energ y savings. 
To close the loop, the policy de- risking activities will aim to establish sustainable Government funding wherever 
such incentives will continue to be needed as a long -term way to address the needs of households living in 
poverty.  
 
Results:  
Indicator:  Additional e xit strategy measures designed and implemented  
Baseline:  N/A 
Mid-term target:  Additional e xit strategy measures designed  
Final target:  Additional exit strategy measures implemented  
 
54. Component 3 – Financial de -risking . A financial de- risking component will work in partnership with EIB, the 
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund of Armenia ( the R2E2 Fund), local commercial (private sector) 
banks and other relevant  national and international financial institutions to provide access to affordable capital for 
energy efficiency retrofits. These financial de- risking instruments will take several forms, including credit lines from 
financial institutions and/or loan guarantees to stimulate local private sector commercial banks to lend to private 
ESCOs and/or building owners. Where existing lending rates are prohibitive (current commercial lending rates are 
around 22% per year, with repayment periods of 5 years), such loans may be at concessional rates. In the context of 
the proposed GCF project, UNDP works closely  with the European Investment Bank (EIB) on the provision of soft 
loans for public and residential energy efficiency retrofits. For these loans to be taken up successfully, GCF finance 
for the other Outputs and Components of the project are critical. In Component  3, technical assistance will also be 
supplied to local commercial banks to develop their products, appraise investments and develop a pipeline of EE 
retrofit investment projects. Finally, information will be disseminated to market stakeholders on the availability of 
energy efficiency building retrofit finance packages on a project website.  Building retrofits will be performed by 
competitively -selected private sector engineering companies.  Activities will be implemented / supported by private 
sector consulting companies and individual experts. The desired outcome of Component 3 is Outcome 3: Access to 
affordable capital for energy efficiency retrofits provided. The Outputs that will contribut e to achieving this Outcome 
are described below.  
 
55. Output 3.1 Technical assistance provided to banks and other financial institutions for market facilitation for 
individual residences  
 
3.1.1 Provide support to banks to develop and market products for energy efficiency in individual residences. This 
will include training and knowledge transfer for banks on appraising investments (including risk assessment) 
and developing a pipeline of projects.  
 Results:  
Indicator:  Capacity of banks to develop and market products for energy efficiency retrofits in individual 
houses  
Baseline:  Banks do not have the capacity to develop and market products for energy efficiency retrofits 
in  individual houses  
Mid-term target:  2 Armenian banks have the capacity to  develop and market products for energy efficiency 
retrofits in individual houses


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 69 
 
 C 
Final target:  4 Armenian banks have the capacity to  develop and market products for energy efficiency 
retrofi ts in individual houses  
 
56. Output 3.2 Technical assistance provided to banks for H ome-Owner Association (HOA) market facilitation . 
Since there is no real market for lending to HOAs in Armenia,  technical support will be offered for establishing 
standard operating procedures for banks’ introduction of credit offerings for multi -owner buildings, and an in -depth 
package of support will be provided for developing lending products for HOAs. The project will also  work with Housing 
Management Companies (HMCs) and installers  / suppliers who can act as facilitators for connecting HOAs with 
lending products. The focus will be on developing lending to existing HOAs and not on  developing new HOAs.  
Activities  that will contribute to achieving this Output are:  
 
3.2.1 Support to development of bank products for HOAs:  
• Demonstrating to senior management the market potential for investment –  including demonstrating what 
similar banks are doing in EU countries.  
• Providing technical assistance in developing the products.  
• Site visits to places where such lending is taking place.  
• Liaison with those organisations that can undertake direct outreach to HOAs (e.g. HMCs and 
suppliers/installers of technologies).  
• Assistance in understanding the legislative and regulatory framework related to lending to HOAs.  
 
Results:  
Indicator:  Capacity of banks to develop and market products for energy efficiency retrofits in multi -
owner residential buildings   
Baseline:  Banks do not have  the  capacity to develop and market products for energy efficiency retrofits 
in  multi -owner residential buildings   
Mid-term target:  2 Armenian banks have the capacity to  develop and market products for energy efficiency 
retrofits in  multi -owner reside ntial buildings   
Final target:  4 Armenian  banks have the capacity to  develop and market products for energy efficiency 
retrofits in  multi -owner residential buildings   
 
57. Output 3.3 Technical assistance provided to local government to develop EE retrofit projects for publicly -
owned buildings . Activities that will contribute to achieving this Output are:  
 
3.3.1  Support to the process of identification, development and aggregation of technically - and financially -feasible 
EE retrofit projects in publicly -owned buildings. Since energy costs constitute a large share of annual 
expenses incurred by public buildings30, those managing such buildings will be strongly motivated to invest in 
EE retrofits given information on the technical possibilities and financing options.  
 
The model for the mechanism that will support such projects is the special purpose fund for improving energy efficiency of lighting systems in Yerevan city Municipality. This fund is being set up as one of the outputs of 
the UNDP -GEF ‘ Green Urban Lighting’  project.  
 
Across the project as a whole, extensive energy savings will be achieved. It is, however, worth noting that, in view of the extreme fuel poverty currently existing in some cases (some schools maintain indoor temperatures 
below 8 ºC in winter), the improvement of energy efficiency in such buildings will result in increased comfort 
levels of the occupants of such buildings but may not necessarily lead to a reduction in energy use, as energy 
use will be maintained at previous  levels but will result in more acceptable indoor temperatures being 
maintained. This effect, which is the result of what is termed ‘suppressed demand’, has been dealt with in climate change mitigation projects. CDM guidelines , for example,  recognise that in cases where,  prior to the 
implementation of the project , the energy services being provided to end -users were too low to meet basic 
                                                             
30 The C2E2 report referred to in footnote 9, p. 47, states that: “In a survey of educational, municipal, and healthcare buildings, 35% 
of those surveyed admitted that electricity bills amount to 11- 20% of their total annual spending. Electricity costs were particularly 
high for educational buildings, where 38% of respondents reported their electricity bills at 11- 20% of the total annual spending, 
whereas 27% of respondents reported the share of electricity costs above 20%. Many schools close down in winter, because they  
cannot provide adequate space heating. When they do operate, they often maintain indoor air temperatures way below adequate 
levels.” Schools often operate at less than 8 ºC.


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 69 
 
 C 
human needs, a baseline can be constructed in which future emissions are projected to rise above current 
levels31.  
 
Resul ts: 
Indicator:  Capacity of local government to  develop EE retrofit projects for publicly -owned buildings  
Baseline:  Local government does not have the capacity to  develop EE retrofit projects for publicly -owned 
buildings  
Mid-term target:  50% of local government employees believe local government has the capacity to  develop EE 
retrofit projects for publicly -owned buildings  
Final target:  80% of local government employees believe local government has the capacity to  develop EE 
retrofit projects for pub licly-owned buildings  
 
58. Output 3.4 Access to affordable capital for energy efficiency retrofits provided . GCF funding for the other 
Outputs and Components will be critical in terms of the needed technical assistance and capacity building for the 
financial institutions to step in and the loans to be successfully taken up.  UNDP will partner with national and 
international financial institutions , which may then, in turn, offer financial de- risking instruments such as credit lines, 
loan guarantees  and public equity for investments in EE building retrofits to local financial institutions such as banks.  
 
59. Activities will include:  
 
3.4.1   Establishment and maintenance of the technical structure for the financial de- risking instruments offered. This 
will include:  
• Validate the technical parameters of the de- risking instruments, including technologies, eligibility 
requirements and criteria for selection.  
• Update the technical parameters regularly to ensure that they are clear, unambiguous and ambitious.  
• Develop, update and maintain standard templates, forms and lists to allow for streamlined investment 
processes.  
• Development of simple models and brochures for banks to present to customers outlining the typical costs 
and savings associated with energy effi ciency investments.  
• Draft an operations manual for bank personnel involved in implementation.  
 
3.4.2 Verification of funded investments  by independent audit companies to be contracted by the Project (PIU under 
Municipality of Yerevan) . This will include:  
• Carry out a verification of investment proposals. Confirm eligibility of technology / installers, reasonable, 
market -level costs and justifiable technology, delivery and installation.  
• Carry out spot checks of selected investments before, during and after i nvestment, as needed.  
 Results:  
Indicator:  Amount and number of loans for building renovation provided  
Baseline:  No lending provided  
Mid-term target:  US$ 2 2 million  
Final target:  US$ 86.25 million  
 
60. Output 3.5 Marketing platform created . Develop marketing materials and a common brand / market platform on 
the advantages of energy efficiency retrofits, including publicising the results and the availability of energy efficiency 
building retrofit finance packages.  Activities that will contribute t o achieving this Output include:  
 
3.5.1 Provide marketing support to banks (including SEF International, ACBA Bank, Ameria, Byblos Bank, Ararat 
Bank, and Ineco Bank32): 
o Support the banks’ marketing activities and enhance their broad implementation.  
                                                             
31 UNFCCC CDM -  Executive Board, 2012, EB 68 Report Annex 2,  Guidelines on the Consideration of Suppressed Demand in CDM 
Methodologies (Version 02.0).  
32 There are 6 local banks in Armenia that already offer financing for EE projects in collaboration with various IFIs (outside of the 
building sector), namely SEF International, ACBA Bank, Ameria, Byblos Bank, Ararat Bank and Ineco Bank. These banks will be t he 
first ones to be targeted to receive technical assistance from the project for design of EE financing products for the residential 
building sector. Other interested banks, including  from the list of EIB’s financial intermediaries  in Armenia, will also be invited 
through the open call for expression of interest.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 69 
 
 C 
o In coordin ation with banks, develop and produce marketing materials (flyers, ad banners, brochures, 
etc.). 
o In cooperation with the banks’ staff, produce a ‘Handbook on Financing Residential Energy Efficiency 
Investments’ for the bank to incorporate in its lending pr ocedures.  
o Assistance to banks in making their voice heard as stakeholders in the process of regulatory reform.  
 Results:  
Indicator:  Marketing materials developed and platform created  
Baseline:  No marketing materials exist  
Mid-term target:  Marketing materials created  and disseminated to at least 5,000 stakeholders  
Final target:  Marketing platform created  and disseminated to at least 25,000 stakeholders  
 
61. Component 4 –  Financial incentives. The desired outcome of Component 4 is Outcome 4: Affordability of energy 
efficiency retrofits for the most vulnerable households ensured through targeted financial incentives to building / apartment owners / ESCOs . The Outputs that will contribute to achieving this Outcome are described below.  Targeted 
financial incentives will be provided and offered to building / apartment owners, or the ESCOs serving these clients, 
to ensure that the most vulnerable households can afford the costs of energy efficiency retrofits. The financial analysis 
(Annex II
33 and Annex III) shows that, for those earning less than the median household income of US$ 400 per 
month, building retrofits are not affordable. Despite the fact that , ultimately , the retrofits will reduce energy bills, such 
households will certainly not be able to afford the upfront costs of energy efficiency retrofits and, therefore, targeted 
subsidies to vulnerable groups are required to help address the affordability gap and stimulate the demand for these retrofits. Such incentives are common even in developed countries – both in the EU and in the USA , sizeable grants 
are common practice. In selecting appropriate financial incentives , UNDP has considered partial credit guarantees 
(first loss cover), partial performance guarantees, blended co- financing and grants.  Credit enhancement facilities  
such as guarantees serve to de- risk lending for local banks. Under this arrangement , donor funds would be placed 
in a reserve account held by a trustee to cover a portion of the loan, with a portion of the sub- lending covered by 
funds in the reserve account. Such facilities could have an impact on the risk -assessment of local banks, but , at 50% 
cover , experience in the region has not shown any effect on interest rates. In addition,  there is no effect on the risk -
percept ion of sub- borrowers. Blended co -financing  serves to reduce interest rates for sub- borrowers. If the donor 
funds are subordinated to the bank lending then this approach can combine a below market interest rate to sub-borrowers with credit enhancement measures. A clear disadvantage of blended co- financing is that the grant is ex -
ante, and thus paid under all circumstances, and since the funds are blended with commercial finance it is also less 
transparent.  In our consideration , the use of ex -post capital gra nts, with verification of work, is an effective way to 
ensure benefits accrue to sub- borrowers rather than being captured by the banks, and absorbed in interest rates 
(making it more transparent than the blended co- financing approach). A grant is also potentially performance- based, 
in contrast to blended co- financing approaches since the grant is only paid on successful completion and verification 
of the work undertaken.  Considering the two sectors that will be addressed in this project, modifications to the grant 
approach will be taken for each:  
 
• For public buildings , the ex -post capital grant paid to the relevant municipality or ESCO will be most 
appropriate.  Systemic d e-risking through the project – components 1 to 3 – will permanently remove the 
market barriers, resulting in ongoing post -project market growth without incentives  
 
• For the residential  sector , the incentives will be targeted at low -income households , so a different approach 
has been proposed. Due to widespread poverty and inequality prevalent across urban areas in Armenia, at 
least one- fifth of households cannot afford to keep adequately warm at reasonable cost, given their income
34. 
Recognising this, the Government of Armenia has used its main social safety net program me, the Family 
Benefit Scheme, to provide compensation to vulnerable households against past energy price increases . The 
scheme uses a scoring system for household vulnerability and allocates state family benefits via Social 
Service Centres in each region/district . The project’s  approach will be to use these existing Armenian social 
support schemes to provide the incentives directly to vulnerable households. The incentives would be paid 
after verification of results for each loan, following approval,  in-principal, at the time the loan is given.  Local 
                                                             
33 A feasibility study , including detailed technical, economic, finan cial and GHG analysis of the project , is included in Annex D of the 
UNDP Project Document on pp. 65- 96, which is presented in Annex II of  this GCF Funding Proposal. The i ntegrated financial model 
which underpins this analysis is provided in Annex III  of this GCF Funding Proposal.  
34 World Bank (2012), Poverty and Distribution Impact of Gas Price Hike in Armenia: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/11988/WPS6150.pdf?sequence=1


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 69 
 
 C 
private sector commercial banks will participate in this activity, and local engineering companies will provide 
services. Activities will be supported by private sector consulting companies and individual  experts.  
• The selection criteria for allocation of incentives will be those already established by the Law on S ocial 
Protection.  The municipality will be responsible for applying those criteria to identify eligible recipients of the 
GCF -funded incentives. Final approval of the list of eligible households will be made by the Project Board 
based on proposal received from the m unicipality.  
• The overall process to be followed for provision  of incentives for households and public buildings is given 
below . 
 
Overall scheme for ex- post provision of incentives for households  
 
 Step  Main responsible  Support  
1 Specification of buildings and packages  of 
eligible measures  PIU/Municipality   Ministry  
2 Preparation of information packages for 
households, private sector, and banks  PIU/Municipality  Technical experts  
Ministry  
4 PR campaign, marketing and advocacy  Project experts  
Banks  
ESCOs   
5 Decision in  principle by households to retrofit 
building  Households / Housing 
Management Companies  PIU 
6 Identification of  eligib le vulnerable households to 
receive incentive  Municipality (Social 
Department)  PIU 
7 Approval of eligible households  Project Board  PIU 
8 Preparation of investment application  Private companies  
Households / Housing 
Management Companies / 
ESCOs  Project experts (legal & technical support)  
9 Application for loan  Households / Housing 
Management Companies / 
ESCOs  Private sector experts 
and companies  
10 Approval and provision of loan – banks check 
measures match approved package  Banks  Project experts  
11 Arrangement of works  Households / Housing 
Management Companies / 
ESCOs  Private sector experts 
and companies  
12 Carrying out of works  Private companies  Private sector experts 
and companies  
13 Verification of results – municipalities check that 
the money was spent on the promised 
measures  Independent evaluator 
(contracted by 
PIU/Municipality)  PIU 
14 Payment of incentive directly to households / 
ESCOs  (see Annex XIIIj)  PIU/Municipality   
 
Overall scheme for ex- post provision of incentives for public buildings  
 Step  Main responsible  Support  
1 Specification of packages of eligible measures  PIU/Municipality  Ministry  
2 Preparation of priority investment plans  PIU/Municipality  Engineering 
companies  
Technical experts  
3 Decision on buildings to be retrofitted and levels 
of incentives  Project board  
 PIU


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 69 
 
 C 
5 Approval and provision of loan  Partner bank (EIB – to be 
confirmed)   
6 Arrangement of works  PIU/Municipality  Private sector 
experts and 
companies  
7 Carrying out of works  Private companies  Private sector 
experts and 
companies  
8 Verification of results  Independent evaluator  PIU 
9 Payment of incentive (Annex XIIIj)  PIU/Municipality   
 
 
62. Output 4.1 Targeted financial incentives provided to vulnerable groups to help address the affordability gap  
 
4.1.1 Targeted financial incentives provided to building / apartment owners, or the ESCOs serving these clients. The 
incentives will initially come from GCF, but during the course of the project, as a result of the policy work under 
Output 2.1, will increasingly  be replaced by local incentives.   
 
Results:  
Indicator:  Financial mechanism to provide targeted financial incentives in place and incentives provided  
Baseline:  No incentives in place  
Mid-term target:  Incentives provided to 15,000 beneficiaries  
Final target:  Incentives provided to 50,000 beneficiaries  
 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  
 
63. The executing entity for the Project is the Ministry of Nature Protection of the Republic of Armenia (MoNP). For 
background information on MoNP , see Section C.7 and Section E.5.2.  
 
64. The individual investments funded by the project will be renovations of private residences and public buildings . Hence, 
a very large number of small individual investments, each with different sponsors , will be funded.  
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
 
65. Overview of buildings market in Armenia:  There has been growth in the residential building stock, particularly in 
the single -dwellings in rural areas. Between 2010- 2013 , the residential sector remained the highest in terms of final 
energy consumption, ahead of the public and commercial buildings sector s.  
 66. Number of buildings -  Residential:  The total number of residential buildings in Armenia is 445,567 (2013, ArmStat). 
100% of residential apartments / houses are privately owned. The following tables provide a breakdown of multiple 
dwellings and single- dwelling households. As shown below , there is a skew towards  multiple -dwelling buildings in 
urban settlements and a skew towards  single -dwelling houses in rural settlements.  
 
Multiple dwelling buildings by location  Units (2013)  
Urban settlements  12,036 
Rural settlements  6,938 
Total buildings  18,974 
Total number of apartments in multiple dwellings  435,427 
Source: ArmStatBank 201535 
                                                             
35Please see: http://armstatbank.am/Menu.aspx?rxid=002cc9e9- 1bc8- 4ae6- aaa3-
40c0e377450a&px_language=en&px_db=ArmStatbank&px_type=PX


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 69 
 
 C 
 
Multi -Dwelling Buildings by Type: 
 
Source: ArmStatBank 2015  
 
Single -dwelling houses by location  Units (2013)  
Urban settlements  157,809 
Rural settlements  268,784 
Total buildings  426,593 
Source: ArmStatBank 2015  
 
67. Population by area: The population of Armenia is predominantly urban.  
 
Location  Population  % 
Urban settlements  1,873,591  62.7%  
Rural settlements  1,115,876  37.2%  
Total  2,989,467  
Source: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2014)  
 68. Growth in building stock: Between 2001- 2013 , the total area of multiple -dwelling units increased by 5%; this type 
of building stock remains dominated by old stock , predominantly in u rban areas . In the same period,  Armenia 
experienced a 65% increase in the floor area of single -dwelling buildings (90,133 buildings) , predominantly in rural 
areas. Approximately  two-thirds of single- dwelling homes are older building stock. This context frames the rationale 
of the project : that there is a clear need to improve th e energy efficiency of the existing building stock.  
 
Housing stock by location and type  km² in 
2001  km² in 
2013  
Total area of apartments of multiple dwellings  26,296  27,534  
Total area of single dwelling houses  40,451  66,806  
Total area of housing stock  67,242  94,656  
 
69. Residential Energy Consumption : The residential sector in Armenia is the highest user of energy.  
 
70%23%7%Breakdown of Multi -Dwelling Buildings by Type
Stone Multi-Apartment
Buildings
Panel Multi-ApartmentBuildings
Monolith Multi-Apartment
Buildings


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 69 
 
 C 
 
Source: ArmStatBank 2015  
 
70. Energy prices : Average electricity tariffs for residential customers increased by a factor of 1.8 times between 2008-
2014, and natural gas tariff s by a factor of  2.6 between  2007- 2014. A decision on 17 June 2015 by the Public Services 
Regulatory Commission to raise electricity prices by a further 17- 22% led to large protests in Yerevan and other cities. 
The extensiv e unrest demonstrates the significance of fuel poverty and has raised the issue to the top of the 
Government’s agenda.  
 
71. Status of EE market and related infrastructure : Armenia has a number (12) of quasi -ESCO companies36, but their 
operat the ions in building sector have, to date, been limited and focus mainly on public and commercial buildings, 
due to deficiencies in the regulations regarding performance- based contracting models in  the residential building sub-
sectors. There is also an Association of Armenian ESCOs (ArmESCO) , established in 2005, which engages in 
strategic planning, capacity building, partnership creation and other activities to support and promote the ESCO 
market in Armenia. The A ssociation has also promoted joint projects in which several ESCOs work together on larger 
projects.  
 
72. The World Bank’s ‘Readiness for Investment in Sustainable Energy’ (RISE) indicators present useful metrics 
capturing the strength of policies in promoting enabling environments and the readiness for attracting private sector 
participation and investment in energy efficiency. A RISE a ssessment conducted by the World Bank in 2014 puts 
Armenia in the “medium -performance” category of countries , with a score of 37 out of 100 (with the highest scores , 
75-83, assigned to developed countries, e.g. Denmark  and the USA). See the f igure below and full details and 
discussion regarding Armenia’s ranking in Annex A, Table 6,  of Annex IIa of  the Funding Proposal. Armenia’s  score  
indicates that initial market conditions and the fundamental policy and regulatory infr astructur e are in place in 
Armenia, but that  certain shortcomings exist and need to be addressed before full market potential can be reali sed.  
 
 
                                                             
36 USAID 2007. Armenia: Building Energy Efficiency Market Assessment . Available at 
https://www.ase.org/sites/ase.org/files/armenia_ee_market_assessment_en.pdf   
Industry
18%
Transport
25% Residential
34%Public & 
Commercial 
Services 
16%Agriculture 
& Forestry 
7%Final Energy Consumption per 
sector (% ktoe) 2014


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 69 
 
 C 
Source: World Bank, 2014. Pilot Report: RISE – Readiness for Investment in Sustainable Energy: A Tool for Policymakers . For 
information about RISE see: http://rise.worldbank.org/  
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  
73. In Armenia, to build a new building or to perform a major reconstruction ( such as enveloping) it is necessary to  apply 
for and obtain an architectural -constructional assignment from the community  / municipality.  Any construction  / 
intervention to the building that requires an architectural -constructional assignment also requires  the design to be 
developed by a licensed architectural company  followed by an independent assessment  of the design by another 
licenced expert  / company . Construction and technical oversight of construction must be conducted by licensed 
companies.  The Ministry of Urban Development is the national authority for licensing in the construction sector.  
Construction permits are issued by local authorities .37 The proce dure described above will be followed for all buildings 
retrofitted under the GCF project.  It is the responsibility of sub- contractors, i.e. companies undertaking building 
retrofits , to be in a procession of appropriate licences, as well as to secure building reconstruction permits  in line with 
the above requirements. All licen ces and permits will have to be obtained prior to commencement of EE retrofits. 
Works on EE retrofits under the project will be phased , starting with Q3 Year 1 for public buildings and Year 2 for 
residential buildings (See Annex X). Only companies with appropriate licenc es will be allowed to bid for EE retrofit 
contracts with the Municipality and/or Building Owners. It will then be responsibility of selected contractors to secure 
appropriate permits for retrofit of specific buildings covered under the contracts. GCF -funded incentives will be 
released upon completion of EE retrofits and independent verification of the quality of works, including compliance 
with all relevant requirements.  
 
74. For activities related to procurement of goods and services  through UNDP, according to the Standard Basic 
Assistance Agreement ( SBAA)  signed with the Government , taxes are not applicable. Section 7 of the Convention 
on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations provides, inter alia, that the United Nations, including its  
subsidiary organs, is exempt from all direct taxes, except charges for utilities services, and is exempt from customs duties and charges of a similar nature in respect of articles imported or exported for its official use.  
If the services are 
procured dir ectly by the Government  implementing partners, then the national procedures apply, which entail the 
payment of Value Added Tax (VAT) amounting to 20% of the turnover of taxable goods and services, which is equal 
to 16. 67% of VAT -inclusive prices.  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
For more detailed description of the governance  structure  of the project/programm e and operational arrangements , 
please refer to S ection 5 ( Implementation and Institutional Arrangement s) of the UNDP Project Document  in Annex II .  
 
75. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM)38, according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA -  see Annex XIII) between UNDP and the Government of Armenia, 
the UNDP Country Programme Document ( CPD – see Annex XIII)  and the Armenia – United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework for 2016- 2020 (UNDAF – see Annex XIII) , and as per the policies and 
procedures outlined in the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures  (POPP)39. The 
national  executing entity - also referred to as the national  “Implementing Partner ” in UNDP terminology -  is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures 
(including the NIM Guidelines). According to the UNDP POPP, an Implementing Partner is “the entity to which 
the Administrator has entrusted the implementation of UNDP assistance specified in a signed document along 
with the assumption of full responsibility and accountability for the effective use of UNDP resources and the 
delivery of outputs, as set forth in such document.” By signing a project document, an implementing partner 
enters into an agreement with UNDP to manage the project and achieve the results defined in the relevant documents. In addition, an implementing partner may enter into agreements with other organi sations or entities, 
known as “ Responsible Parties” , which may carry out project activities and produce project outputs on behalf 
of the Implementing Partner.   Respons ible Parties are accountable directly to the Implementing Partner.   
 
                                                             
37 For a detailed description of the procedure to obtain construction permits see: 
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/armenia#dealing- with-construction- permits  
38 NIM fully complies with the financial management and  procurement guidelines of UNDP.  
39 https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining -a-Project.aspx


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 69 
 
 C 
76. In legal terms, project implementation will be governed by the national Government’s signature of the 
UNDP  SBAA40 (See Annex XIII ) together with a UNDP project document provided in Annex II, which will be 
signed by the UNDP Country Office in Armenia, the Implementing Partner (the Ministry of Nature Protection) and 
the Responsible Party (the Municipality of Yerevan) to govern the use of the funds (once the funds are secured)  
 
77. The Implementi ng Partner  (UNDP terminology) –  Executing Partner (GCF terminology) –  for this project is the 
Ministry of Nature Protection (MoNP)  of the Republic of Armenia (RA), as the national authori sed body for 
UNFCCC implementation in Armenia.  MoNP  is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the 
monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes and for the effective use of UNDP resources.  The following parties will assist MoNP in successfully delivering project outcomes: Mo NP’s 
Environmental Project Implementation Unit (EPIU) and the Municipality of Yerevan (through its Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) – to be established), as the Responsible Party acting on behalf of MoNP. EPIU will 
lead the implementation of Component 1, while the Municipality of Yerevan will be responsible for delivering 
envisaged outputs under Components 2, 3 and 4
.  
 
78. UNDP’s overall role as an Accredited Entity is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its 
Headquarter s and Country Office units.  This role includes: (i) project preparation oversight; (ii) project 
implementation oversight and supervision, including financial management; and (iii) project completion and 
evaluation oversight.  It also includes oversight roles  in relation to reporting and knowledge- management.  The 
‘project assurance’ function of UNDP is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent 
project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project managem ent milestones are 
managed and completed. Project assurance has to be independent of the Project Manager; therefore, the Project 
Board cannot delegate any of its assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager. A UNDP Programme Officer, 
or M&E Officer, t ypically holds the Project Assurance role on behalf of UNDP. The ‘senior supplier’ role of UNDP 
is to represent the interests of the parties that  which provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project 
(designing, developing, facilitating, procuring, implementing). The senior supplier’s primary function within the 
Board is to provide guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project.  
 
79. MoNP will be responsible for the overall supervision of the project to ensure synergy with other GHG mitigation 
policies and measures in the country. UNDP has a long track -record of successful collaboration with M oNP, 
dating from 1997. M oNP has the capacity and knowledge to guide and oversee the conceptual aspect  of project 
implementation,  including professional guidance on achieving the climate change mitigation objectives and 
overseeing the GHG emissions reduction impacts. Mo NP has been the implementing agency for the full -size 
UNDP -GEF ‘Improving Energy Efficiency of Municipal Heat and Hot Water Supply ’ project41, and the UNDP -GEF 
‘Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings ’ project , and has a proven track -record in successful implementation 
and cooperation with different ministries and stak eholders. The day -to-day implementation of the project will be 
carried out through the well -established UNDP Climate Change Program me Unit coordinated by MoNP. GCF 
funds will not be used to pay the salaries of Government personnel, whose costs will be full y covered by the 
Government.  The management arrangements for this project are summari sed in Figure 3 below.  
 
80. In addition, MoNP’s Environmental Project Implementation Unit (EPIU) will be closely involved in project 
implementation (in particular, it will lead the Component 1 on MRV) and will also receive assistance and capacity 
building from the project to prepare for its subsequent accreditation under the GCF as a National Accredi ted 
Entity. EPIU is currently undergoing the accreditation process for the Adaptation Fund ( please see EPIU’s 
application request to Adaptation Fund (AF) attached under Ann ex XIII), and the support to GCF accreditation 
will build on this AF baseline.  
 
81. The Municipality of the City of Yerevan will act as the Responsible Party  for components 2- 4 of the Project . The 
Municipality is approving and managing the city budget on annual base. The 2015 budget approved on December 
23 by C ouncil decision #265- N involves income of approximately  US$ 149.73 million  and expenditures of 
approximately US$  150.25 million . Yerevan Municipality has a special procurement department responsible for 
all procurements , including services and works executed through open and competitive tenders in compliance 
with the Law on Procurement of the Republic of Armenia.  Yerevan Municipality has long track -record of 
successful collaboration and implementation of international pro jects. Some of the most recent examples inc lude 
                                                             
40 SBAA was signed with the Government of Armenia on March  8th 1995. 
41 http://erc.undp.org/evaluationadmin/downloaddocument.html?docid=6769


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 69 
 
 C 
the implementation of the ‘ Sustainable Transport Development Investment Program me’ under a loan agreement 
between the Armenian Republic and the Asian Development Bank. The project , with a total value of US$ 48 
million,  is implemented b y the Municipality through the ‘Yerevan Construction I nvestment Pr oject Implementation 
Unit (PIU)’ . The Municipality is also an implementing agency of the EBRD US$ 4.0 million loan and EURO 1.9 
million  grant project aimed at ener gy efficient upgrades  of the street lighting system in the city. Before the project 
starts , a Harmonised Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessment will be undertaken by UNDP to ascertain 
the Municipality’s financial management capacity.  The Project Imple mentation Unit (PIU) will be established  at 
the Municipality of Yerevan and will be composed of staff selected on a competitive basis with a track -record of 
working on housing and building quality issues. Project management responsibilities that the PIU wi ll take on will 
include the day -to-day management and decision- making over Components 2- 4 of the Project.  
 
82. The Municipality’s PIU will be responsible for delivering all envisaged outputs under Components 2, 3 and 4, 
whereas the MoNP’s Environmental Project Implementation Unit (EPIU) will be responsible for delivering all outputs under Component 1 (See Annex XIIIk). Detailed execution responsibilities are provided in Annex XIIIk 
and in the Figure below.  
 
83.  UNDP will be the GCF Accredited  Entity and its Country Office (UNDP CO) in Armenia will be responsible for 
the management of the grant , ensuring transparency, appropriate conduct and financial responsibility . The UNDP 
CO will gradually hand over project  management functions to the Project Implementation Unit ( PIU) to be 
established under Yerevan Municipality.  UNDP will continue to act as the financial delivery mechanism for the 
GCF grant and will continue technical assistance and assurance of quality con trol for the full duration of the 
project .  
 
Figure 3. Project Management Structure  
 
 84. Terms of reference (including selection, membership, and accountability) will be established for each function in 
the structure. Signed conflict of i nterest declarations will be required from member s of the Project Board, 
Executive, Project Management Team and Project Implementation Unit.  
 
 
Project Board  
Project Management Team  
in MoNP   
 
Component 1: MoNP’s EPIU  
 
Project Assurance  
(UNDP and other Board 
members or delegated to 
other individuals)  
Technical Advisory 
Committee  
Senior Beneficiaries:  
Municipality of Yerevan  
Home -Owner s & 
Associations  
Executive:  
MoNP/GCF NDA of 
Armenia  
 
Senior Suppliers:  
UNDP -GCF  
Ministry of Finance of 
Armenia   
Project  
Components 2, 3, 4: 
Project Implementation Unit  
of Municipality of Yerevan


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 69 
 
 C 
85. The Project Board  is comprised of the following organi sations:  the Ministry of Nature Protection of RA, Yerevan 
Municipality, the Ministry of Urban Development of RA, the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources of RA, 
UNDP and potential parallel financing partners  (EIB). The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, 
management decisions when guidance is required by the Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be made 
in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development results, best value for money, 
fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached 
within the Board, the final decision shall rest with the UNDP Programme Manager . The Project Board will meet 
twice a year, unless an ad hoc meeting is requested in writing by a Board member.    
 86. The Technical Advisory Committee will comprise representatives of interested public and private agencies. 
The Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, the Ministry of Urban Development, the Ministry of Territorial Administration, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Nature Protection, the R2E2 Fund, the National Institute 
for Standards of the Republic of Armenia, and the National University of Architecture and Construction will be 
invited to nominate representatives  to the Technical Advisory Committee. This group will meet annually, with 
periodic consultation as needed throughout the year. The Board will actively seek and take into account the input 
from the Technical Advisory Committee. Once a year, Board meetings will be timed to occur immediately after 
the annual meetings of the Technical Advisory Committee.  
 
87. The Project Manager  will run the project on a day -to-day basis on behalf of MoNP  within the constraints laid 
down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project terminal evaluation 
report, and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, has been completed and submitted to UNDP.  The Project Manager is responsible for day -to-day management and decision- making for the project  and 
for the establishment of internal control processes in the project. The Project Manager’s prime responsibility is to 
ensure that the project produces the results specifie d in the project document, to the required standard of quality 
and within the specified constraints of ti me and cost.  
 
88. For UNDP to ensure that cash transfers are properly managed, Harmonised Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessments will be undertaken on the following relevant institutions:  PIU of the Municipality of Yerevan (when 
established and operational) and the EPIU of the MoNP. The project will also establish a purchasing review 
committee for the project as per UNDP Financial Regulation and Rule 121.01.  
 
89. Specific responsibilities will include:  
 
90. Overall project management:  
• Manage the realisation of project outputs through activities;  
• Liaise with the Project Board to assure the overall direction and integrity of the project;  
• Identify and obtai n any support and advice required for the management, planning and control of the project;  
• Responsibility for project administration;  
• Liaise with any suppliers;  
 91. Running the project:  
• Plan the activities of the project and monitor progress against the quality criteria.  
• Mobilise goods and services to initiative activities, including drafting TORs and work specifications;  
• Monitor financial resources and accounting to ensure accuracy and reliability of financial reports;  
• Manage and monitor the pr oject risks  
• Be responsible for managing issues and requests for change by maintaining an Issues Log.  
 
92. Engineering companies and other service providers hired by UNDP , EPIU  or the PIU will be procured using GCF -
approved UNDP procurement practices  with com petitive and open tendering. The energy efficiency retrofits 
themselves will be performed by private- sector engineering companies. For public buildings, procurement will 
take place according to the national public procurement rules. For residential beneficiaries , procurement 
requirement may be specified by the banks that are providing loans . The approach will be competitive / private 
sector -oriented,  with the aim of creating a competitive sustainable market for energy efficiency retrofits in the 
country.  
 
93. The approach to funding the four  project components are as follows:


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 69 
 
 C 
• Component 1: Competitive and open tendering for individual and company services  (see Annex Vb – 
Procurement Plan)  
• Component 2: Competitive and open tendering for individual and company services  (see Annex Vb – 
Procurement Plan)  
• Component 3: Competitive and open tendering for individual and company services  (see Annex Vb – 
Procurement Plan)  
• Component 4: For investments that meet  eligibility requirements , incentives funds will be provided by UNDP 
via PIU /Municipality of Yerevan, as follows:   
 
• For public buildings the ex -post capital grant will be paid directl y by UNDP to Municipality . 
• For the residential sector, the inc entives will be targeted at low -income households , so a different approach 
has been proposed. Due to widespread poverty and inequality prevalent across urban areas in Armenia, at 
least one- fifth of households cannot afford to keep adequately warm at reasonable cost, given their income42. 
Recognising this, the Government of Armenia has used its main social safety net programme, the Family 
Benefit Scheme, to provide compensation to vulnerable households against past energy price increases. The 
scheme uses a scoring system for household vul nerability and allocates state family benefits via Social 
Service Centres in each region/district. The project’s  approach will aim to use these existing Armenian social 
support schemes to provide the incentives directly to vulnerable households. The incent ives would be paid 
by PIU/ Municipality of Yerevan after verification of results for each loan, following approval, in- principal , at 
the time the loan is given (See Annex XIIIj) .  
 
94. Implementation of Component 4 will be conditional on the successful delivery  of Output 2.3,  ‘Support provided 
for the creation of an enabling policy framework for EE retrofits in multi- owner residential buildings’ , which is a 
prerequisite for successful implementation of the incentive scheme.  
 
 
                                                             
42 World Bank (2012), Poverty and Distribution Impact of Gas Price Hike in Armenia: 
https://openknowledge.w orldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/11988/WPS6150.pdf?sequence=1


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 69 
 
  
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
The timetable is provided Annex  X.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
95. In the absence of the GCF contribution, the market barriers outlined in Section C.2 will limit investments in 
energy savings and restrict the participation of private sector capital. GCF involvement will help to overcome the 
barriers and create a self -sustaining market for private and public investment in low -carbon building renovation.  
 
96. While achieving thermal modernisation through energy efficiency retrofits in all building sectors is a national 
development and climate change mitigation priority, the overall investment risk profile of such retrofits is 
prohibitive, deterring private and publ ic investment despite the vast potential for highly cost -effective energy -
saving and GHG emission reduction opportunities. While there are scattered donor efforts to improve the energy efficiency of the Armenian economy, in the absence of GCF support a com prehensive removal of the barriers 
limiting investment in EE building retrofits will not occur. As a result, existing buildings in Armenia will continue 
to consume high amounts of energy, incurring high costs for residents and organi sations operating publi c 
buildings. Significant potential energy savings (and corresponding GHG emission reductions) will go unreali sed. 
 
97. The following barriers in particular will be removed as a result of GCF involvement:  
• Policy barriers - Component 2 will employ the GCF grant to build on the work begun in an earlier GEF project 
and lead to Armenian authorities adopting and implementing an enabling policy framework for EE retrofits.  
• Financial barriers -  Components 3 and 4 w ill employ the GCF grant along with co- financing to initiate the 
development of a market in which loans are available at rates and tenors that encourage investment in EE 
solutions  and additional financial incentives are provided to poor and vulnerable hous eholds . The GCF 
contribution is particularly critical for Component  4 because,  in the absence of financial incentives, EE retrofit s 
have negative NPV and do not present a viable investment opportunity  (see results of financial analysis in Annex 
II, pp. 65-96, and Annex III) . Also, incentives for low -income households are needed to unlock building- level 
investments, otherwise these households would block building- level investment decisions in multi -apartment 
buildings.  
• Market barriers -  Component 2 will employ the GCF grant to build capacity, particularly in multi -owner residential 
buildings, to enable residents  to invest in EE retrofits in these buildings.  
• Technical  / capacity barriers -  Components 1 and 2 will employ the GCF grant to build the required knowledge 
base for implementing EE retrofits in the country.  
 
98. The GCF involvement will lead to energy efficiency retrofits with a significantly higher energy -saving 
performance than is common pract ice in Armenia. This additionality will provide a lasting transformation of the 
market and result in long -term climate change benefits.  
D.2. Exit Strategy  
99. Long -term sustainability of the project is embedded in the project design, which aims at overcoming systemic 
barriers and creating market conditions for energy efficiency investment thus catalysing impacts beyond the end 
of the GCF funding. Sustainable market opportunities for EE investment will be created by:  
 
• Addressing policy needs within Component 2: the legislative barriers to public and private sector 
investment will be addressed at national, sub- national and local authority level s, and technical and 
capacity barriers will be addressed.  
• Addressing financing needs within Component 3: The project will put in place arrangements for long-
term sustai nable provision of affordable finance for EE building renovation, which matches the risk -
return profile of such investment. It will do this by building the knowledge and experience of local banks and ESCOs.  
• Catalysing initial investment through financial incentives provided under Component 4, which will 
serve to kick -start the market, addressing first -mover barriers at both local bank and borrower levels. 
By seeding a critical mass of investment, practical experience and know -how will be created, thus 
addressing these systemic barriers. For residential buildings, where the incentive will be targeted at 
vulnerable households, the project will work through the existing Family Benefit Scheme of the 
Republic of Armenia. By following this approach, the project w ill demonstrate how the funding that the 
Government currently uses to compensate vulnerable households against past energy price increases 
can be redirected to energy savings. To close the loop, the policy de -risking activities will aim to


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
101. The Project will achieve high greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions from improved EE  and lower energy -
intensity  buildings . Based on experience and evidence from energy audits of UNDP’s pilot project in Yerevan43 
(Annex IIa describes this  pilot project on EE upgrad ing of a multi- apartment residential building and its results) , 
up to 60% of energy consumption / GHG emissions in buildings can be reduced cost -effectively.  
 
• Total ton nes of direct CO 2 eq reduced per annum : an estimated 69,484  tCO 2 per year or 1. 4 million tCO 2 
over the 20- year lifetime of the EE interventions .  
• Including direct and estimated indirect emission savings, a total of 5.6 to 5.8 million tCO 2 over the 20- year 
lifetime of the EE interventions will be achieved.   
• Expected total number of direct beneficiaries : 210,000.  
 
102. The overall impacts of the GCF project have been estimated using the data from the technical and financial 
analysis  (presented in Annex II) . The overall impacts are summari sed in the tables below:  
 
  Average 
cost per 
retrofit 
(US$) Average 
level of 
grant 
(%) Energy 
savings 
(GWh/year)  GHG 
savings  
(tCO 2eq 
/ year)  Number 
of 
buildings  Total 
amount of 
grant 
(US$) Total 
investment 
(US$) Lifetime 
GHG 
savings 
(CO 2eq, 
20 years)  
Single -family 
individual buildings          10,000  9% 110.3  27,239        6,000    5,400,000   60,000,000  544,783  
Multi -family 
apartment buildings        120,000  22% 93.1 22,997          290    7,656,000    34,800,000  459,942  
Public buildings 
(large, such as 
hospitals)        250,000  5% 7.7 5,005            23      287,500     5,750,000  100,093  
Public buildings 
(small, such as 
schools)          95,000  8% 53.2 14,243          150    1,140,000   14,250,000  284,860  
Total    264.3  69,484  6,463  14,483,500  114,800,000  1,389,677  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
                                                             
43 In 2013- 2014, UNDP, with GEF financial support, implemented  the first large -scale thermal moderni sation project in the Republic 
of Armenia in a typical panel multi -apartment residential building in Yerevan. Full results of the project, including technical, economic 
and environmental feasibility , are presented in Annex IIa to this proposal. Also, the  results of a social survey of the residents are 
presented in Annex XIIIa (pp. 43- 45). 
 establish sustai nable Government funding wherever such incentives will continue to be needed as a 
long-term way to address the needs of households living in poverty.  
 
100. Output 2.5 will take into account any remaining needs for the creation of a sustainable market and will put in 
place any necessary additional measures needed to ensure the market created will continue developing after 
the GCF intervention. These measures w ill be discussed with stakeholders and implemented before the end of 
the project’s lifetime. Components 1 and 2 of the project are designed to have a lasting impact by overcoming 
the existing barriers to investment in EE retrofits in buildings in Armenia. During project implementation, 
Components 3 and 4 offer additional financial de- risking and financial incentives. It is expected that private and 
public sector financing will be attracted to the sector as a result of the implementation of these de- risking 
instruments, resulting in the development of a market for EE building retrofits in Armenia. As a Government 
institution, the project’s Executing Entity –  the Ministry of Nature Protection of Armenia –  will remain involved in 
the sector.


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  69,484 (direct) 
Lifetime  1,389,677 (direct)  
 
4.2-4.4 million (indirect)  
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population (adaptation only)  Total  210,000  
Percentage 
(%) N/A 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Regulatory systems: Level 5.1 – Institutional and regulatory systems that improve incentives for low -
emission planning and development and their effective implementation.  
 
Number of vulnerable people (lowest quintile of household income) with improved building EE : 50,000  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided ( mitigation only)  
 
103. A detailed bottom -up analysis of model buildings in Armenia has been conducted. Four models have been 
developed, two in the residential sector (one for an individual single- family house and one for a multi -family 
apartment building)  and two in the public sector  (a hospital and a school) . Building parameters and energy 
characteristics were determined for each type of building. A set of efficiency measures was then applied and the 
energy needs and potential savings for these measures calculated. Total energy  savings were estimated taking 
into account a rebound factor. Using the model buildings as a guide to potential energy and GHG reductions, 
the estimated total emission reductions from the project investments were calculated. The GHG emissions 
analysis makes use of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) methodology for energy efficiency projects44. GHG 
emission coefficients were taken from the GEF GHG calculation worksheets for natural gas and electricity  (data 
for Armenia) .45 For electricity, the grid emission factor for Armenia, given in the GEF worksheets , is taken from 
the IGES database46 and is based on the CDM combined margin approach.  Total direct emission reductions are 
the sum of the reductions achieved in the four building categories evaluated.  
 
104. The project will undertake a number of activities beyond simple investments that will also stimulate the market 
for energy efficiency in the residential and public building sectors. Therefore, there will be indirect energy savings triggered by investments not within the direct control of the project. These are estimated using bottom -up and 
top-down approaches based on the GEF methodology.  For bottom -up emission estimates, the estimated direct 
reductions are multiplied by a replication factor –  with the expectat ion that the volume of investments and GHG 
emissions reductions will increase by a factor of 3 over a 10- year period after project completion due to the 
project intervention. This is a modest replication factor according to GEF practice. To estimate the in direct GHG 
emission reductions using a top- down methodology, total 10- year market size was estimated.  
 
105. A detailed description of the methodology used to calculate the expected tCO
2 eq reduced is provided in Annex 
H of the UNDP Project Document (Annex II).  
 
Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased resilience)  
 
                                                             
44 See https://www.thegef.org/gef/pubs/STAP/Methodology -for-Calculating- GHG -Benefits -of-GEF-Energy -Efficiency -Projects -v.1 
under “Financial Instruments”  
45 see  
https://www.thegef.org/gef/pubs/STAP/Methodology -for-Calculating- GHG -Benefits -of-GEF-Energy -Efficiency -Projects -v.1 under 
“Financial Instruments”  
46 To be found at http://pub.iges.or.jp/modules/envirolib/view.php?docid=2136


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
106. Direct beneficiaries of the project (who continue to benefit after the project for the lifetime of the investments) 
are calculated using an average household size of 5, and an average number of dwellings per apartment building 
of 3647. For public buildings, beneficiaries are taken as the average number of permanent building residents. 
For a hospital, this is the hospital staff, not the number of short -term users (patients).  
 
107. Jobs created by the project are based on data in Ürge -Vorsatz et al. (2010): Employment Impacts of a Large -
Scale Deep Building Energy Retrofit Programme in Hungary48. This detailed study takes into account jobs 
created in the construction sector, from the supply chain and from additional spending of additional disposable 
income as a result of financial savings. It also accounts for job losses in the energy supply sector resulting from 
reduced energy demand.  The study finds  that, on average, 17 jobs are created per million Euros invested 
(approximately 15 jobs per million US$). This employment factor is used here to estimate the number of jobs created as a result of the investments facilitated by the project. In order for the job  creation to be sustained, there 
is an implicit assumption that lending will continue at the same rate in the future. If the retrofit investment market 
were to shrink after the project comes to an end, many of the jobs created would be lost.  
 
108. The detailed numbers are shown in Annex D of the UNDP Project Document  
 
Describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a comparable context.  
 
109. One sub- set of buildings  with significant energy -saving potential in Armenia is concrete panel buildings, of which 
there are approximately  4,300. In such buildings alone,  the energy -saving potential from thermal modernisation 
is over 1.250 TWh/year with a GHG reduction potential of 250,000 tonnes  per year CO2eq, and annual savings 
of about US $ 63 m illion (based on gas and electricity tariffs of 2014).  
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one- off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate -resilient development pathways through a theory 
of change for scaling up and replication (e.g. in terms of multiples of initial impact of the proposed project/programme).  
 
110. The paradigm shift potential for the proposed project lies in the project’s focus on the private sector as the driving 
force for investment and implementation of EE retrofit s, as opposed to current models which are primarily based 
on (scarce) public finance and lack repayment mechanisms (i.e. accumulated energy savings are not moneti sed 
and stay with building owners).  The project will lead to a paradigm shift in the perceptio n of investment in EE 
retrofits by investors , which are currently viewed as too risky and unattractive for private sector .     
 
111. The theory of change for th e project is illustrated in Annex XII. The project’s results chain is based on UNDP’s 
approach to market transformation for energy efficiency. This approach is based on the fact that , due to the high 
upfront capital intensity of energy efficient investments, access to large quantities of low -cost financing is critical 
to cost -effectively transform ener gy efficient markets. The main elements of the theory of change are support to 
governments to put together public instrument packages that: (i) address the non- financial barriers that block 
demand for investment; and (ii) create attractive risk -return prof iles by reducing, transferring or compensating 
for risk.  
 
Activity -specific sub -criteria and assessment factors:  
 
112. Innovation: Opportunities for targeting new market segments . Project Outputs 2.3, 2.4 and 3.2 will create the 
enabling policy framework for EE  retrofits in multi -owner residential buildings, provide technical assistance to 
banks to enable them to finance EE retrofits in such buildings , and support HOAs in accessing such finance. 
                                                             
47 These assumptions are based on the characteristics of the pilot building in Yerev an, which is a typical multi -apartment residential 
building in Armenia (i.e, there are 4,300 similar buildings across the country) . 
48 http://zb r.kormany.hu/download/8/82/00000/Study%20Deep%20Building%20Energy%20Retrofit%20Prog.pdf


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
This will create a market for EE retrofits in the market segment of multi -owner buildings in Armenia, a market 
which is non- existent at the moment  
 
113. Innovation: Opportunities f or adopting new business models.  The project will encourage the development of an 
enabling environment for ESCOs in Armenia and,  in Output 2.4,  includes activities that will provide support to 
establishing ESCO  models based on Energy Performance Contracting (EPCs)  for implementation of EE retrofit s 
in multi- apartment residential buildings . Such models  are currently only at an early stage of development  in the 
country.  
 
114. Level of contributions to global low -carbon development pathways:  The project’s contribution to t he shift to low -
emission sustainable development pathways is described in Section E.1. The buildings sector worldwide is a 
major energy consumer. As described in Section C.2, GHG emissions from the building sector now represent 
19% of global GHG emissions.  Reduction of emissions from existing building stock will be an essential element 
of a global low -carbon development pathway, but there are numerous barriers to achieving such reductions. 
This project will provide a replicable, scalable model for the creat ion of an enabling environment for EE retrofits 
that will be particularly relevant for the transition economies of the former Soviet Union, in which there is huge 
potential for improvement of energy efficiency in the built environment49. 
 
115. Potential for expanding the scale and impact of the proposed project (scalability). A theory of change for scaling-
up the scope and impact of the intended project without commensurately  increasing the total costs of 
implementation.  The project has the potential to be highly scalable: Armenia has approximately 4,300 panel 
buildings. Once a working model for financing retrofits of this type of buildings has been established and the 
skills for performing such retrofits have been built  with direct support from the GCF  project targeting an initial 
sub-set of 290 panel buildings , it will be relatively straightforward to scale- up the project to the rest of this market 
segment . The potential for energy savings from EE retrofits of this building stock is about 1,250 million kWh/year 
or 250,000 tCO 2/year. The leveraged investment ratio is expected to be US $ 20 for every US $ 1 invested by the 
GCF  (See S ection E.6.2. for estimated scope and impacts induced by the project for each building categor y and 
the total leveraging ratio) . 
 
116. The project will undertake a number of activities beyond simple investments , which will stimulate the market for 
energy efficiency in the residential and public building sectors. Therefore,  there will be indirect energy savings 
triggered by investments not within the direct control of the project. These are estimated using bottom -up and 
top-down approaches based on the GEF methodology. I ndirect emission savings are estimated to be between 
4.2-4.4 million  tCO 2. 
 
117. Replicability . A theory of change for replication of the proposed activities in the project . Replicability of the project 
is also high. Neighbouring countries have large numbers of similar buildings to those in Armenia as well as 
similar barriers and risks to EE investments and may benefit by learning from successful projects in Armenia.50 
 
118. In summary, the potential to scale- up the project is incorporated into the project design: first, through the 
establishment of robust MRV for the building sector that will enable further investment decisions to be made on 
the basis of sound data;  second,  through supporting the creation of an enabling policy framework ; and, third, 
through the establishment of a financial mechanism and a system for the provision of financial incentives to 
vulnerable households that can be expanded as needed. Beyond the direct project scale- up measures, the 
potential for replication is large – not just in Armenia, but also in the development of best -practice financing 
mechanisms that could be copied in neighbouring  countries.  
                                                             
49 Centre for Energy Efficiency (2015) , Final Report: Energy Efficiency Orbits for Transition Economies  
http://www.cenef.ru/file/Final%20Report_C2E2_CENEf_June2_2015.pdf   
50 See Centre for Energy Efficiency (2015), Final Report: Energy Efficiency Orbits for Transition Economies  
http://www.cenef.ru/file/Final%20Report_C2E2_CENEf_June2_2015.pdf  for an overview of potential and barriers to EE in building 
sector in former Soviet economies.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
E.2.2. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
119. The key to achieving a true paradigm shift is through the creation of an enabling market -based environment 
through policy, finance, technical  / capacity de- risking and barrier removal.  
 
120. Arrangements that provide for long- term and financially sustainable continuation of relevant outcomes and k ey 
relevant activities:  The project will strengthen the institutional and regulatory systems relevant to EE retrofits in 
Armenia. It will do this through working with national, sub- national and local authorities towards the adoption and 
implementation of a n enabling policy framework for EE retrofits. This will be supported by the development of 
an MRV framework that will provide data for planning of further investments. The capacity that will be built in 
Government and in financial institutions for encouraging and financing EE retrofits will enable the development 
of a market that will continue to exist beyond completion of the intervention.  
 
121. Extent to which the project creates new markets: The market for EE building retrofits in Armenia is currently 
extremely limited. For multi -owner buildings and public buildings in particular , no financial products exist that can 
fund such investments. HOAs lack the knowledge to engage in such projects and ESCO  models have not yet 
been applied in these sectors . The p roject will  create a functioning market for the different sub- segments of the 
buildings sector and create the market , which , once established , will develop further as a result of the improved 
risk environment for such investments that the p roject will cre ate. 
 
122. Degree to which the activity will change incentives for market participants by reducing costs and risks, eliminating 
barriers to the deployment of a low-carbon solution:  project activities are designed to address the market barriers 
to energy efficient building renovation via a combination of policy and financial de- risking instruments and 
targeted financial incentives for  key market players. By targeting the barriers, the p roject will reduce the overall 
investment risk profile of EE building retrofits and thus achieve a risk -return profile for EE building retrofits that 
will incentivise market participants to invest in such projects.  
 
123. Degree to which the proposed activities  help to overcome systematic barriers to low -carbon development to 
catalyse impact beyond the scope of the project:  The project will systematically target the barriers and investment 
risks that currently result in a prohibitive overall investment risk prof ile of EE building retrofits in Armenia. The 
barriers (described in Section C.2) fall under the general categories of policy, financial, market and technical  / 
capacity barriers. The project is designed to ensure that each of these barrier categories will be eliminated or 
reduced as far as possible in Activities specifically designed for that purpose, resulting in the creation of a 
favourable market environment for investment in EE retrofits in buildings that will be sustained beyond the scope 
of the projec t. 
E.2.3. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
124. The project will provide technical assistance to strengthen existing policies and formulate secondary legislation 
that support EE building retrofits in different building sectors.  
 
125. Under  Component 1, which will introduce robust MRV, improved data for decision- makers will allow policy -
makers to set priorities for energy efficiency programmes within the buildings sector. The existence of the MRV 
system will allow decision -makers to formulat e policies and programmes based on actual consumption and 
performance data from the building sector.  
 
126. Com ponent 2 will support national and local authorities to adopt and implement an enabling policy framework 
for EE retrofits. This Component will support on- going legal reform in the field of energy efficiency , such as  
introduction of binding legislation on energy auditing, energy passports/certificates and labelling for existing 
buildings. Measures will include: the modernisation and enforcement of EE standards and mandatory energy 
performance standards for retrofitted buildings ; the development, introduction and enforcement of adequate 
secondary legislation for providing a clear and effective set of functional models and rules for multi -apartment 
building management bodies to undertake EE retrofits; legislation that will assist the management of energy 
efficiency building retrofits for different types of building; and assistance to residents and common- share building 
organisations on collective decisio n-making in the context of EE  retrofit investment.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
E.2.4. Potential for knowledge and learning  
127. The project will contribute to knowledge creation and sharing by all market players. To ensure that the 
strengthening of knowledge will be a focus throughout the project’s life,  the project includes an output, Output 
1.2, which  deals specifically with the existence and implementation of a plan for sharing lessons learned. In 
addition, the provision of technical assistance to the construction sector, G overnment (national and sub- national) 
and HOAs will result in collective learning in those target groups. Energy and financial savings information will 
be collected, analy sed and disseminated via the project website and through various other channels and 
activities such as workshops and advertising.  
 
128. The project will support the implementation of building Energy Management Information Systems (EMIS) in 
retrofitted buildings. The information gained from these systems will be disseminated, helping to establish the 
business case for energy efficiency building retrofits , inform better policy -making and providing information for 
national documents on climate change such as future National Communications to the UNFCCC . 
 
129. The monitoring and evaluation plan is described in  Section H.2.  The planned knowledge management activities, 
including the sharing of lessons learned, are described in Output 1.2  
  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
130. Delivering a large -scale retrofit initiative in the form of the proposed GCF project will deliver large and important 
development benefits whose impacts will increase over time as energy prices rise51.  
 
131. Economic co- benefits :  
 Major economic savings (up to 5% of household incomes) due to reduced spending on energy  and, as a 
result,  reduction of energy (fuel) poverty  among at least 5,000 households . 
 Job creation through direct employment in retrofit activities, which would result in approximately 50,000 person- months  of paid labour . 
 Reduction in G overnment expenditures on energy (and improved budgetary position of national and sub -
sovereign entities) and freeing- up Government budget to be reallocated to other important areas of 
expenditure such as education, healthcare or reinvestment in EE -related activities.  Energy costs constitute a 
large share of annual expenses incurred by public buildings. In a survey of educational, muni cipal and 
healthcare buildings, 35% of those surveyed state that electricity bills amount to 11- 20% of their total annual 
spending. Electricity costs are particularly high for educational buildings, where 27% of respondents report 
the share of electricity costs to be above 20%. In large public buildings such as hospitals , the total energy 
savings possible as a result of changing the heating system and better insulating the building is 43%, with an improvement in lighting electricity needs of 80%. In smaller  public buildings such as schools , the total energy 
saving possible as a result of better insulating the building is 49%.  This means that retrofits could potentially 
save public buildings 10% or more of their budget .
52  
 Government’s budget deficits reduced.  
 
132. Social and health co-benefits :  
• Poverty reduction through reduced energy bills : over 30% of Armenian households are considered energy 
poor, where energy poverty is defined as households spending more than 10% of their budgets on energy .53 
• Improving occupancy conditions and thermal comfort for tenants and building users  
                                                             
51  Multiple soc io-economic development benefits of  EE are documents by IEA (2014),  Capturing the Multiple Benefits of Energy 
Efficiency : http://www.iea.org/topics/energyefficiency/energyefficiencyiea/multiplebenefitsofenergyefficiency/  and Copenhagen 
Economic s (2012),  Multiple Benefits of Investing in Energy Efficient Renovation of Buildings : http://www.renovate -
europe.eu/uploads/Multiple%20benefits%20of%20EE%20renovations%20in%20buildings%20-
%20Full%20report%20and%20appendix.pdf   
52 Centr e for Energy Efficiency (2015) , Final Report: Energy Efficiency Orbits for Transition Economies  
http://www.cenef.ru/file/Final%20Report_C2E2_CENEf_June2_2015.pdf  
53 http://r2e2.am/wp -content/uploads/2013/09/SREP -09.16.pdf


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
• Improved access to educational facilities with suitable thermal environments : currently, many schools close 
down during the winter because they cannot provide adequate space heating . 
• Improved conditions for home- owners , including improved health due to reduced exposure to cold, improved 
indoor air quality and a healthier indoor environment from the absence of moulds . The World Health 
Organisation ( WHO ) estimates that , in 2012, 1,123 deaths in Armenia were attributable to household air 
pollution from solid fuel use .54 
• Increase of the lifetime  of the buildings ; 
• Creation of jobs in the construction sector  (estimated a s 1,700 – see Section E.1.2 and Annex II ). 
 
133. Environmental co- benefits  
• Improved air quality due to the reduction in use of solid fuel heating: In 2010, 19% of the population of Armenia 
still used solid fuels in the home (UN MDG Database55).  
• Noise reduction due to sound insulation : this  is beneficial in multi -family apartment buildings , where noise 
levels can be a major issue and can cause friction between neighbours.  
• Reduced need for cooling in summer.  
 
134. Gender -sensitive development impact  (See Annex VIc for Gender Assessment and Action Plan) :  
• Positive impact of EE retrofits on women through improved conditions in the home.  
• Improved access of women to investments on energy efficiency building retrofit s and to information about 
building energy efficiency .  
• Broader participation of women in opportunities:  setting -up of building sector MRV , where users will be trained 
on data collection and analysis and use of EMIS; training and awareness -raising for commercial banks on 
performing due diligence of EE retrofit opportunities ; development of energy performance standards and a 
mechanism for continuous update and systematic enforcement  
• Out of the 82,200 residents of the single and multi -family buildings that will be directly impacted by the project, 
an estimated 6,000 peopl e would be female- head of households and their dependents based on the 37% 
percentage of the female- headed households in 2010 (WB data)56. Out of the 128,000 users of public 
buildings , at least 90,000 will be women,  reflecting the much higher share of female employment in the  public 
sector.  When targeting vulnerable households , the project will work with the main Armenian social safety net 
programme, the Family Benefit Scheme. The scheme already prioritizes vulnerabl e women, such as single 
mothers , in allocation of state support. Additional indicators and targets will be added to ensure equal access 
to financial incentives for women during implementation of Component 4.  
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
135. Climate change is predicted to result in growing  energy demand in building s, predominantly for cooling in 
summer, and, in parallel, will lead to a  rise in energy tariffs57. Taken together, these climate change impact s will 
lead to exacerbation of energy poverty and  worsening of health and living conditions, in particular for urban 
dwellers.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
 
136. Residential buildings and fuel  poverty . Poverty levels in Armenia have increased since 2007, which is 
primarily  a result of the energy crisis , caused by high dependence on imported energy,  and hikes  in prices of 
household energy. Armenia exhibits high energy expenditures relative to income,  which results in fuel poverty. 
About 32% of the population lives below the poverty line against the average national poverty index .58  
 
                                                             
54  http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.HA PBYCAUSEBYCOUNTRY?lang=en  
55 http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Default.aspx   
56 http://data.worldbank.org/data- catalog/gender -statistics   
57 UNDP (2009), The Socio- Economic Impact of Climate Change in Armenia: 
http://www.am.undp.org/content/dam/armenia/docs/Report%20SOI%20of%20CC.pdf  
58 http://data.worldbank.org/country/armenia


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
137. The World Bank classifies Armenia as a lower middle -income country. In 2014 , Gross National Income per capita 
was US $ 3,810, slightly above the average of other lower middle- income countries. The adverse impacts of the 
financial crisis, which  hit the Armenian economy hard between 2008- 2011, was a key factor in the marked 
increase in the level of poverty in the country, reaching 14.1 per cent in 2009. Poverty in 2011 became deeper 
and more severe as extreme poverty incidence increased, growing by a factor of  2.3 (or by 2.1 percentage 
points)  relative to the 2008 level;  for the very poor , it increased by a factor of 1.6  (or by 7.3 percentage points) ; 
and total poverty grew by 26.8% (or by 7.4 percentage points) .59 
 
138. High energy expenditures relative to income result in energy poverty and, in some cases, electricity poverty.  
Rising fuel costs and the need for investments in new energy assets and rehabilitation of existing assets will increase the cost of providing electricity. Thus, households currently facing fuel 
poverty and/or electricity poverty 
are likely to continue to experience significant pressures on their budgets as energy tariffs continue to rise. On 
average, Armenian households spend about 8% of their budg et on energy, with slightly more than half of this  on 
gas. The poorest quintile spend 7%  and 6.5% of their budget on energy overall and heating, respectively .60 In 
2010 , there was a tariff increase on gas imports from Russia which led to a nearly 40% increase in the retail gas 
price for residential consumers. In an analysis of the impacts of this increase, the World Bank  estimates that it 
led to an additional 1.9% of Armenian households being  classified as poor . The increase in gas price also led to 
an increase in the proportion of households using fuelwood for heating, which served to increase indoor air 
pollution.  
 
139. Due to widespread poverty and inequality prevalent across urban areas in Armenia, at least one- fifth of 
households are not able to afford the upfront costs of EE retrofits. The project directly targets these groups 
through focused subsidies to help address  the affordability gap and stimulate the demand for EE retrofits.   
 
140. Public buildings . Energy costs constitute a large share of annual expenses incurred by public buildings. See 
Section E.3.1.  
 
141. The Government of Armenia and municipalities  are fiscally constrained in terms of available budget s necessary  
to invest in public building EE retrofits. Whilst some local banks provide credit lines for building EE investments, 
there is an overall lack of depth and history in the local capital market for  finance products in EE building retrofit 
finance for the range of potential stakeholders , including single -dwelling residential, multi -owner apartment s and 
public buildings .  
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
142. Improving energy efficiency in the building sector has been assigned a high priority  in Armenia’s climate, energy, 
and housing strategies. In particular , achieving thermal modernisation through energy efficiency retrofits is 
outlined as a national development priority, particularly for multi -apartment buildings. This is particularly clear  in 
the provisions of the National EE Programme (2007), the National Security Strategy (2007), the Concept for 
Ensuring Energy Security (2013) and the Energy  Security Strategy Action Plan (2014) , which all identify the EE 
potential for the buildings sector  and provide outlines of technical  measures/solutions to be taken. The 10- city 
Covenant of Mayors agreement also emphasises the critical importance of energy efficiency in the building sector
61.  
 
143. Armenia’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC (2015)  provides an up- to-date overview of policies 
and measures for mitigation of GHG emissions in the country. It identifies public, residential and commercial 
buildings among the country’s top priorities for climate change mitigation: GHG emissions from buildi ngs grew 
five-fold from 345 ktCO 2 in 2000 to 1,723 ktCO 2 in 2010. Armenia’s  UNFCCC Technology Needs Assessment 
                                                             
59 http://data.worldbank.org/country/armenia   
60 World Bank (2012). Poverty and Distribution Impact of Gas Price Hike in Armenia: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/11988/WPS6150.pdf?sequence=1   
61 Please see pp. 12- 15 in Annex II for a detailed description of existing plans and policies on climate change and energy efficiency .


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
(2003 ) identified heat supply to buildings as one of the main sources of GHG emissions and as having a large 
potential for energy saving and emis sion reductions .  
 
144. The project is fully consistent with the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution ( INDC)  of Armenia approved 
by the Government in September 2015.  Specifically, the INDC identifies “ Energy (renewable energy and energy 
efficiency) ” and “Urban Development (building and construction) ” among the  main sectors included in the 
national mitigation contributions of the Republic of Armenia. The INDC also identif ies “Energy” and “Human 
Settlements” as being among the most vulnerable sectors to climate change. Further, the INDC emphasi ses that 
“the climate change mitigation actions should not reverse the social and economic trends of Armenia, but 
contribute to the socioeconomic development of the country”, which is precisely  what  this project int ends to 
achieve in the context of climate change mitigation measures in Armenia’s building sector. Finally , the INDC 
recogni ses that the achievement of the national  climate change mitigation target will require “the support of 
adequate (necessary and suffi cient) international financial, technological and capacity building assistance”, 
including from the Green Climate Fund (GCF).   
 
145. This project will promote application of EE principles in Armenia through implementation of corresponding policies and practices in line with the identified priorities for low -emission and climate- resilient development , in 
particular  the following:   
 
 The National Programme for Energy Saving and Renewable Energy (2007) prioritises the alignment of 
state policy on development , and directs finance and credit policy of the country to energy saving and 
establishing and maintaining  an active market structure for energy efficiency benefits and providing an 
effective mechanism for market participants.  
 Two laws governing energy effic iency: the Law of the Republic of Armenia on Energy (2001) and the Law 
on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy (2004). These laws define the main terms and princip les for the 
energy sector , including ensuring effi cient use of energy; ensuring the  energy independence of Armenia;  
and creat ing new industries and organi sing new services, implement ing targeted national program mes 
and apply ing new technologies in order to promote the development of renewable energy and energy 
saving.  
 
146. The project and its interventions are strongly aligned with the recently -prepared Government of Armenia and 
UNDP ‘Energy Efficient Public Buildings and Housing i n Armenia NAMA ’ (2014). This NAMA will promot e energy 
efficiency in public buildings and social housing, with a particular focus on energy efficiency measures in new 
construction, capital renovation and in management of public buildings . The NAMA will assist the cities of 
Armenia to meet their commitm ents to reduce GHG emissions from energy consumption by 20% by 2020.  The 
GCF project is specifically designed to support the NAMA in achieving transformational change by targeting the 
following NAMA objectives:   
 
• Support policy, regulatory, institutional a nd market transformation,  leading to a higher level of energy 
efficiency of structures and reduced GHG emissions from the building sector.  
• Contribute to improved energy performance of public buildings in health, educational, cultural and other 
sectors, imp roving comfort levels  and cutting public budget allocations for energy bills while improving the 
overall quality of public services.  
• Support the provision of adequate and affordable housing in Armenia using the integrated building design 
concept, and contribute to  reducing the total operational costs of buildings, reducing public costs and costs 
for the users  / clients.  
• Contribute to the development objectives of Armenia (environment, economic, and social) relate d to the 
construction and building sector.  
• Support transformational change to a low -emission development path way in the longer term.  
• Contribute to improving Armenia’s energy security.  
 
147. Above all, the project  builds on a strategic sequencing of interventio ns to scale -up its baseline support by 
extending support to ESCO -based market approaches and financial de- risking, as well as broadening the scope, 
stringency and enforcement of EE standards for buildings (such as standards for low -energy and nearly zero -
energy buildings).


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
148. UNDP is one of the world’s largest brokers of climate change grants for developing countries, with a current 
portfolio of US $ 1.34 billion in mitigation and adaptation grant -financed projects in over 140 countries, supported 
by co -financing of $6.7 billion.  Since 1992, UNDP, in conjunction with government and non- government partners 
from more than 40 countries, including Armenia, has been developing and implementing projects on EE in 
buildings . The Global Environment Facility (GEF) has provided over US $161 million in support to 55 projects, 
supplementing US$ 1 billion in co -financing contributions from national and international partners. The focus of 
UNDP’s work is on removing barriers , creating enabling market environment s and catalysing financing for 
increased investment in energy efficient buildings.  
 
149. UNDP in Armenia was established in 1993 and supports the Government to reach national development 
priorities and the Millennium  Development  Goals . UNDP has extensive experience and expertise in climate 
change mitigation, located in the Armenia Country Office and in regional (Istanbul) and global (New York) UNDP 
centres.   
 
150. In Armenia, policy and market de- risking support provided by the UNDP -GEF ‘Improving Energy Efficiency of 
Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply ’ project  has mobilis ed significant private investment  in modernisation 
of the municipal district heating sector . As a direct consequence of the technical assistance provided, the project 
was able to leverage US$ 17 million in foreign direct investment for the heat supply sector, US$ 12 million of 
which had been invested by 2014, for reconstruction ( and expansion) of heat supply systems.  
 
151. UNDP has been selected as the implementing partner by the NDA due to UNDP’s major contributions in the EE sector of Armenia,  including the following:  
 
• Development of the first Armenian NAMA  – “Energy efficient public buildings and housing in Armenia”, 
submitted to UNFCCC NAMA R egistry in 2014
62. 
• Assistance in conducting a needs assessment in the context of the Sustainable Energy for All Initiative 
(SE4ALL) . 
• Proven country experience with designing and implementing EE projects in the building sector . 
• Implementing a UNDP -GEF project on ‘Improving Energy Efficiency of Municipal Heating and Hot Water 
Supply ’ that successfully mobili sed significant private sector investment (see above  for more details) . 
• Implementing a UNDP -GEF project aimed at ‘Improving Energy Efficiency  in Buildings ’, including 
support to the Armenian Government in development of energy building codes and secondary legislation 
for EE in buildings . 
• Implementing the first-ever Armenian  full thermal modernisation of an existing residential multi -
apartment building (in Avan district of Yerevan – Figure 1, Annex IIa) , as well as social housing in the 
towns of Goris and Akhouryan  (Annex XIII) . 
• Contribution to mainstreaming innovative  legislative changes: amendments to the Laws ‘ On Energy ’ and 
‘On Energy Saving and Renewable Energy ’, development of two technical regulations related to building 
EE, introduction of building energy passport and EE label  systems , mandatory requir ements on EE 
consideration in construction / reconstruction / capital repairs under public funding (2014), and 
assistance to the adaption and approval of 14 EN/ISO standards .    
• Establishment 2 testing laboratories for insulation materials . 
• Energy audits of 15 buildings (residential and public) based on the adopted standard and methodology  
(Annex XIII) . 
• EE certificates (the first ones in the country) were issued to 9 buildings (existing and newly built) . 
• Institutional support for preparation of greenhouse gas national inventories;  
• Training of architects and civil engineers on integrated building design approach concepts .  
• Elaboration of g uidelines for thermal insulation of building envelope s, subsequently  approved by the 
Ministry of Urban Development;  
                                                             
62 http://www4.unfccc.int/sites/nama/_layouts/un/fccc/nama/NamaSeekingSupportForImplementation.aspx?ID=71&viewOnly=1


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
• A bilingual textbook , ‘Green Architecture: EE and Renewable Energy ’ (430 pages) , was developed and 
approved for inclusion into the curricul um of the National University of Architecture and Construction of 
Armenia.  
• Development of typical replicable single- family energy efficient building designs  and the respective 
catalogue, approved by the Ministry of Urban Development . 
• A pilot project on restoration of the district heating system of the Avan residential area of  Yerevan was 
the key to unlocking the application of cogeneration technology in the heat supply sector of Armenia and 
to providing the evidence that district heating restoration projects only become feasible and attractive for 
private investors when support schemes are available.  
• Cooperation with Yerevan Municipality in improving the energy efficiency of the street lighting system 
and establishment of a special purpos e EE fund the savings gained from EE initiatives . 
 
152. Financial status:  UNDP is accredited under 'basic' and 'project management' fiduciary standards of the GCF.  
 
153. Executing entity: The programme will be implemented by the Ministry of Nature Protection (M oNP) following 
the UNDP National Implementation Modality (NIM) . MoNP houses  the National Focal Point for the UNFCCC and 
has been  coordinating climate change programmes since 1997.  MoNP will be responsible for the overall 
management and supervision of the pr oject to ensure synergy with other GHG mitigation policies and measures 
in the country. UNDP has enjoyed a long-term and highly successful collaboration with M oNP. MoNP has the 
capacity and knowledge to guide and oversee the conceptual elements of the project implementation,  including 
professional guidance for achieving the climate change mitigation objectives and overseeing the GHG emissions 
reduction impacts. Mo NP has been the implementing agency for the UNDP -GEF ‘Armenia-  Improving EE of 
Municipal He ating and Hot Water Supply ’ and the UNDP -GEF ‘Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings ’ projects , 
and has a proven track -record of successful implementation and cooperation with different ministries and 
stakeholders. Staff of the Ministry of Nature Protect ion, other civil servants and Municipal staff  who will work on 
this project will not receive salaries from the project, as this is contrary to the Law on the Civil Service and also 
UNDP rules.  
 
E.5.3. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
 
154. Summary of stakeholder consultations . The project idea was initiated in November 2014, when the results of 
a UNDP -supported pilot project on EE retrofit s in Avan municipality of Yerevan w ere presented to the 
Government and donor community. The Government (Municipality of Yerevan and MoNP) expressed strong 
interest and demand for scaling- up the successful pilot, as did  EIB in terms of  providing financing for that pilot 
program me. Between Novem ber 2014 and May 2015, two project scoping missions were organi sed by EIB and 
UNDP , during which a broad  spectrum of partners and stakeholders were involved and consulted. As a result, 
the project concept was designed and presented to the NDA in May 2015. After discussing the project idea, the 
NDA provided a Letter of No Objection for the project on 19 May 2015. Further, a donor coordination meeting 
on energy efficiency was held in June 2015 at which the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development 
and Ministry of Energy Natural Resources underlined the need for , and request ed support to the donors  for, 
energy -saving measures in the multi -apartment residential sector (see Minutes of the Donor Coordination 
meeting in Annex X III). The full proposal was  presented and discussed with the NDA on July 20, 2015, prior to 
the Project Appraisal Committee meeting ( in which  all key stakeholders from the Government, civil society and 
private sector participated, including the NDA). In addition, Yerevan Municipalit y and the Ministry of Nature 
Protection both provided co -financing letters for this project (Annex IV).  
 
155. UNDP has long- standing and on- going stakeholder consultations with a variety of stakeholders , including 
Government agencies, NGOs , other development agencies and potential project beneficiaries. Stakeholder 
consultations during the preparation of the project included one- on-one meetings , as well as a presentation at 
the Local Project Appraisal Committee (LPAC) meeting ( the m inutes of  the LPAC meeting are presented in 
Annex VII) . Government agencies have been made aware of, and have engaged in,  on-going discussions 
regarding the EE building retrofit project through activities associated with UNDP’s existing EE buildings and EE lighting  project activities and the well -established UNDP Climate Change Program me Unit coordinated by , and 
located at , the Ministry of Nature Protection . Other Government agencies that have been engaged include the


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
Ministry of Urban Development, the Ministry of T erritorial Administration, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry 
of Energy and Nature Resources , the National Institute of Standards, the R2E2 Fund, the Scientific Research 
Institute of Energy, and the National  University of Architecture and Construction.   
 
156. On 10 June 2015,  a donor coordination meeting of the Armenian Working Group on Infrastructure, E nergy and 
Environmental Sustainability was held. The group,  co-chair ed by the World Bank, UNDP and MoENR , includes 
a diverse and strategic cross -section of Armenian Government institutions and development partners. The 
representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources underlined 
the need to support  energy -saving  measures in the multi -apartment residential sector. In addition, t he Group 
concluded that finding and using a common set of strategic and powerful metrics for measuring results will be 
critical, both for communicating broadly on the economic , environmental  and development gains to be made 
from energy efficiency investments, and for mobilising additional resources and support . Minutes of the meeting 
are provided in Annex III .  
 
157. Civil society organi sations that have been consulted through one- on-one meetings include the Builders ’ Union 
of Armenia and the Architects ’ Union of Armenia. Informal discussions have also been held with potential project 
beneficiaries identified through engagements with UNDP’s on- going activities  in Armenia.  A full list of 
stakeholders and their role in project design and implementation are presented in Annex II (pp. 18- 20). 
 
158. Stakeholder coordination . The primary means of stakeholder coordination will be via the Project Board, which 
will provide an official, ongoing forum for coordinating the work of various G overnment agencies and other 
donors. In addition to work through the Project Board, project staff will maintain regular communication with other agencies regarding their complementary work on energy efficiency building retrofits. See S
ection 5. 
‘Implementation and institutional arrangements’ for more details on this arrangement.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
159. The project’s  objective is to deploy an integrated suite of interventions to systematically de -carbonise the existing 
building stock to realise both greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions and sustainable development benefits. 
Barriers to achieving this include policy, financial, market and technical  / capacity barriers. Addressing the policy, 
market and technical  / capacity barriers requires technical assistance, which is provided in Components  1, 2 and 
3. In order to address the financial barriers , financing is needed – which  is provided in Components 3 and 4.  
160.  The concessional loan, subject to EIB’s due dilligence, will be offered on terms that will not crowd- out private 
and other public investment. EIB follows the principles of the ‘ DFI Guidance for Using Investment Concessional 
Finance in Private Sector Operations ’.63 These principles are:  additionality , crowding- in, commercial 
sustainability, r einforcing m arkets , and promoting high standards.  Taken together, these principles affirm EIB’s 
commitment to provide market -consistent support for commercially sustainable projects in situations where 
private investment is not forthcoming or requires supplementing.   
 
161. In Component 4, grants from the GCF will be given as a temporary targeted incentive to address the needs of 
the most vulnerable households. The financial analysis (Annex III) shows that , for those earning below the 
median household income of US$400,  building r etrofits are not affordable. For middle-  and higher -income 
households , grants are not needed from an affordability point of view, and will only be used at a low level to 
overcome early -mover barriers. The grants will support poor and vulnerable households to allow them access 
to improved thermal comfort and cost / energy savings. Furthermore,  incentives in the form of grants are common 
in developed countries –  both in the EU and USA siz eable grants are common practice. KfW , for instance, 
provides loans together with incentive grants for energy efficiency retrofits in Germany of between 7.5- 22.5%, 
and consequently the proposed incentive grants in Armenia can be considered modest.  
 
162. In the public sector, a small incentive (totalling approximately  US$ 1.5 million) is also justified based on the 
additionality that higher energy efficiency than ‘business as usual’ brings. This modest incentive will also serve 
                                                             
63 http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/news/roundtable.pdf


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
to accelerate the renovation of buildings, thus improving the quality of life of citizens  using public facilities such 
as hospitals and kindergartens.  
 
Please describe the efficiency  and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 ( core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
 
163. The proposed project, by focusing on addressing systemic barriers to energy efficiency in existing housing – 
through policy and financial de-risking – represents an efficient and effective way to address Armenia’s future 
GHG emissions and to meet the country’s stated mitigation objectives as stated in the INDC  and the sub-national  
targets set by cities . By providing incentivi sed financing , the project will also address first -mover costs and kick -
start market -based refurbishment of existing housing stock.  The effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed 
activities are characteri sed by the following key performance indicators:  
 
Key performance indicator  Target  
Estimated cost per tonne CO 2eq (total investment cost/expected 
lifetime direct emission reductions)  • US$ 22 / tCO 2e for total project financing  
• US$ 14.4 / tCO 2e for GCF  financing  
Estimated cost per tonne CO 2eq (total investment cost/expected 
lifetime direct and indirect emission reductions )  • US$ 5-6 / tCO 2e for total project financing  
• US$ 3.4-3.6 / tCO 2e for GCF  financing  
 
164. An appropriate benchmark  for the total  investment cost/expected lifetime direct emission reductions  is provided 
by data from a recent report on energy efficiency retrofits in residential buildings in the Western Balkans .64 For 
Albania, which has an electricity system with a grid emission factor similar to that of Armenia, t he calculated cost 
per tonne of  lifetime emission savings  is between US$ 178-897/tCO 2e, depending on the type of building and 
the type of measures considered.  For some CDM projects , data are available that have enabled calculat ion of  
the investm ent cost per tCO 265. Examples include : 
 
Project  Period over 
which emission 
reductions are 
counted (y ear) Investment 
US$/tCO 2 
Moldova Energy Conservation and Greenhouse Gases Emissions Reduction : This 
program me of 27 projects will improve eff iciency  and promote switch ing from 
coal/mazut to natural g as for heating public buildings  10 3,452 
Massive introduction of Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFLs) to Households in Ecuador  10 45 
Energy Efficiency Measures in Office Building at Kalina of Ivory Property Trust (India)  10 250 
Energy Efficiency Measures at MindSpace Building No 6 at Hyderabad  10 133 
Energy Efficiency Measures at Terminal T3 (India)  7 1,002 
Installation of Natural Gas-Based Combined Cooling , Heating and Power (CCHP) 
Systems in DLF Building 5 in Gurgaon, India  7 3,176 
Energy Efficiency Measures at MindSpace Building No 9 at Hyderabad  10 82 
Energy Efficiency Measures at MindSpace Building No 14 at Hyderabad  10 167 
 
165. As can be seen, the cost per tCO 2e of building energy efficiency projects can vary widely (see also the sensitivity 
analys is in Annex D of the UNDP Project Document – Annex II ). This cost will depend to a large extent on the 
measures to be implemented and on the carbon intensity of the local electricity grid.  In the literature on energy 
efficiency, the cost presented is often the abatement cost, in which the energy cost savings are subtracted from 
the sum of investment and O&M cost. The abatement value for energy efficiency measures is often negative. 
This justifies the large difference between the direct emission reductions as a result of investments made in the project and the indirect emission reductions, which include investments that will be made due to the barrier 
removal and market creation by the project.  Energy efficiency projects are justified by the fact that , although the 
                                                             
64 https://www.energy -community.org/portal/page/portal/ENC_HOME/CALENDAR/Other_Meetings/2015/03_Jun and 
https://www.energy -
community.org/portal/page/portal/ENC_HOME/DOCS/3284024/Guidance_Note_on_Residential _Energy_Efficiency_programs.pdf   
65 CDM Pipeline, www.cdmpipeline.org


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
direct cost of emission reductions may be relatively high, once existing barriers have been removed private and 
other public investment will follow that have the potential to lead to very large emission reductions.  
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co -financing ratio  (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long- term low emission investment.  
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
 
Key performance indicator s Target  
Co-financing ratio (total amount of the Fund’s 
investment versus confirmed co -financing)  2:1 
Leveraging ratio (total amount of the Fund’s 
investment versus expected volume of finance to be 
leveraged)  1:5 
 
166. The project’s co -financing ratio, i.e. the total amount of the Fund’s investment versus confirmed co-financing,  
stands at 2:1. There is also a significant potential to catalyse long- term low -emission investment  (see Section 
E.6.5 for details) , as reflected in the significantly higher project  leveraging ratio (i.e. the total amount of the Fund’s 
investm ent versus expected volume of finance to be leveraged), which stands at 1:5.  
 
167. The project will undertake a number of activities beyond simple investments that will stimulate the market for 
energy efficiency in the residential and public building sectors. Therefore, investments not within the direct 
control of the project will be triggered.  The indirect investment catalysed has been estimated using the GEF 
methodology for calculating indirect emission reductions.  The total market / penetration is as given i n the table 
below.  
 
168. Total 10- year market size was estimated based on the following:  
 
• The total numbers of each building- type in the country . 
• The market -penetration rates over the course of 10 years after project completion if the project is carried 
out. 
• The impact on this market development of the GCF project, using a relevant  ‘causality factor ’. For this 
calculation, a level 2 causality factor is used ( 40% – modest) . 
 
  # of units in 
the country  Estimated 10-
year market 
penetration rate66 Investment 
per unit (US$)  Total 
investment  
(million US$)  
Single -family individual buildings  392,590  20%               
10,000      785.1  
Multi -family apartment buildings  4,300  20%             
120,000      103.2  
Public buildings (complex demand - and 
supply -side renovation, such as for a 
hospital)  180 50%             
250,000        22.5  
Public buildings (simple demand -side 
measures, such as for a school)  2,326  50%               
95,000      110.5  
Causality factor  - -  -  40% 
Total investment catalysed  - -  -          408.5   
 
 
                                                             
66 Market penetration rate is a measure of the number of sales or adoption of a product or service compared to the total theoret ical 
market for that product or service – i.e. the number of households / apartment buildings / hospitals / schools that have adopted 
energy efficiency measures versus the total number of such buildings in the country.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected e conomic and financial rate of return  with and without the Fund’s support, base d on the 
analysis conducted in F .1. 
 
169. The economic rate of return of the project is given in the following table:  
 
Key performance indicator  Overall  Houses 
(single 
dwelling)  Apartments (9-
story, 36 
dwellings)  Public buildings 
– demand -side  Public 
buildings – 
demand - and 
supply -side 
Economic rate of return    12.7%  4.5%  12.9%  13.6%  17.0%  
 
170. The investments in public buildings have the greatest economic return based on the technical and financial 
models used. At 12.7% for the overall project portfolio, the overall project has a positive economic net present 
value . 
 
171. All GCF funds will be used as grants –  either for technical assistance ( Components 1,  2 and 3), or for investment 
incentives. The financial rate of return is given for the overall project and each sub -sector in the table below:  
 
Key performance indicator  Overall  Houses 
(single 
dwelling)  Apartments (9-
story, 36 
dwellings)  Public buildings 
– demand -side  Public 
buildings – 
demand - and 
supply -side 
Average level of grant from GCF  13% grant 
(average)  9% grant 
(average)  22% grant 
(average)  5% grant 
(average)  8% grant 
(average)  
Financial rate 
of return  With the 
Fund’s support  9.7%  1.7%  9.5%  11.7%  13.8%  
Without the 
Fund’s support  7.5%  0.5%  5.6%  10.2%  12.8%  
 
172. The GCF funds increase the financial rate of return from 7.5% to 9.7% for the project as a whole. The effect on 
the IRR for sub- sectors is proportional to the grant amount, with the impact being greatest for  apartment 
buildings. While the IRR for individual houses is very low , experience of Central and Eastern European countries 
show67 that most  residents do not take financial performance into account when investing in building renovation. 
For this reason,  the market at the individual house level is considered viable when incentivised with a grant. 
While the GCF grants will come to an end at the end of the project, the TA activities will address systemic barriers, including the creation of local incentives –  a model very common in the EU and the USA .
68  
 
Please describe financial viability in the long- run beyond the Fund intervention.  
 
173. The project includes technical assistance activities that focus on addressing systemic barriers to the market for energy efficient residential and public buildings. This includes the development of policy , legislation and 
incentives to support low -income h ouseholds to invest in energy efficien cy. Through the use of grants, the market 
will be transformed such  that, after the Fund intervention,  additional investment in the market will continue to 
take place at a faster rate than before F und intervention.  
 
                                                             
67 Cirman A et al (2011), What Determines Building Renovation Decisions? http://www.enhr2011.com/sites/default/files/Paper -
AndrejaCirman- WS11.pdf   
68 See for instance http://aceee.org/files/proceedings/2012/data/papers/0193- 000422.pdf ,  
http://www.epa.gov/ cleanenergy/documents/suca/program_incentives.pdf  and 
http://www.inspirefp7.eu/wp- content/uploads/2014/08/WP2_D2.1b_20140523_P18_Policies -and-incentives -relevant -to-retrofit.pdf  
and Slide 10 of https://www.energy -
community.org/portal/page/portal/ENC_HOME/DOCS/3736187/KfW_3_pillar_approach_EE_public_buildings.pdf


---
*Page 53*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
174. The provision of a very modest amount of grant funding is needed to jump -start the EE retrofits market. The 
amount and share of grants in total investment will be progressively reduced; together with measures to reduce 
the risks of EE investment (i.e. enactment of supportive policies and work with domestic banking sector), this strategy will ensure that the need for grant financing is minimi sed by the end of the project’s 6- year 
implementation period. It is, however, likely that a certain group of vulnerable h ouseholds will continue to be in 
need of grant support and, therefore, the project will work with the Armenian social support system to ensure that ownership of this grant support shifts to internal Armenian social security funding. UNDP has successful 
experience with introducing such policy changes: for example, in Kazakhstan, UNDP worked with the 
government to expand the coverage of the state social support system to include grants to vulnerable 
households for EE measures in homes. A similar approach will  be adopted in Armenia.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
175. Best available technologies have been considered and will be applied. The energy efficiency  parameters of the 
materials and measures will be higher than local standards, and reflect best EU practices. The following technical parameters are proposed:  
 
• EE insulation  for outer walls –  final U -value (W/m
2K) of 0.75 or better  
• EE windows – U-value (W/m2K) of 2 or better  
• Roof insulation – final U -value (W/m2K) of  0.25 or better  
 
176. Measures included in the analysis for residential buildings are:  
 
• Insulation of outer walls and of the roof  
• Energy -efficient windows  
• Installation of windows and doors in staircases  and landing areas of apartment buildings  
 
177. Measures included in the analysis for public buildings:  
 
• Insulation of the outer walls, of the cavities beneath the windows and of the roof  
• Energy -efficient windows and doors  
• Heating system replacement with a condensing gas boiler system  
• Thermostatic valves for the heating system  
• Hydraulic balance valves for the heating system  
• CFL or LED  lighting  
• Improved manage ment  
 
178. Best international practice is followed in terms of project design. The project includes both technical assistance focused on permanent reduction and removal of market barriers and reduction of risks, coupled with incentivised 
commercial lending in conjunc tion with  an International Financial Institution. The demonst r
ation effect in 
residential and public sector buildings and within involved banks, coupled with systemic barrier removal 
activit ies, is considered best practice and a cost -effective means to create markets : this is an approach followed 
by Multilateral Development Banks around the world .69 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF core indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime 
emission reductions (mitigation only)  
                                                             
69 In the Eastern European region, the most notable development bank using this approach is the EBRD –  see www.ebrdseff.com


---
*Page 54*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
 
(a) Total project  financing  US$ 29,820,00070 
(b) Requested  GCF amount  US$ 20,000,000   
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  1,389,677  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 22 tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  US$ 14.4  / tCO 2eq 
 Low High 
(f) Expected indirect and direct lifetime emissions (tCO 2eq) 5,558,709  5,827,059  
(g) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (g = a / f) (US$/ tCO 2eq) 5.12  5.36  
(h) Estimated GCF cost in US$ / tCO 2eq removed (h = b / f)  3.43  3.60 
 
A detailed bottom -up analysis of model buildings in Armenia has been conducted. Four 
models were developed, two in the residential sector (one for an individual single- family 
house and one for a multi -family apartment building) and two in the public sector (a hospital 
and a school). Building parameters and energy characteristics were determined for each 
type of building. A set of efficiency measures was then applied and the energy needs and 
potential savings for these measures calculated. Total energy savings were estimated 
taking into account a rebound factor. Using the model buildings as a guide to potential 
energy and GHG reductions, the estimated total emission reductions from the project 
investments were calculated. The GHG emissions analysis makes use of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) methodology for energy efficiency projects. GHG emission 
coefficients were taken from the GEF GHG calculation worksheets for natural gas and 
electricity. For electricity, the grid emission factor is taken from the IGES database and is 
based on the CDM combined margin approach. Total direct emission reductions are the 
sum of the reductions achieved in the four building categories evaluated.  
 
The project will undertake a number of activities beyond simple investments that will also 
stimulate the market for energy efficiency in the residential and public building sectors. 
Therefore, there will be indirect energy savings triggered by investments not within the 
direct control of the project. These are estimated using bottom -up and top- down 
approaches based on the GEF methodology. For bottom -up emission estimates, the  
estimated direct reductions are multiplied by a replication factor –  with the expectation that 
the volume of investments and GHG emissions reductions will increase by a factor of 3 
over a 10- year period after project completion due to the project intervention. This is a 
modest replication factor according to GEF practice. To estimate the indirect GHG 
emission reductions using a top- down methodology, total 10- year market size was 
estimated.  
 The full methodology used for calculating the factors is given in Annex D of the UNDP 
project document . 
 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks 
established in a comparable context.    
 
See the discussion of the appropriate benchmark for cost per tCO 2 in Section E.6.1  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as 
a result of the Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation 
only)  
                                                             
70 Note that the amount of project cost  indicated here does not include  potential  EIB loan and own funds  from residential borrowers 
of credit lines  (potential parallel financing)


---
*Page 55*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 69 
 
 
 E 
The expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project as a result of the 
Fund’s financing is US$ 102.82 million. Of this, US$ 86 million will be from the EIB loan 
and private sector (from residents, once loans are repaid), and US$ 20 million will be public 
investment (from national and city governments, once loans are repaid) in energy 
efficiency retrofits , representing a total leveraging ratio of 1:5.   
  
The volume of finance to be leveraged is the sum of all finance for the project.  
 
Source of financing  Amount, US$  
GCF  20,000,000  
Confirmed co -financing  
Yerevan Municipality   8,000,000  
UNDP    1,420,000  
MoNP   400,000  
TOTAL  Co-financing  9,820,000  
Potential p arallel financing /leverage  
EIB 86,250,000  
Residents   6,750,000  
TOTAL  Potential p arallel 
financing /leverage   93,000,000  
TOTAL  Volume of finance   102,820,000  
 
 
The financial analysis that was used to arrive at the values of leveraged financ ing is give n 
in Annex D of the UNDP Project Document.  
 Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks 
established in a comparable context.   
The GEF has indicated a level of ambition for the overall GEF portfolio to reach a co-
financing ratio of at leas t 6:1 (total co- financing to total GEF resources) for the Sixth 
Replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund (GEF -6)71 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co- benefit generated as a result of the 
project/programme)   
 
                                                             
71 GEF/C.46/09, 2014.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 69 
 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3 ). 
 
179. The project will accelerate the market for energy efficient retrofits of buildings in:  a) the residential sector, and 
b) the public sector. In the residential sector , two typical building models are considered: a single- family house 
and a multi -owner apartment building (see Section F.2 below). In the pub lic sector, two technical scenarios are 
considered for the same building: a retrofit with only  demand- side (energy -saving) measures, and a retrofit with 
both demand-  and supply -side (fuel -switch) measures.  
 
180. Starting with the investment costs and modelled energy and financial savings , a bottom -up financial and 
economic model has been developed for each building -type. The fuel prices (for natural gas and electricity) are 
increased annually at a rate of 1% per year. This is a conservative f igure : until recent public protests broke out, 
the Government’s plan was for electricity prices to increase by 16% in 2015 alone. Investment parameters 
include own funds (10% for residential buildings and 20% for public building), an incentive grant and a loan, 
and sensitively analysis has been carried out for these parameters. The simple payback, internal rate of return 
(IRR) and net present value (NPV) are determined using standard financial modelling.  
 
181. The choice of discount rate for the NPV calculations is guided by which party is being affected and what the 
time value of money is for that party .72 The time value of money for a household varies considerably according 
to household members’ perception of r isk and the perception of likelihood of returns on the investment. There 
is a difference in investment in energy efficiency in the residential sector between individual households and 
multi- owner buildings. For investments in energy efficiency in Armenia a t the building level in multi -owner 
buildings , the discount rate is higher due to factors such as lack of awareness amongst the owners, lack of 
access to financing, inertia in the decision- making process, perceptions that the building space outside of the 
apartment is not the owner’s individual responsibility, coordination costs, absentee owners, and the perceived risk of free riders. This indicates that there should be a difference in the appropriate discount rate to be used 
in any financial modelling. The justification for using particular discount rates is provided below:  
 
• For households (houses and dwellings within apartment buildings),  the discount rate represents the 
opportunity cost of other investing options. As a proxy for this opportunity cost, the interest rate on savings 
deposits in Armenia is used (10.4% in 2014).
73 The discount rate used in calculations is 10%.  
• For residential building -level investments,  the discount rate chosen is 17.5%:  
o For building -level investments, the perception of risk is higher and the perception of likelihood of 
returns on the investment is lower. This is generally due to the perception that collective action may 
not succeed. Additionally, there is general inertia of apartment owners to invest together. This is 
demonstrated by the lack of investment at the apartment -building level in countries even where the 
legal framework is already conducive to collective decision- making (for example, Croatia, Serbia 
and Montenegro74). 
o This figure is consistent with that given in the EU analysis, ‘Study evaluating the current energy 
efficiency policy framework in the EU and providing orientation on policy options for realising the 
cost-effective energy efficiency/saving potential until 2020 and beyond’75, which  uses 17.5%. This 
figure is also consistent with that used in the EU’s PRIMES model for households76. While, clearly, 
                                                             
72 See discussions in, for example Woolf et al. (2012), Best Practices in Energy Efficiency Programme Screening: How to Ensure that 
the Value of Energy Efficiency is Properly Accounted For. Available at http://www.synapse-
energy.com/sites/default/files/SynapseReport.2012- 07.NHPC_.EE -Program -Screening.12- 040.pdf  
73 See World Bank (2015) Data: Deposit interest rate (%) htt p://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FR.INR.DPST/countries   
74 World Bank (2014),  Western Balkans: Scaling- up Energy Efficiency in Buildings : https://www.energy -
community.org/portal/page/portal/ENC_HOME/DOCS/3282025/Final_Report _Scaling_Up_Energy_Efficiency_in_Buildings_in_the_W
estern_Balkans.pdf   
75 https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2014_report _2020- 2030_eu_policy_framework.pdf   
76 See page 87 of this report:


---
*Page 57*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 69 
 
 
 F 
perceptions of risk are far higher in Armenia than in the EU (as reflected by high interest rates on 
savings accounts, loans, etc.), this conservative figure has been used in the analysis.  
• For public buildings , a discount rate of 10% is used.   
 
182. The economic analysis takes into account increasing fuel prices, an increase in property values (for residential 
buildings), and an economic benefit of reduced GHG emissions valued at $25 per tonne of CO 2eq reduced.77 
A detailed financial and economic model has been prepared for each building- type (at the building level), and 
combined into an overall project -wide integrated financial model. This model is available in Annex III.  
 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2.  
 
183. The US$ 20 million of GCF grants will be composed of funding used for technical assistance (Components 1, 
2 and 3) to remove market and policy barriers to EE building retrofits; and for incentives (Component 4) to 
address the needs of vulnerable households by making loans for EE building retrofits more affordable. The technical assistance provided in C omponents 1, 2 and 3 are grant -funded since t hey address and remove 
systemic risks and overcome market barriers.  
 
184. In Component 4, grants from the GCF will be given as a temporary targeted incentive . They will be used to 
target vulnerable households. The grants will support poor and vulnerable households to allow them access to 
improved thermal comfort and cost / energy savings. I ncentives in the form of grants are common in developed 
countries – both in the EU and USA , sizeable grants are common practice.
78 In Germany, for instance,  KfW 
provides loans together with incentive grants for energy efficiency retrofits of between 7.5- 22.5%79, and 
consequently the proposed incentive grants in Armenia can be considered modest. A total of US$ 12.5 million 
in incentive grants will be used to support vulnerable households in the residential sector . 
 
185. In the public sector, a small incentive (totalling around US$ 1.5 million) is also justified based on the additionality  
that a higher level of energy efficiency will be promoted than under the ‘business as usual’  scenario. In addition,  
the modest incentive will also serve to accelerate the renovation of buildings, thus improving the quality of life 
of citizens  using public facilities such as  hospitals and kindergartens.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
186. The technical evaluation80 has been carried out using bottom -up building energy models (4 models in total), 
using empirical Armenian data from building energy audits and feasibility studies undertaken by UNDP and the 
R2E2 Fund. The models account for building geometry, climatic conditions and building use. For each building-type, a typical Armenian building is modelled , and the most common fuel and energy characteristics used. 
Investment costs are based on installed costs of energy -efficient materials in the Armenian market. The before 
and after energy needs and costs are determined for each buildi ng-type.  
 
187. The technical measures selected have high energy efficiency parameters comparable to those used in the EU (see Section E6.4 above) . From a technology perspective,  all these measures are well known and proven over 
decades of experience. While energy performance characteristics are higher than commonly used in Armenia, 
the base technology is well known (wall insulation, efficient windows, roof insulation, etc .), so technology risk s 
are very low.  The measures proposed offer the following energy savings:  
                                                             
 https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2014_report_2020- 2030_eu_policy_framework.pdf  
77 This value is within the lower end of the range of estimations used by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for the Social Cost 
of CO 2 for 2015 which were (in 2011 Dollars) USD 12 per tonne using a 5% average discount rate, USD 39 per tonne using a 3% 
average discount rate and USD 61 per tonne using a 2.5% average discount rate: 
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/economics/scc.html    
78 See for instance http://aceee.org/files/proceedings/2012/data/papers/0193- 000422.pdf,  
http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/documents/suca/program_incentives.pdf  and 
http://www.inspirefp7.eu/wp- content/uploads/2014/08/WP2_D2.1b_20140523_P18_Policies -and-incentives -relevant -to-retrofit.pdf  
79 See slide 10 of https://www.energy -
community.org /portal/page/portal/ENC_HOME/DOCS/3736187/KfW_3_pillar_approach_EE_public_buildings.pdf  
80 See Annex II (pp. 61- 96), Annex IIa and Annex XIII for details about the technical evaluation .


---
*Page 58*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 69 
 
 
 F 
 
Technical performance summary  Houses (single -
dwelling)  Apartments (9-
story, 36 
dwellings)  Public buildings 
– demand -side  Public 
buildings – 
demand - and 
supply -side 
Modelled energy savings  77% 76% 43% 49% 
Rebound factor used to correct for suppressed 
demand  20% 20% 40% 40% 
Savings used in financial and economic 
calculations  62% 61% 26% 29% 
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
188. The project will eliminate  policy, financial, market and technical barriers  to creat e an enabling environment for 
investments in energy -efficient building retrofit s. The interventions from the technical assistance of the GCF 
are mainly capacity building. T he $14 million investment by the GCF accounts for approximately  11% of the 
total investment  cost ($122.82 million) , or about 16% compared to EIB’s potential parallel contribution of $86.25 
million. Building  retrofit s may cause impacts such as generation of waste and safety risks to the community 
from installation and dismantling , but these are minimal, temporary and can be easily mitigated.  
 
189. The overall outcome of the project will be reduction in energy consumption of the building sector , with 
associated reductions  in GHG emissions and wider opportunities for gender mainstreaming in capacity building, 
financing and employment (about 1,7 00 jobs will be created).  
 
190. The project has completed the UNDP social and environmental screening procedure (see SESP attached as 
Annex VI). This screening was undertaken to ensure this project complies with UNDP’s Social and 
Environmental Standards. The overall social and environmental risk category for this project is: L ow.  
 
191. Given the type and scale of the interventions proposed by the project, no EIA is required by the Government 
(as confirmed in the Letter from the MoNP, Annex VIb).  
 
192. The UNDP SESP template used to classify the project follows the current best international practice (i.e. EBRD, EIB, ADB, WB, etc.), whereby similar projects (i.e. involving EE building retrofits) have been classified by IFIs 
as ‘low -risk’.  For example, t his was the case for a recent €137 million EIB project in Romania (‘ Bucharest 
Thermal Rehabilitation’ , as well as the WB -GEF US$ 10.9 million grant for the Municipal Energy Efficiency 
Project in Armenia
 (approved in 2012). The EIB investment in Romania and the World Bank’s  project in Armenia 
funded identical technic al measures to what are  proposed under the current proposal: i.e. thermal rehabilitation 
of multi -storey residential and public buildings, including such physical interventions as insulation of walls, 
basements and attics, repair/replacement of external doors and windows, installation of reflective surfacing of 
walls behind radiators, replacement of boilers and heating systems. Consequently, t he project has been 
assigned a ‘low’  category in UNDP ’s E&S Screening template based on consultation with the Government to 
ensure consistency in environmental and social assessments among project  partners and similar initiatives in 
Armenia and elsewhere. However, the SESP recogni ses that categori sation of projects is an iterative process ; 
should stakeholders raise concerns about  the project’s social and environmental aspe cts during 
implementation, the ‘low risk’  designation will be carefully reviewed.  
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s financial m anagement and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.


---
*Page 59*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 69 
 
 
 F 
193. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and 
regulations81 and the NIM Guidelines82. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management 
section of the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures , available at 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/intr oduction.aspx .  
 
194. NIM Guidelines identify four modalities for cash transfer to manage project finances. All four modalities can    
be used in the same project, for different activities and/or inputs:  
• Direct cash transfer - UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the implementing partner, 
who in turn reports back expenditure;  
• Direct payment - the implementing partner carries out the procurement but requests UNDP to make 
the disbursement;  
• Reimbursement – as for direct cash transfer, except that U NDP pays the implementing partner after 
the implementing partner has itself made the disbursement;  
• Direct Agency Implementation –  UNDP conducts expenditure from requisition through to disbursement 
with no cash being transferred to the implementing partner . However, the implementing partner has 
full programmatic control and so full control over expenditures.  
 
195. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section 
of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Polici es and Procedures (POPP). The policies outline formal 
procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. See here: https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx
 
 
196. In line with NIM Guidelines,  UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the Responsible Parties (the PIU of 
the Municipality of Yerevan, once established and operational, and the EPIU of the MoNP)  by undertaking an 
evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners  (part of the 
Harmonised Approach to Cash Transfers -  HACT ). 
 
197. In line with NIM Guidelines and cash transfer modalities , procurement under the project will be undertaken by 
either Responsible Parties (EPIU of the MoNP and Municipality of Yerevan’s PIU) or by UNDP under  the ‘Direct 
Agency Implementation’  modality. Wherever procurement is carried out by the Responsible Parties,  it will be 
fully aligned with Government regulations and procedures and will also have to be compatible with UNDP’s 
financial and procurement standards. Specifically, according to the UNDP Policies and Procedures, “UNDP has 
a responsibility to accept appropriate cash advance requests, reported expenses or direct payments that are 
consistent with the Annual Work Plan and UNDP’s Financial Rules and Regulations (FRRs) and –  therefore – 
to reject improper advance requests, expenses, or requests for direct payments.  If subsequent information 
becomes available that questions the appropriateness of expenses recorded or direct payments already made, 
these should be rejected at any point up to the issuance and signature of the Combined Delivery Report ”. 
 
198. Project  will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit 
guidelines and policies  along with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA with the GCF . In line with NIM 
rules, p eriodic (quarterly) financial reviews of project expenditures will be conducted to ensure funds are used 
for the purpose intended in the approved proposal.  
 
199. The project will apply international accounting financial reporting standards for the project reporting . 
 
200. UNDP will en sure compliance with the GCF’s Fiduciary Principles and Standards , including anti -corruption and 
AML/CFT requirements . 
                                                             
81 https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial -Rules -and-Regulations_E.pdf   
82 
https://info.undp.org/global/documen ts/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/Nati
onal%20Implementation%20by%20the%20Government%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx&action=default&
DefaultItemOpen=1


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk category  Level of r isk Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Government does not commit to refine and implement 
new building legislation  Other  Medium  Very low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
202. This risk is mitigated through UNDP’s established working relationship with the Government to develop laws 
and building c odes. The Government clearly recogni ses the need for energy efficiency improvements in 
buildings and is committed to introduce appropriate regulations. Illustrating this, in December 2014 a 
Resolution was adopted that makes energy efficiency as well as cost -effective renewable energy solutions 
mandatory for integration in construction  / reconstruction projects. Development and enf orcement of an 
ambitious regulatory framework is also a central element of the NAMA on ‘Energy efficient public buildings 
and housing in Armenia’ . The Government has requested UNDP support to help ensure development and 
implementation of legislation in line with international best practices on building energy efficiency.  The GCF 
project will be implemented by a Government body, the Ministry of Nature Protection, which is responsible for 
UNFCCC implementation in Armenia  and which is also the GCF NDA . 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Government does not continue to bring energy prices 
in line with market prices  Financial  High (>50%)   High  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
203. Government policy, demonstrated through significant growth in energy prices over the past 5 years, clearly 
shows positive intentions : natural gas prices increased by roughly 170% between 2008 and 2014,  and the 
electricity tariff increased by 35% (day -time) and 41% (night -time). However, at the time of writing (July 2015) , 
large protests are ongoing in Yerevan due to proposed tariff increases, putting into question future 
developments on this front.  However, even with modest 1% increase per year, as conservatively assumed in 
the financial analysis, EE retrofits can represent a viable investment alternative (provided other barriers are 
eliminated).  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G .2. 
201. Technical and operational risks include risks related to lack of knowledge and skills , and the under -developed 
nature of the ESCO market. Financial risks include those related to the level of energy prices and the 
availability of loans for EE investments. Social and environmental risks to the project are minor. A n additional  
risk relates  to the Government’s commitment to adopt and implement legislation. The most significant risks 
are the financial risks. These will be mitigated through the creation of financial mechanisms as part of the 
project.


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
Knowledge and skills among local professionals are 
too limited  to support the growth of the market  Technical and 
operational  Medium   Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
204. This risk will be mitigated through provision of technical assistance to build capacities  of various local 
stakeholders involved in building design, construction and operation. Capacity building will mostly take place 
through practical experience gained as a result of the financial incentives under Component 4. Thus , technical 
assistance will be provided through a ‘learning- by-doing’  approach whereby local specialists will work together 
with international consultants to deliver energy efficiency projects in residential buildings . 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Lack of demand for building sector energy efficiency 
retrofits  Financial  Medium   Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
205. UNDP’s prior work in Armenia shows that demand exists where conditions are supportive. Through the de -
risking activities of th e project, supported by a temporary financial incentive, demand is expected to be 
significant. For the public sector, energy audits show that there is a reasonable payback period (between 5-
15 years) for  EE measures and this indicat es that , when market barriers are addressed,  the underlying 
investments should be bankable. For residential investments, decisions are seldom made solely on the basis of financial returns ( they are primarily driven by comfort). However , the models also indicate reasonable 
returns on investment.  Demand for retrofits in the context of the GCF project has been confirmed by the 
commitment of the Munic ipality of Yerevan (home to one- third of the Armenian population), as reflected in its 
co-finance  letters (Annex IVc).  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
High levels of default on loans for the residential sector  Financial  Medium   Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
206. Investments in building renovation have proven to have low levels of default.83 The incentive  and other project 
activities will support the viability of investments on a temporary basis and thus reduce costs, especially for 
vulnerable residents ; since local banks will still have exposure to some risk, moral hazard will be avoided.  
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
The Government will have spending and procurement 
responsibilities for the project under the AWPs and 
quarterly disbursements of the NIM modality  Financial  Medium   Very low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
207. HACT assessment s will be conducted prior to project implementation to identify and resolve potential (if any) 
financial management deficiencies in the Implementing Entities. The constraints on Gov ernment spending 
imposed by NIM (only quarterly advances, etc.). Regular reporting on financial and other operational aspects 
of the project through PIRs and also the MTR and TE. Annual independent financial audit s. 
Selected Risk Factor 7   
                                                             
83 http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTEAPASTAE/Resources/FinancingEnergyEfficiency.pdf , in particular page 174 for Hungary, 209 
for Romania


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Lenders remain unwilling to provide loans for energy 
efficiency investments  Financial  Medium   Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
208. The global economic recovery is resulting in a growing willingness of lenders to offer financing for energy 
efficiency investments in Armenia, although the building sector is currently virtually unaddressed. While this project will not be able to eliminate  macroeconomic risk, the financial  mechanisms to be supported will provide 
lenders with ample learning opportunities. Experience in other countries shows that this learning, when 
accompanied by technical assistance to address systemic barriers , leads to sustained lending since lenders 
and borrowers will be shown the benefits of energy efficiency investments.  
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Lack of developed ESCO market prevents 
achievement of  reductions  of energy intensity in public 
buildings  Technical and 
operational  High (>50%)   Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
209. Armenia has a number of quasi -ESCO companies, but their operations have, to date, been limited to the public 
sector only, and there are deficiencies in the regulations regarding performance- based contracting models 
with the public and residential building sub- sectors, which pose a risk. The gradual introduction of 
performance- based contracts and associated policy changes, combined with  capacity building, will help to 
mitigate this risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 9   
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Climate change (such as increase s in winter 
temperature reducing the demand for space heating)  
can make investments in  EE building retrofit s less 
attractive  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
210. The climate -related risk of the project is considered very low because long -term climate impacts (i.e. 
temperature extremes, higher average temperatures and reduced precipitation) will be directly addressed 
through housing units that will be more energy -efficient and comfortable (and yet more affordable) at both high 
and low temperatures.  While average wint er temperatures are projected to increase, since the 1961- 1990 
average winter temperature was -5.3°C, even with a significant increase in temperature there will still be a 
considerable need for heating.  It should be noted that increases in temperature will  reduce demand for heating 
and increase demand for cooling. Since cooling is electrical and more costly, this may increase demand for 
retrofits . 
Selected Risk Factor 10  
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Environmental  and social risks  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
211. No substantial environmental and social risks have been identified that the project may face. The project will 
be implemented in accordance with UNDP’s environmental and social policies to ensure that any 
environmental risks are minimised. The Government has determined that the environmental and social risks 
posed by the project are sufficiently small that an ESIA is not required under national legislation, and has 
issued a formal letter accordingly – see Annex VI. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
The project may discriminate against women with 
regard to  access to opportunities and benefits  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
212. The p roject will analyse  any gender -based differences in access to financing and capacity building, and will 
involve an in- country gender expert in developing gender -disaggregated data and indicators to ensure an 
equitable gender representation in the selection  process for financing, focus group discussions and training.  
The project will ensure female- headed households are among project participants to an extent at least 
representative of the general population.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Retrofit works and failure of structural elements from 
building retrofit s may pose safety risks to communities  Social and 
environmental  Low  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
213. Only registered contractor(s) will be allowed to implement  EE building retrofit s. Contractor(s) will be required 
to conduct orientation and training for  workers on EE building retrofit s, particularly multi -family apartment 
buildings and public buildings.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Duty-bearers do not have the capacity to meet their 
obligations such as in collecting baseline data for the 
EMIS and in managing EE building retrofit financing  
projects  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
214. Component 1 will include capacity building on establishing MRV, data collection and analysis, and 
procurement  / installation of EMIS. Component 2 will support broader legislative reforms to develop building 
codes, energy auditing, energy certification and label ling for existing buildings , multi- owner building 
management, payment enforcement, and a framework for energy efficiency retrofit s that will significantly 
contribute to build ing the necessary capacity . 
Selected Risk Factor 1 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Potential for excluding affected stakeholders from 
participation  Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
215. Consultations have been undertaken  to determine the stakeholders and their roles during project 
implementation.  These consu ltations will continue throughout the project cycle. Consultations on various 
components of the project will be designed to be gender -sensitive, inclusive and responsive to the needs of


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
the stakeholders identified. A mechanism to deal with potential conflict issues during implementation will be 
incorporated in the p roject  design and contracts for commercial firms (e.g. architects etc.) will be through 
public procurement according to UNDP rules.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Generation of waste from building retrofit s Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
216. Recipients of financing for EE building retrofit s will be required to dispose of the waste generated from civil 
works following the applicable regulations. Management of waste / construction debris will be part of the 
conditions in granting the funds and for awarding the civil works to the Contractor.  According to the Laws of 
the Republic of Armenia on Waste Disposal and Sanitary Purification, on Local Self -Government, Self -
Government in Yerevan City and the Law on Waste, the municipality is responsible for arranging the removal 
of waste but pass es on this responsibility to the Contractor through the terms of the contract.  
 
* Please expand this sub- section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.  
 
 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Results Management Framework  and 
Performance Measurement Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level84 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable 
development pathways  1. The project objective is to use an integrated suite of interventions to systematically de -
carboni se the existing building stock to reali se both energy savings  and sustainable 
development benefits . 
 
2. The project will create a favourable market environment and scalable business model for 
investment in energy efficiency retrofits, leading to siz eable energy savings and 
accompanying GHG emission reductions ( directly, 1.4 million tCO 2 over the  20-year 
lifetime  of the investments ; including additional indirect savings , a total of between 4.2-
4.4 tCO 2eq). It will also catalyse additional private and public sector financing of 
approximately US$ 100 million.  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  GCF core indicator:  
Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO 2eq) 
reduced or avoided as a result of Fund- funded 
projects/programmes  EMIS system to be set up in 
Component 1 
of the Project  0 100 kt  
CO
2e / year Direct 
1.4 Mt 
CO 2e 
over 
20-
years  Housing units and 
buildings  are more resource- efficient 
and comfortable (and yet more 
affordable) at both 
                                                             
84 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Meas urement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
high and low 
temperatures and 
thus subject to reduced long-term 
climate impacts  
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  GCF core indicator: Cost 
per t CO 2eq 
Defined as total 
investment cost / 
expected lifetime 
emission reductions  Project 
monitoring 
data on costs 
plus data 
from the 
indicator on tonnes of 
CO
2eq 
reduced  0 - 14.4 
USD / 
tCO 2e 
for 
GCF   
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  GCF core indicator: 
Volume of finance 
leveraged by the project and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing,  
disaggregated by public 
and private sources  Project 
reporting  0 - US$ 
100 
million   
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term   Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems  5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems 
that improve incentives 
for low -emission 
planning and 
development and their 
effective 
implementation  
(outcome indicator for 
Component 2)  Score on 
World Bank 
RISE 
indicators for 
building s 
sector (see 
the UNDP 
Project 
Document for 
details  – 
Annex II ) 34 64 91 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
lead to practical 
change and do not 
remain on paper  
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances  7.1 Energy intensity  / 
improved efficiency of 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances as a result 
of Fund support  Reported data 
from project 
monitoring 
component  160 kWh 
/ m2 - Reduc -
ed by 
50% Rebound effect due 
to lower energy 
intensity is limited  
UNDP IRRF 1.5: Inclusive 
and sustainable solutions 
adopted to achieve 
increased energy efficiency 
and universal modern 
energy access  1.5.1 Number of new 
development 
partnerships with 
funding for improved 
energy efficiency and / 
or sustainable energy 
solutions targeting 
underserved 
communities  / groups 
and women  Project plans, 
signed 
agreements, 
MoUs, 
financial 
reports and 
budgets.  
 
These may be 
available on 
partners’ 
websites, 0 - 5 See A nnex A of the 
Project Document 
(Annex II) for a 
discussion of 
UNDP’s indicators.


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
through 
media reports 
or direct 
communicat -
ion with the 
partners 
involved  
Robust MRV for the 
building sector established 
(Component 1 – 
Establishment of building 
sector MRV and knowledge 
management)  Establishment of a 
web-based, publicly -
accessible MRV 
database  Project 
reporting  No MRV 
in place  Website 
establish -
ed and 
fully web-
accessible  5,000 
website 
hits per 
year MRV systems 
continue producing 
data after project 
end 
National, sub -national and 
local authorities adopt and 
implement an enabling 
policy framework for EE 
retrofits  
(Component 2 – Policy de-
risking)  See indicator 5.1 
above   
    
Access to affordable capital 
for EE retrofits provided  
(Component 3 – Financial 
de-risking)  Value of loans for 
building renovation 
provided  Reported data 
from project 
monitoring 
component  0 US$ 22m US$ 
100m The Government 
continues to bring 
energy prices in line 
with market prices  
Level of skills  
among local 
professionals is 
maintained at a level 
that can support 
market growth 
Lenders make use of 
learning 
opportunities offered 
by the financial 
mechanisms 
supported in this 
project  
Affordability of EE retrofits 
for most vulnerable 
households ensured 
through targeted financial 
incentives to building / 
apartment owners  / ESCOs  
(Component 4 – Financial 
incentives)  Number of vulnerable 
beneficiaries (lowest 
quintile of household 
income) with improved 
building EE  Applications 
submitted for 
the financial 
incentives 
scheme  0 15,000 50,000  Targeted financial 
incentives are 
aligned with the 
capital provided for 
EE retrofits, 
effectively leading to 
the implementation 
of retrofits  
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1.1 MRV systems for the 
buildings sector in Armenia 
established Development and 
coverage of MRV 
system and database  Regular 
project 
reporting  N/A Developed  
& in use 
for 
renovated 
buildings: 
full 
coverage 
of 
buildings 
retrofitted Develop
ed  
& in use 
for 
renovat
ed 
building
s: full 
coverag
es of Building occupants 
cooperate with the 
implementation of 
MRV systems


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
                                                             
85 The indicators for  2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 use GEF definitions (as defined in Annex II of the Climate Change Mitigation Focal Area Strategy in 
the GEF -6 Programming Directions)  for the baseline and targets.   in this 
project  building
s 
retrofitte
d in this 
project  
1.2 Knowledge 
management and MRV 
information disseminated  Number of 
beneficiaries with access to knowledge 
about energy use in 
buildings, opportunities 
and financing for EE  Regular 
project 
reporting  N/A Number of 
beneficiari
es: 50,000  Number 
of 
benefici
aries: 
250,000  Learning 
opportunities offered 
by this project lead 
to sustained lending 
for EE investments  
2.1 Public instruments for 
the promotion of investment 
in EE selected UNDP ’s framework to 
support policy -makers 
in selecting public instruments to promote 
energy efficiency 
investment in 
developing countries 
used, adapted as 
necessary  Report on implementat -
ion of the 
framework  Frame -
work not 
used for 
EE in 
Armenia  Number of 
public 
instrument
s selected: 
3  
Number 
of public 
instrum
ents 
selected
: 3 Policy -makers follow 
through on 
implementation of 
the selected 
instruments  
2.2 Support provided to on-going legal reform in the 
field of EE  Binding legislation on building codes and adequate secondary 
legislation adopted.  National legislation  Level 3. 
Policies 
proposed 
and 
consultati
on 
ongoing.
85  Level 4. 
Strong 
policy 
adopted  Level 5. 
Strong 
policy 
adopted 
and 
institutio
nal 
capacity 
strength
ened  UNDP's working 
relationship with the 
Government is 
effectively employed 
to maintain the 
momentum for legal 
reform  
2.3 Support provided for 
the creation of an enabling 
policy framework for EE retrofits in multi -owner 
residential buildings  Adequate secondary 
legislation providing a 
clear and effective set 
of functional models 
and a standard set of 
rules for multi -owner 
building management 
bodies to undertake 
EE retrofits developed, 
introduced and 
enforced  National 
legislation  Second-
ary 
legislat -
ion 
lacking  Level 6. 
Sub-
sector 
plans 
reflect key 
policy 
targets  Level 7. 
Regulat
ory 
frame -
work 
develop
ed UNDP's working 
relationship with the 
Government is 
effectively employed 
to maintain the 
momentum for 
creation of an 
enabling policy 
framework  
2.4  Support provided to building owners / managers / owner associations / 
ESCOs on legal matters 
related to EE retrofit projects  Business models for repayment of EE 
investments 
implemented  Regular 
project 
reporting  Level 1. 
No 
business 
models 
for repay -
ment of  
EE 
invest -
ments in 
buildings 
in place  Level 3. 
Strong 
proposal 
defined 
with buy -in 
from 
stakehold
ers 
confirmed  Level 5. 
Financ -
ial 
mechan
-ism in 
operat -
ion with 
eviden-
ce of 
stability  Gradual introduction 
of performance-
based contracts and 
risk transfer to 
ESCOs, combined 
with capacity 
building, lead to the 
development of an 
ESCO market  
2.5 Exit strategy measures implemented  Additional exit strategy 
measures designed 
and implemented  Regular project 
reporting  
N/A Additional 
exit 
strategy 
measures 
designed  Addition
al exit 
strategy 
measur
es Exit strategy 
succeeds in 
maintaining the 
momentum created 
by the project and


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
implem -
ented  leads to local 
stakeholders 
continuing to further 
develop the market  
3.1 Technical assistance 
provided to banks and other financial institutions  Capacity of banks to develop and market products for energy 
efficiency retrofits in 
individual houses  Survey of 
bank 
employees  Banks do 
not have 
the  
capacity 
to 
develop 
and 
market 
products 
for 
energy 
efficiency 
retrofits 
in  
individual 
houses  2 
Armenian 
banks 
have the 
capacity to  
develop 
and 
market 
products 
for energy 
efficiency 
retrofits in 
individual 
houses  4 
Armen -
ian 
banks 
have 
the 
capacity 
to  
develop 
and 
market 
product
s for 
energy 
efficien -
cy 
retrofits 
in 
individ -
ual 
houses  Banks are interested 
and participate in 
capacity building to 
enable them to 
deliver EE projects 
in individual houses  
3.2 Technical assistance  
for HOA market facilitation 
provided to banks  Capacity of banks to develop and market 
products for energy 
efficiency retrofits in multi -owner residential 
buildings  Survey of 
bank 
employees  Banks do 
not have 
the  
capacity 
to 
devel op 
and 
market 
products 
for 
energy 
efficiency 
retrofits 
in  multi -
owner 
resident -
ial 
buildings  2 
Armenian 
banks 
have the 
capacity to  
develop 
and 
market 
products 
for energy 
efficiency 
retrofits in  
multi -
owner 
residential 
buildings  4 
Armen -
ian  
banks 
have 
the 
capacity 
to  
develop 
and 
market 
product
s for 
energy 
efficien -
cy 
retrofits 
in  multi -
owner 
resident
-ial 
building
s Banks are interested 
and participate in 
capacity building to 
enable them to 
deliver EE projects 
in multi -owner 
residential buildi ngs 
3.3 Technical assistance  
provided to local government to develop EE 
retrofit projects for public ly-
owned buildings  Percentage of local government 
employees in Armenia 
who believe they have 
the capacity to  
develop EE retrofit 
projects for publicly -
owned buildings  Survey of 
local government 
employees  Local 
govern-
ment 
does not 
have the 
capacity 
to  
develop 
EE 
retrofit 
projects 
for 50% of 
local 
govern-
ment 
employ -
ees 
believe 
local 
govern-
ment has 
the 
capacity to  80% of 
local 
govern-
ment 
employ -
ees 
believe 
local 
govern-
ment 
has the 
capacity Local government is 
interested and 
participates in 
capacity building  to 
enable it to deliver 
EE projects in public 
buildings


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
publicly -
owned 
buildings  develop 
EE retrofit 
projects 
for 
publicly -
owned 
buildings  to  
develop 
EE 
retrofit 
projects 
for 
publicly -
owned 
building
s 
3.4 A ccess to affordable 
capital for EE retrofits 
provided  Amount and number of 
loans for building 
renovation provided  Reported 
data from 
project 
monitoring 
component  No 
lending 
provided  US$ 20 
million  US$ 
86.25  
million  Economic situation 
continues to improve  
3.5 Marketing platform 
created  Marketing materials 
developed and platform created  Marketing materials, 
project 
reporting  No 
market -
ing 
materials 
exist Marketing 
materials 
created  
and 
disseminat
-ed to at 
least 
5,000 
stake -
holders  Market -
ing 
platform 
created  
and 
dissem -
inated 
to at 
least 
25,000 
stake -
holders  Marketing campaign 
successfully raises 
awareness of the 
opportunities offered 
by building EE 
retrofits  
4.1 Targeted financial 
incentives provided to 
vulnerable groups to help 
address the affordability 
gap Financial mechanism 
to provide targeted 
financial incentives in 
place and incentives 
provided  Reported 
data from 
project 
monitoring 
component  No 
incentive
s in place  Incentives 
provided 
to 15,000 
beneficiari
es Incentiv
es 
provide
d to 
50,000 
benefici
aries  Sufficient uptake of 
the financial 
incentive among the 
target market of 
vulnerable home 
owners  
       
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1.1 MRV framework  Development of  the MRV framework, 
including guidelines and monitoring methodologies for the various categories of buildings  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Hiring of consultants to develop 
MRV framework in conjunction 
with the project team  
1.1.2 EMIS implementation  Support to full implementation of building EMIS in targeted buildings for 
demonstration and capacity building 
purposes  Software  
International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time , 
Funds  Following competitive tender 
and based on detailed technical 
specifications , Ministry of 
Nature Protection financially 
supported for the purchase of 
EMIS  systems  
1.2.1 Stakeholder 
engagement  Identifying appropriate formats for 
reaching the relevant stakeholders  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Specialist communications 
consultants engaged to develop 
communications strategy  
1.2.2 Website  Establishment of a website that will 
provide information and a platform for 
communication between the different 
stakeholders  Web developer , 
Web hosting Competitive tender for Web 
design and implementation  
1.2.3 Formats for dissemination  Formats for information dissemination 
will be developed based on their likely 
effectiveness for raising awareness, International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , Specialist communications 
consultants   assist with the  
develop ment of  informative and


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
facilitating information access and 
providing actionable guidance and 
support to the sector  PMU  staff time ,  
Funds  accessible literature and other 
media communications tailored 
to specific user -groups  
1.2.4 Information provision  Provision of information to consumers  Printing and 
publication costs , 
International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Procurement of design and print 
services, and development of 
accessible information products  
2.1.1 Public instrument 
selection The project will make use of UNDP’s 
framework to support policy -makers in 
selecting public instruments to promote energy efficiency investment in 
developing countries  Workshops (2) and 
meetings  (15), 
International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Specialist DREI consultants and 
UNDP staff to assist in 
instrument selection  
2.2.1 Technical specialist 
support to authorities  to 
adopt and implement an enabling policy framework   Support to national, sub -national and 
local authorities to adopt and implement 
an enabling policy framework for EE 
retrofits.  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Hiring of consultants to assist in 
preparation of policies and 
regulations  defining the terms of 
EE retrofits  
2.2.2 Introduction of 
legislation  Support to the gradual introduction of 
binding legislation on energy auditing, energy passports  / certificates and 
labelling for existing buildings  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Hiring of consultants to assist in 
design and implementation of 
legislation, and the design and 
implementation of auditing, 
passports and labelling  
2.2.3 Public building 
legislation  Support to the introduction of legislation 
specific to public buildings  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Hiring of consultants to assist in 
design and implementation of 
legislation  
2.3.1 Technical support 
from experts to policy -
makers in developing policy 
related to HOA  legal status, 
payment enforcement and 
management  Support  to policy -makers in developing 
policy relating to HOA legal status, payment enforcement, professional management and consensus levels  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Hiring of consultants to advise 
and develop evidence base for 
policy -makers for development 
of HOA policy  
2.4.1 Legal support to 
management of m ulti-
owner buildings  related to 
energy efficiency retrofits  Provide support on legal matters related to EE retrofit projects for multi -owner 
buildings  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Specialist legal support hired on 
a retainer basis and made 
available to retrofit projects as 
and when required  
2.4.2 ESCOs  Provide support to  establishing  ESCOs  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Specialist technical and legal 
consultants hired to assist with 
support to ESCO establishment  
2.5.1 Exit strategy  Development and implementation of 
exit strategy  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Hiring of consultants to advise 
on design and implementation 
of post -project impact 
sustainability measures  
3.1.1 Technical support 
provided to banks to 
develop and market energy 
efficiency products to 
individual residences  Provide support to banks to develop 
and market products for energy 
efficiency in individual residences  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Technical and financial 
consultants hired to assist with 
support to local banks


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
 3.2.1 Technical support 
provided to banks to 
develop and market energy efficiency products to multi -
owner building 
management (HOAs)  Support to development of bank products for HOAs  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Technical and financial 
consultants hired to assist with 
support to local banks  
3.3.1 Public ly-owned 
buildings  Support to the process of identification, 
development and aggregation of technically and financially feasible EE retrofit projects in public ly-owned 
buildings  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Specialist consultants hired to 
assist with development of 
screening criteria and 
aggregation methodologies for 
EE retrofit projects in public 
buildings  
3.4.1 Technical structure for financial instruments  Establish ment  and maint enance  of the 
technical structure for the financial de-risking instruments offered  Concessional loans: 
US$ 86.25 million  Mode of operation of the 
financial de -risking instruments 
designed, implemented and 
documented  
3.4.2 Verification  Verification of funded investments  International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  MRV system designed, 
implemented and documented  
3.5.1 Marketing support  Provide marketing support to banks  Printing and 
publication costs , 
International 
consultants , 
Local consultants , 
PMU staff time ,  
Funds  Specialist communications 
consultants assist with the 
development of  literature and 
other media communications 
tailored to specific customer 
segments  
4.1.1Targeted incentives  Targeted financial incentives provided 
to building / apartment owners, or the 
ESCOs serving these clients  Incentives: US$ 14 
million  Mode of operation of the 
financial incentives designed, 
implemented and funds 
transferred  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
217. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP  and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy . Concerning energy savings, C omponent 1 focuses on collection of data. Since it is not cost -
effective to measure the savings in all retrofitted buildings , a selection of buildings (covering locations, building 
types,  usage, retrofit measures) will receive Energy Management Information Systems , providing detailed 
performance information in real -time. This data will be used to determine overall project savings by including 
details of the measures and types of buildings retrofitted. Responsibility for reporting on savings rests with the 
Project Management Team, and will report to UNDP. UNDP  will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the 
Reporting Period in accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA). UN DP has the country 
presence and capacity to perform such functions.  In the event of any additional post -implementation obligations 
over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the GCF Secretariat in the final year of the 
Reporting Period and will prepare a post -Reporting Period plan and budget for approval by the GCF Board as 
necessary.   
 
218. The primary responsibility for day -to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Manager. 
The Project Manager will develop annual w ork plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The 
Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of 
transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.   
 
219. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as


---
*Page 72*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
 outlined in the UNDP POPP . Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support 
will be provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders , 
including the NDA Focal Point , will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.   
 
220. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to: a) re- orient project stakeholders on the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that 
influence project implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting 
and communication lines and confli ct resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework and discuss 
reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finali se the M&E plan; d) review financial 
reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan 
and schedule Project Board meetings and finali se the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will 
prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will 
be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advis or, and will be approved by the 
Project Board.     
 
221. A project implementation report (PIR) will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The Project 
Manager , the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input into 
the annual PIR  and the GCF reporting requirements as described in the Accreditation Master Agreement . The 
Project  Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually 
well in advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective 
tab of the PIR. The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country 
Office will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR, along with 
the terminal evaluation report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report 
package.     
 
222. An independent mid- term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final 
half of the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the 
standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Cent re. The final MTR report will 
be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advis or, and will be appro ved by the 
Project Board. The final MTR report will be available in English.  
 
223. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of 
the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates 
and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Cent
re. The final TE report will be cleared by the 
UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advis or, and will be approved by the Project Board. The 
TE report will be available in English. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project terminal 
evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in 
English and the management response to the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) 
(www.erc.undp.org).   
 
224. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this pr oject for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations.  
 
225. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan are  included in the UNDP Project Document.  See 
Chapter 6 of the Project Document (Annex II) for more details.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 69 
 
 
 H 
 
 I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  (Annex I)  
☒ UNDP Project Document including Feasibility S tudy (Annex II)  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format) (Annex III)  
☒ Confirmation letters for co- financing commitment (Annex IV)  
☒ Term Sheet (Ann ex V)  
☒ Environmental and Social Screening Report (Annex VI)  
☒ Appraisal Report and Due Diligence Report with recommendations (Annex VII)  
☒ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (Annex VIII)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme (Annex IX)  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex X)  
☒ Project/programme confirmation (Annex X I) 
☒           Economic analysis - theory of change (Annex XII ) 
☒           Additional background details (Annex XIII)  
☒           Responses to GCF comments on concept note (Annex XIV)


---
*Page 74*
---

 
GFC/B.13/16/ Add. 02 
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GFC/B.13/16/ Add. 02 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  De-risking and scaling -up investment in energy efficient building 
retrofits (in Armenia)  
Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category C  
 Note:  Environmental and social report disclosure not required for 
Category C and Intermediation 3 projects and programmes.  
Environmental and social report disclosure information  
Description of 
report/disclosure  N/A  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website   
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Link to disclosure  http://  
Other link(s)  http://