=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20151009193414+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.10
/ModDate: D:20151015170005+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.10
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 The agenda item number will be determined when the final sequence of items in the provisional agenda is 
confirmed by the Co-Chairs. Consideration of funding 
proposals  – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP00 8 GCF/B.11/04/Add.08 
15 October 2015  Meeting of the Board  
2 – 5 November 2015  
Livingstone, Republic of Zambia  
Provisional Agenda Item 14 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following two parts:  
(a) A funding proposal entitled “Urban Water Supply and Waste water Management 
Project in Fiji” submitted by the Asian Development Bank; and  
(b) A no -objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point.  
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated  authority or focal point, respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.11/04/Add.08 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 3*
---

r


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEME NT 
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
  
  Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal req uire detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate info rmation into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-ADB-31/07/2015 -1”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 48 A A A A A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Fiji Urban Water Supply and Wastewater Management Project  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion    Republic of Fiji 
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Mr. Esala Nayas i, Act ing Permanent Secretary, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs  
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  Asian Development Bank  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  Ministry of Finance  
Beneficiary:  Government  of Fiji  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☒  Medium (50<x≤250) ☐  Small (10<x≤5 0) 
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  31/July/2015  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Ms Maria Paniagua, Unit Head, Project Adminis tration Unit, 
Pacific Department / Ms Hanna Uusimaa, Climate Change 
Specialist, Pacif ic Department  
Organization  Asian Development Bank  
Email address  mppaniagua@adb.org  / huusimaa@adb.org  
Telephone number  (+679) 3318101  / (+63 2 ) 632 4840  
Mailing  address  6 ADB Av , Mandaluyong, 1550 Metro Manila, Philippines  
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply) 
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appl iances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.) 
☐ Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water t reatment  and management , etc.) 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufact uring facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecos ystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☒


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 48 
 
 A A A A A 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objective s and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
1. The project will  improve access to safe water and sewerage services b y building infrastructure to  increase 
water production by 20% and wastewater treatment (WWT) by 200% in the greater Suva area (GSA) , and supporting  
government to develop and implement policy and regulatory reforms in water and sewerage. A capacity developm ent 
technical assistance was provided by the ADB to prepare the project.1   
2. The p roject features a strong focus on climate change adaptation and mitigation measures , critical to resilience 
and sustainability of the infrastructure.  Climate change considerat ions have been  included in the design of the p roject, 
particul arly in adaptation to floods,  droughts,  and salinity intrusion due to sea level rise,  as well as  ecosystem 
conservation through the increase of sewerage coverage  and improvement of wastewater pr ocesses and mitigation 
through use of energy efficient technologies and the increase of sewerage coverage.   Only water supply adaptation 
measures in this submission are to be considered by the GCF Board Meeting in November 2015.  
3. Water Supply . The project will design and const ruct a new water intake by the Rewa River, with a pumping 
station, water treatment plant, and clear water reservoir and a pipeline to increase  water production by 30,000 m3 per 
day; and will reduc e non-revenue water (NRW) due to techni cal and non -technical losses. The project will improve 
resilience through appropriate siting of the intake higher up the river catchment, away from the projected salinity wedge 
moving up the river system due to  sea-level rise , and lower river flows during pronounced droughts. While the water 
sources are still all reliant on surface water systems, the impact s on stream flows associated with future cli mate change 
are less likely  in the much larger Rewa river system . The proposed water supply scheme will also be designed to allow 
future flexibility for demand increases and/or  changing supply source yields.  
4. Wastewater Management . The project will increase sewer coverage and reliability of wastewater treatment 
(WWT) processes in the GSA through increasing WWT cap acity of the Kinoya  plant . The project will design and build 
new treatment facilities, upgrad e existing wastewater pumping stations,  replace  wastewater infrastructure ; and expand 
sewerage network to service an additional 15% of households. This will improv e overa ll effluent quality and minimize 
the incidents o f wastewater bypass , thereby improving water quality downstream in rec eiving waters  and reducing 
pollution levels affecting Laucala Bay ; as well as enable the servicing of backlog areas and allow futur e growth within 
the Suva -Nausori wastewater system . 
5. Institutional Framework . The project will improve sector management and sustainable service delivery 
capacity by supporting implementation of a water demand management program;  strengthening the NRW reduc tion 
program;  supporting the approval and implementation of the National L iquid Waste Trade Program;  supporting the 
institutional strengthening of WAF ; and supporting WAF to develop a decentralization strategy to reduce number of 
sewer pumping stations and  increase efficiency in the remaining pumping stations.  
6. The proposed financing structure combines a maximum debt financing and a minimum grant financing, taking 
into account the country's debt burden, the project's revenue -generating capacity at completion , and the urgent need to 
adopt least -cost climate change solutions . Current debt levels  constrain Fiji’s ability to borrow for investments in water 
and sewerage. The additional costs of adaptation and mitigation measures will substantially increase the cos t of 
providing such infrastructure. While investments in water and wastewater treatment have a strong social, economic, 
and environmental return to Fiji, the financial returns are limited. Grant funding by GCF will allow Fiji, a small island 
developing state (SIDS) , to undertake vital adaptation measures without either reducing funding for other high priority 
development needs or increasing its risk of debt distress.   
  
                                                             
1 ADB. 2013. Technical Assistance to Fiji for Urban Development Planning and Inst itutional Capacity Building.  
Manila.


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 48 
 
 A A A A A 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if  applicable)  Project Design Advance Loan : 17 December 2 015 
Project Loan : 15 September 2016  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Project Design Advance Loan : 31 July 2016  
Project Loan : 30 June 20 23 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Project D esign Advance Loan  
Start:  7 January 2016  
End:  31 January 2017  
 
Project Loan  
Start: 1 February 2017  
End: 31 December 2022  
Project  lifespan  7 years


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORM ATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 48 
 
 B B B B B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
7. A detailed financial analysis for t he project is provided as a linked document to the Project Appraisal Report 
and the financial analysis model together with detailed estimated cost by component, output, financier, cost category 
and year is included as a supporting document to this proposal .   
Indicative Cost Estimates Summary Table by Component  and Financier (million USD)  
Component  Sub-component (if applicable)  Total  ADB EIB GCF  GoFiji  
1. Water Supply  1.1 Rewa Water Treatment Plant  63.88 15.91 10.61  26.99  10.37  
1.2 Non Revenue Water Produ ction  10.01 1.55 1.03 0.00 7.42 
2. Wastewater  2.1 Kinoya Wastewater Treatment Plant Upgrade  29.10 12.69 8.46 0.00 7.95 
2.2. Pump Station Upgrades  10.56  5.35 3.56 0.00 1.65 
2.3. Sewer Mains Upgrade  12.71 3.00 2.00 0.00 7.70 
2.4 Sewer Extension  31.68  3.93 2.62 0.00 25.12  
3. Capacity Building  4.50 3.47 0.00 0.00 1.04 
4. Project Management  4.50 4.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 
5. Recurrent Costs (O&M)  12.88 0.00 0.00 0.00 12.88  
6. Contingencies  Physical  14.20 3.98 2.24 2.13 5.86 
Price  12.81 3.59 2.02 1.92 5.28 
7. Interest during Construction  14.94  9.57 5.37 0.00 0.00 
8. Commitment Charges  0.24 0.15 0.09 0.00 0.00 
Total  222.0 0 67.70  38.00  31.04  85.26  
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
Indicative Project Financing Plan  
Source  Amount  
  Share of Total 
(%) ($ million)  
ADB (OCR Loan)  67.70  
 30% 
EIB (Loan)  38.00  
 18% 
GCF Grant  31.04  
 14% 
Governmenta 85.26  
 38% 
  Total    222.00    100%  
a Government will make a submission to the GCF in time to be considered for the March 2016 Board 
Meeting for the financing  of climate change related activities under Component 2: Waste water.  The 
estimated cost of climate change related activities under this component  amount to $39 million and 
funding source will be  subject to confirmation of funding from GCF in March 2016 . 
Source: ADB estimates .  
ADB = Asian Development Bank; GCF = Green Climate Fund; EIB = European Investment Bank; 
OCR = Ordinary Capital Resources.


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORM ATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 48 
 
 B B B B B 
8. ADB will provide a  loan of $ 67.70  million  from its ordinary capital resources (OCR) to help finance the project. 
The loan will have a 20 -year term, including a grace period of 5 years, an annual interest rate determined in accordance 
with ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) -based lending facility, and a commitment charge of 0.15% per year . 
The intere st and other charges during construction will be capitalized in the loan . The EIB has indicated intent  in 
principle2 to provide a loan with similar terms and conditions to ADB loan to cofinance the project. The proposed grant 
from the GCF  will finance the cost of adaptation measures of the project. The Government will finance taxes and duties, 
land acquisition , and operation and maintenance cost included in the Design -Build Operate (DBO) contracts  as well as 
mitigation and ecosystem conservation activities under component 2 .  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  220.00  million USD 
($)  
(b) 
Requested 
GCF 
amount   (vi) Grants *  
 31.04 million USD 
($)  
 
  
 
 
* Please provide economic and financi al justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF  is expected to  
provide, part icularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should corresp ond to the level of the 
project/programme ’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total r equested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  31.04  millio n USD 
($)  
(c) Co -
financing  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Loan  
Loan  
Government 
contribution  
 67.70  
38.00  
…………  
85.26  
 million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) ADB 
EIB 
Government 
of Fiji  
 20  years  
 See above  
 pari passu  
pari passu  
 
 
Lead financing institution: Asian Development Bank  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment  in section I  issued by the co -financing institution.  
B.3. Fee Arrangement  
9. Fee arrange ment for the proposed project is to be aligned with the GCF Board’s decision on fees, which is 
expected to be taken at the 11th meeting of the Board. In the absence of a GCF Board decision ADB will submit a fee 
proposal as requested by the GCF.  
B.4. Finan cial Market Overview (if applicable)  Not Applicable  
                                                             
2 The project is in an advanced stage of appraisal, awaiting presentation to EIB decision making bodies .


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context   
10. Fiji has a population of approximately 868,000, of which 53% is urban.  By 2030, it is estimated that two in 
three Fijians will be living in the country’s urban centers.  While poverty rates in Fiji are highest in rural areas, the rapid 
growth of peri-urban squatter settlements  implies that the majority of poor people in Fiji now live in and around urban 
areas. Fiji’s urban sector accounts for 60% , and  only the GSA accounts 40%, of the country’s gross domestic product  
(GDP) . The GSA, which consists of Suva City —the national capital —as well as the towns of Lami, Nasinu, and 
Nausori and their surrounding peri -urban areas, accounts for 57% of Fiji’s urban population. By 2023, the pop ulation 
of the GSA is expected to grow by 12 .8%. 
11. Despite the economic importance of the country’s cities and towns, urban infrastructure and services have not 
kept pace with rapid urban growth. Extreme  drought and flooding events as well as sea level ri se result  in higher cost 
in the provision of these services by the Government. Inevitably this is contributing to environmental degradation and 
increased health risks, and acts as a binding constraint on social and economic development. The improved delivery  
of urban water supply and sanitation services is thus essential for ongoing economic development and is  a high 
priority of government.  The investments to be financed by the project have been identified based on the WAF draft 
Water Supply and Sewerage Mast er Plan 2013 -2033 and the WAF 2014 corporate plan  and through consultation with 
stakeholders in Fiji .   
12. Fiji’s development plan , entitled the Government of Fiji: Roadmap for Democra cy and Sustainable Socio -
Economic Development 2010 –20143, aligned to the Millennium Development Goals , has prioritized water and 
sanitation services in Fiji’s socio economic development. The Green Growth Framework for Fiji: Restoring the 
Balance in Development that is Sustainable for Our Future4 reiterates a similar commitment t o enhancing accessibility 
to safe drinki ng water and sanitation in Fiji, and has recognized increased population growth, water consumpt ion and 
climate change impacts as an impediment to efforts to achieving sustainable development.  
13. Fiji has developed its National Climate Change Policy in 20125 to provide a policy framework which guides 
government’s strategic direction on issu es relating to climate change. A strategy identified for a daptation is the 
inclusion of vulnerability assessments and climate change impact projections into resource management planning, 
such as integrated coastal and watershed management plans. In addition , the draft National Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategy provides detail ed and specific actions for implementation of adaptation meas ures per sector 
including the water sector.  
14. The SIDS  have adopted the Barb ados Programme of Action (BPoA, 1994 ), the Mauritius Strategy (2005 ), and 
the SAMOA Pathway (2014 ), which all include  climate change as a significant issue  for the SIDS . Fiji also support s 
the Strategy for Climate and Disaster Resilient D evelopment in the Pacific6, aligning  itself with the view that the cross -
cutting issues  of climate change and disaster risk management  should be implemented through the policies of other 
sectors, such as  those of agriculture, water resources, health, land use, environment, energy, infrastructure 
development and finance and planning.  
C.2. Project Objective  against Baseline  
15. For the Overall Project Objective against Baseline , please refer to the Proj ect  Design and Monitoring 
Framework included as Annex I of the Project Appraisal Report and Section H.1.2. of this proposal.  
  
                                                             
3 Government of Fiji, 2009. Suva.  
4 Government of Fiji. 2014. Suva.  
5 Government of Fiji, 2012. Suva.  
6 Secretaria t of the Pacific Community. 2015. Draft Strategy for Climate and Disaster Resilient Development in the 
Pacific (Version 17). Suva.


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
C.3. Project Description  
16. The project will ensure that residents of some of Fiji’s most densely populated areas have improved access to 
safe piped water and an environmentally friendly sewerage system.  The project’s impact is aligned with the 
government’s policy to improve delivery of water supply and sanitation services as articulated in the Roadmap for 
Democracy and Sustainable  Socio -Economic Development, 2010 –2014. The outcome will be improved access to 
sustainable water supply and sewerage services. The project has three main components: (i) increasing access to 
reliable and safe  water supply in the GSA ; (ii) increasing sewer coverage capacity and reliability of WWT processes in 
the GSA ; and (iii) improving management and sustainable delivery of water and sewerage services.  
17. The Project meets the requirements to access financing from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). Climate change  
considerations have been included in the design of the Project, particularly in adaptation to floods and droughts due to 
changes in rainfall patterns, salinity intrusion due to sea level rise; and mitigation through use of energy efficient 
technologies in  pumping stations, and the increase of sewerage coverage for further reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions.   The project will also contribute to protection of Laucala Bay and surrounding coral reefs  by reducing 
sewage spills and improving Kinoya wastewater  treatment processes .   
18. Water Supply.  The Waimanu River is the only raw water source for the Waila and Tamavua water treatment 
plants which currently serve the GSA. Both water treatment plants are running 24 hours per day at full capacity and at 
times can not meet peak demands. With NRW estimated at 46% by WAF, WAF has no capacity to extend the network 
to peri -urban areas or new growth areas. As a consequence, some of the served areas suffer intermittent service. 
Service interruptions are more pronounced du ring drought periods, when the Waimanu River flow is insufficient to 
operate the plants at their full production capacity and during periods of high rainfall, when the Waimanu waters 
become highly turbid, reducing the output of both plants as the filters r equire more frequent backwashing. The 
situation is compounded with the predicted onset of climate change and the expected changes in rainfall patterns and 
increase in extreme rainfall events, forecasting more frequent interruptions to supply into the futur e. The reduction of 
NRW is a parallel priority but even if the 25% target is achieved, current production will still not be sufficient to cater 
for growing demand.  
19. The project will increase access to reliable and safe water supply in the GSA through: (i)  increasing 
production by 30,000 m3 per day by designing and constructing a new water supply source in the Rewa river, with a 
water treatment plant, pumping station and reservoir to serve the GSA water supply system; and (ii) reducing non -
revenue water due  to technical losses and non -technical losses by replacing meters; improving leak detection and 
repairs; establishing district metering and demand management areas and pressure management systems. This will 
address the existing shortfall in bulk water supp ly and water treatment during peak dry weather periods, therefore 
improving water supply reliability and continuity across the GSA water supply system; and provide additional bulk 
water supply and water treatment capacity to allow the servicing of areas no t currently supplied by the system as well 
as to service future growth in GSA.  
20. The new raw water intake at the Rewa River will result in a more resilient water supply system by reducing 
the risk posed by  dependen cy solely  on the Waimanu River system, as i s the case currently. While the water sources 
are still all reliant on surface water based systems, the Rewa River is a much larger river system and any impact on 
stream flows associated with future climate change impacts are not likely to impact extractio ns for urban water supply. 
In addition, the new location of the new intake takes into account new insights concerning the impact of climate 
change on sea water levels and decreased river flows during extended drought periods and provides as such 
additional  security against salinity impacts that are likely caused by climate change in the near future.  
21. Wastewater Management. Current planning regulations ban high -density urban development in unsewered 
areas. Existing sewerage infrastructure covers only 36% of  the GSA and the lack of adequate wastewater 
infrastructure has constrained high density development. This is directly contributing to urban sprawl and 
environmental degradation. To address this problem, the government intends to increase sewerage coverage  in the 
GSA to 90% by 2023. The main WWT facility in the GSA, the Kinoya WWT plant, is currently working at full capacity 
and needs to be upgraded and expanded before additional flows can be treated. Wastewater modeling has also 
revealed major deficiencies  in the pump station s and gravity and rising mains.  
22. The project will increase WAF sewer coverage capacity and reliability of WWT  processes in the GSA through: 
(i) increasing WWT capacity of Kinoya to approximately 277,000 population equivalent (PE)  by des igning and building 
new treatment facilities, namely two primary sedimentation tanks, a carbon  and nutrient removal facility, a new


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
digester and upgrade of sludge dewatering plant, and a new combined heat and power (CHP) equipment for power 
production ; (ii) upgrading around 31 existing wastewater pumping stations to allow more wastewater to flow efficiently 
to the treatment plant; (iii) replacing of around 18km of wastewater trunk mains and relining of around 18km of 
wastewater reticulation and trunk mains that are reaching the end of their asset life; and (iv) the design and 
construction of new wastewater infrastructure to service additional 15% of the households in backlog areas (4,500 
households currently equipped with septic tanks causing uncontrolled bi ogas emissions) and new development areas 
(approximately servicing 6,500 new lots). This will improve overall effluent quality and help to minimize the incidents of 
wastewater bypassing treatment, thereby improving water quality downstream in rec eiving wat ers. More importantly,  it 
will enable t he servicing of sewerage backlog  areas and allow future growth within the  Suva -Nausori wastewater 
system.  
23. Institutional Framework. WAF is a commercial statutory authority promulgated under the ambit of the Public 
Enterprise Act 1996 and manages both water and wastewater services across Fiji in accordance with the functions 
and powers of the Promulgation reporting to the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport (MoIT). Since becoming a 
statutory authority in 2010, WAF has been focusing on operational improvements to both the supply of water and 
wastewater systems. For WAF to be able to improve its financial sustainability and to be more accountable to 
regulatory bodies, government is tasked with tackling water and sewer age tariff reform, introducing and enforcing 
liquid waste trade regulations , and reviewing regulations that affect municipal waste water manageme nt. 
24. Sector management and sustainable service delivery capacity  will be improved through: (i) supporting 
WAF w ith the implementation of a water demand management program, NRW reduction program7 and the National 
Liquid Waste Trade Program; (ii) supporting the Department of Environment with the review of the environmental 
regulatory framework for municipal wastewate r treatment discharge as well as sludge treatment and disposal 
practices and standards, and with monitoring and enforcement of these regulations; (iii) assisting the government and 
WAF with completing the corporatization of WAF, including transfer of asset s, governance arrangements, greater 
financial sustainability and the retention of revenue within WAF; (iv) assisting the Ministry of Local Government, 
Housing and Environment and WAF with formulating water safety plans to protect the quantity and quality o f the water 
at the intakes for all the water sources in the project area (this should consist of developing land use plans and 
ensuring required protective measures are in place for all water source locations); (v) reviewing policies used by WAF 
in financi al reporting and supporting the implementation of changes to WAF accounting policies and financial 
management, including the provision of accounting training; (vi) supporting the promotion of gender equity within WAF 
business practices; and (vii) carrying a study on options long terms alternatives to reduce energy consumption of the 
GSA wastewater treatment system.  
25. Non-Revenue Water . ADB has been supporting WAF to reduce NRW since 2007. The project will finance an 
international NRW specialist and an intern ational water demand management specialist (see their TORs in Project 
Appraisal Link Document 1: Project Administration Manual ).  In addition to the support to be provided by the project, 
ADB is financing twining arrangements between WAF and Hunter Water a nd WAF and Sydney Water to provide 
advice in NRW and water demand management.  NRW is a priority for WAF who is also receiving training and 
technical assistance from the Government of Japan and from the Government of New Zealand.  Supporting 
Document 14 - WAF Non Revenue  Water Reduction Strategy and on -going Technical Assistance on NRW and Water 
Demand Management  provides further details of WAF strategy to reduce NRW  and its high priority within WAF .    
26. Water and Sewage Tariff Review .  A water and sewerage  tariff review has been recommended by ADB to 
support water demand management efforts and to improve the financial sustainability of WAF. Such  review is 
currently being undertaken  by Government who has requested KPMG to revise a tariff review study that wa s carried  
out in 2012.  In addition, the Pacific Regional Investment Facility has financed a tariff review study  which is now on -
going.  The result of these two studies will be the basis for WAF to  submit a proposal to its Board ..  Supporting 
Document 15 – Water and Sewage Tariff Review Studies and Government Commitment  to Tariff Review includes a 
copy of the Memorandum of Understanding signed between ADB and the Government of Fiji committing “WAF to 
complete by December 2015 the water and wastewater tariff  review study that will allow WAF to recover its 
operational cost and maintenance (O&M) and asset depreciation. Based on this tariff study, the government to commit 
by December 2016 to approve a tariff increase to allow WAF to recover its O&M cost, and/or to subsidize O&M and


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
capital budget necessary for WAF to implement any social and community obligations agreed to with government for 
access to services by vulnerable groups, particularly in informal settlements.”  The Supporting Document  also 
includes  a summary of on -going initiatives  and action plan,   the TORs of the tariff review financed by the Pacific 
Infrastructure Regional Facility , and  the tariff review undertaken by KPMG in 2012.   
27. In addition to the support provided under the project, which incl udes an international State Own Enterprise 
reforms expert and an international financial management expert, ADB is providing financial assistance to WAF to 
undertake an independent review of its service quality, efficiency in planning and execution of inve stments, operating 
efficiency, business management efficiency, financial sustainability, access to service and corporate governance.  The 
assessment will be carried out using Aquarating which is a methodology developed by the International Water 
Associatio n with financing by the Inter -American Development Bank.  The results are audited by international team of 
experts which provide a report with detailed recommendations to improve processes. Supporting Document 16 – 
Aquarating Assessment  includes a copy of the Memorandum of Understanding between ADB and the International 
Water Association to support WAF to undertake this assessment and a description of  Aquarating Methodology.  
C.4.  Background Information on Project Sponsor  
28. The Asian Development Bank (ADB)  has been working with the Government of Fiji since 1970. As of 31 
December 2014, $417.26 million in loans and $30.72 million in technical assistance have been provided to the 
country. National elections —held on 17 September 2014 and endorsed by an observe r group of 14 nations as a 
“credible reflection of the will of the Fijian people” —have resulted in Fiji’s full re -engagement with the international 
community. ADB and the government have since formulated a new country partnership strategy (CPS), 2014 –2018.  
The CPS provides the foundation for higher, more inclusive growth, and assists Fiji in achieving its Millennium 
Development Goals.  Consistent with the priorities of successive governments, ADB engagement in Fiji has focused 
on promoting inclusive economic  growth and poverty reduction. Strides have been made toward these goals through 
direct investments in transport and urban water and sanitation infrastructure, and improved public sector 
management.  
29. ADB road transport investments in Fiji over a 20 -year pe riod have helped disadvantaged groups participate in 
the cash economy by reducing transport costs and traveling times. This has increased access to employment 
opportunities and social services. An improved transport system in Fiji has helped to bolster mar ket efficiencies, and 
to broaden access to education,  health, and business services.   
30. In 2005, ADB commenced its Water Supply and Sewerage Project  concentrated in the Suva –Nausori 
corridor. This has delivered improved water  supply to about 150,000 people,  representing almost half the population 
living  in the project area.  Supplementary financing to complete the roads and urban water and  sanitation projects was 
provided in 2009.  ADB also provided emergency assistance in 2009 and 2012 to help meet  humanitari an and relief 
expenses following devastating floods in the Western  Division. This allowed the retroactive financing of unforeseen 
government  spending, and improved the government’s fiscal position.   
31. In December 2014, ADB built on its commitment to infrast ructure  development through the approval of a $100 
million investment in the transport sector. This project, which will receive additional cofinancing from the World  Bank, 
will upgrade and rehabilitate roads, wharves, and jetties in line with priorities id entified in the Government’s draft 20 -
year National Transport Sector Plan. ADB has also provided technical assistance to support the reform of state -
owned enterprises in Fiji, to develop the national 20 -year transport strategy, and to formulate an urban wa ter and 
sanitation master plan. Fiji also continues to participate in ADB technical assistance projects in the region, covering 
areas such as climate change, public sector management, information and communication technology, and trade 
facilitation.   
32. ADB’ s presence in Fiji has been enhanced by the location of its Pacific Subregional Office in Suva, strong 
coordination and harmonization with other development partners, and significant analytical work —including an 
ongoing country diagnostic study and a priva te sector assessment —on behalf of the country.  
33. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) will be the exe cuting agency for the project. MOF has extensive experience as 
executing agency for infrastructure projects and has been executing agency for the following ADB’s f inanced projects:  
Transport Infrastructure Investment Sector Project, approved in Dec 2014; Fiji Roads Upgrading Project III 
(Supplementary) approved in Mar 2009; Suva -Nausori Water Supply and Sewerage Project (Supplementary) 
approved in Dec 2009; Suva -Nausori Water Supply and Sewerage Project approved in Dec 2003; and Fiji Roads


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
Upgrading Project approved in Nov 2005.   
34. The main tasks of the MOF are to cause WAF to implement the project as agreed in the project documents, 
submit withdrawal applications t o ADB and disbursement requests to EIB, and to submit required annual audit reports 
and financial statements of project account to ADB and EIB.  MOF will also coordinate appropriate government 
representation for loan negotiations, loan signing, and loan eff ectiveness and will chair the Project Coordination 
Comittee. The role of the MOF and overall project implementation structure is described in Appraisal Report, Link 1: 
Project Administration Manual.  
35. The Water Authority of Fiji is the Imple menting agency f or the project.  A risk assessment of WAF was 
undertaken and included in the project appraisal re port, Link 8: Risk Assessment.  Specific measures have been built 
within the project to mitigate the risks identified, including financing consulting services to  strengthened WAF financial 
management and procurement processes among others.   
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)   Not Applicable  
Not applicable  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  
36. To carry out the project activities, WAF will be required to obtain the neces sary operating and environmental 
licenses and permits required to comply with Fiji policies and regulations as well as with ADB guidelines on 
environment al and social safeguards .  
37. The g overnment will finance all taxes and duties for the project – no excha nge regulations are applicable.  
38. Firms contracted by WAF will be required to have the necessary insurances . The Government has agreed to 
follow ADB Procurement Guidelines.  ADB standard contract templates will be used for the contracting of  goods and 
servi ces. 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s 
39. The key organizations involved in the project include the Ministry of Finance ( MOF ) that will represent Fiji 
as the Client and within ADB terminology is considered the executing agency . WAF will b e the agency 
responsible for the day -to-day implementation of the project  and under ADB terminology is considered the 
Implementing Agency . The project management unit (PMU) will be established within WAF. ADB as the 
accredited entity will monitor project i mplementation activities.  
40. A Project Steering Committee will be established and chaired by MOF . Members of the Project Steering 
Committee will include  Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOF A) as the National Designated Authority for the GCF; the 
Ministry of Infr astructure and Transport (MOIT); the Ministry of Local Government, Housing and Environment 
(MLGHE), the Ministry of Lands and Mineral Resources (MLMR), the iTaukei Land Trust Board (TLTB)  and WAF . 
Details of the implementation organizations’ key roles and responsibilities are indicated in the table and figure 
below:


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
Project implementation 
organizations  Management Roles and Responsibilities  
 MOF   Client  and Executing Agency  (as per  ADB terminology ) 
 Cause WAF to implement the project  
 Submit withdrawal applicat ions to ADB  
 Submit required annual audit reports and financial statements of 
project account to ADB  
 Coordinate appropriate go vernment representation for project  
negotiati ons, project signing, and project  effectiveness  
 Project steering committee (PSC)   The PSC will include representatives from MOF  (chair); MOFA, WAF; 
MOIT, MLGHE,  MLMR, TLTB .  
 Oversee implementation of the project and its consistency with 
national government policies (Green Growth Framework, Roadmap to 
Democracy and Sustainable Socioeconomic Development, Public 
Sector Investment Program, Updated National Infrastructure Policies 
and Plan)  
 Monitor project progress and cooperatively resolve issues hindering 
progress  
 Guide the executing and implementing agencies  
 
 WAF   Implementing agency  (as per  ADB terminology ) – tasked with the 
delivery of the project outputs.  
 Assist MOF  in recruitment of project management and design and 
supervision consultants in accordance with Guidelines on Use of 
Consultants by ADB and its Clients  
 Establish a Project Manage ment Unit which will be responsible for 
day to da y implementation of the project  
 Prepare overall implementation plan and annual budgets  
 Supervise project management and design and supervision 
consultants  
 Oversee detailed design of subprojects  
 Ensure timely  bidding and award of civil works contracts in 
accordance with ADB Procurement Guidelines  
 Safeguards implementation and monitoring  
 Monitoring and evaluation of project performance in accordance with 
project design and monitoring framework  
 Review of withdra wal applications before submission to executing 
agency  
 ADB  Project  financier  and overall project administrato r of the project on 
behalf of GCF  
 Lead on c onduct ing regular joint project reviews  
 Monitor and support project implemen tation and compliance wi th ADB  
policies and procedures in relation to technical, economic, financial, 
procurement, safeguards, governance, and anticorruption policies 
and procedures  
 Overall coordination and advisory support


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
Project Organization Structure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41. The Loan proceeds including ADB administered co -financier funds will be disbursed in accordance with 
ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2007, as amended from time to time), and detailed arrangements agreed upon 
between the Government and ADB. Purs uant to ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009) (SPS),8 ADB funds may 
not be applied to the activities described on the ADB Prohibited Investment Activities List set forth at Appendix 5 of 
the SPS. All financial institutions will ensure that their investme nts are in compliance with applicable national laws and 
regulations and will apply the prohibited investment activities list (Appendix 5) to subprojects financed by ADB.  
42. In addition, a financial management assessment was conducted for WAF as the IA and t he MOF  in its 
capacity of EA. No major country level financial management issues are apparent, since Fiji has a well -developed and 
functioning public sector. However, due to the recent  nature of the  restoration of democracy, overall inherent risk has 
been assessed as moderate. The overall control risk has been assessed as significant due to : (i) lack of financial 
autonomy of IA; (ii) audit issues arising from the external audit of the IA;  and (iii) weak information systems and 
reporting issues of the IA. Th e project will address the control risk associated with the IA through long term financial 
management capacity building of WAF. The project will also support WAF to complete its corporatization, including 
                                                             
8 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Safeguards/Safeguard -Policy -Statement -June2009.pdf  
Works Delivery  Unit  
 
Capacity Building Unit  
 Finance and Admin istration  
Unit ADB /EIB/GCF  
 Government of Fiji  
Ministry of Finance  and Strategic Planning  
(Executing Agency)  Project Steering 
Committee  
(MFSP;  WAF; MOFA; 
MOIT; MLG HE; MLMR; 
TLTB)  
Water Authority of Fiji  
(Implementing Agency)  
Project Management Unit  
Design Build & Operate  
Consulting firm  
Technical Assistance  
Consultant s 
Project Management 
Consultants


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
achieving financial autonomy. In addition, the capa city of WAF’s financing and accounting staff will be strengthened 
through training programs conducted under the project and  the placement of  an accountant within the PMU. WAF has 
adequate capacity for procuring goods, works, and consulting services in acco rdance with ADB procedures and 
requirements. The PMU will have one procurement officer and will be supported by consultants in bid preparation and 
evaluation, particularly for the complex design –build contracts.  
43. Before the submission of the first withdraw al application, MOF  will submit to ADB sufficient evidence of the 
authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal applications on behalf of the borrower, together with the 
authenticated specimen signatures of each authorized person.  Withdrawal app lications and supporting documents 
will demonstrate, among other things that the goods, and/or services were produced in or from ADB members, and 
are eligible for ADB financing. All disbursements under government financing will be carried out in accordance  with 
regulations of the government and prevailing ADB guidelines. The WAF will maintain separate project accounts and 
records by funding source for all expenditures incurred on the project. Project accounts will follow international 
accounting principles and practices or the national equivalent, acceptable to ADB9. 
44. WAF will (i) prepare the annual financial statements for the project, in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (ii) have such financial statements audited annually by indepen dent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience , and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or 
the national equivalent acceptable to ADB10; and (iii) furnish to ADB, not later than 6 months after the  end of each 
related fiscal year, copies of the audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English 
language, and other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.  
45. Public disclosure of the project financial statements, including the audit report on the project financial 
statements, will be guided by ADB’s Public Communications Policy (2011).11 After review, ADB will disclose the 
annual audited financial stat ements for the project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 
30 days of the date of their receipt, by posting them on ADB’s website. The audit management letter will not be 
disclosed.  
46. All advance contracting and retroactive fi nancing will be undertaken in conformity with ADB’s Procurement 
Guidelines (February 2007, as amended from time to time) (ADB’s Procurement Guidelines )12 and ADB’s Guidelines 
on the Use of Consultants (2007, as amended from time to time) (ADB’s Guidelines o n the Use of Consultants).13 The 
issuance of invitations to bid under advance contracting and retroactive financing will be subject to ADB approval. The 
borrower, MOF and WAF have been advised that approval of advance contracting and retroactive financing d oes not 
commit ADB to finance the Project.  Information on all procurement notices and contract awards financed under the 
project will be made public in ADB website.  
47. MOF will provide ADB with (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with ADB 's project 
performance reporting system; (ii) consolidated annual reports including : (a) progress achieved by output as 
measured through the indicator's performance targets, (b) key implementation issues and solutions; (c) updated 
procurement plan ; and (d)  updated implementation plan for next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 
6 months of physical completion of the Project.14 To ensure projects continue to be both viable and sustainable, 
project accounts and the e xecuting agency audited financial statement s, together with the associated auditor's report, 
should be adequately reviewed.  
                                                             
9 WAF follows the International Financial Reporting Standards.   
10 OAG follows the International Standards on Auditing.  
11 Available at: http://www.adb.org/documents/pcp -2011.  
12  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Procurement/Guidelines -Procurement.pdf  
13  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Consulting/Guidelines -Consultants.pdf  
14 Project completion report format is available at: http://www.adb.org/C onsulting/consultants -toolkits/PCR -Public -
Sector -Landscape.rar


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
48. ADB will undertake 2 project reviews a year to (i) discuss progress of project implementation activities, 
compliance with covenants and project  agreements,  (ii) monitor progress in achieving project outputs ; and (iii) agree 
on any required  changes to the project implementation arrangements . A mid -term review will be undertaken within 3 
years of project being effective or at any time that ADB and Government c onsider it necessary. The midterm review 
mission will carry out : (i) a review of institutional, administrative, organizational, technical, environmental, social, 
economic, and financial aspects of the project based on the assumptions and risks included in the design and 
monitoring framework and updated project performance reports ; (ii) a review of covenants to assess whether they are 
still relevant or need to be changed, or waived due to changing circumstances; (iii) an assessment of need to 
restructure or reformulate the project and the effects of this on the immediate objectives (purpose) and long -term 
goals of the project; and (iv) an updating of the project’s design and monitoring framework where restructuring or 
reformulation is necessary or its immedia te objectives will change. ADB will also carry out a Project Completion 
Report after approximately one year after physical completion of the project.  The Independent Evaluation Department 
will review the findings of the Project Completion Report.  Both re ports will be made publicly available.    
49. The key contractual agreements under the project will be procured in full compliance with the ADB 
Procurement Guidelines (April 2015, as amended from time to time), and the conditions of contract shall be the 
Cond itions of Contract for Construction for Building and Engineering Works Designed by the Employer, Multilateral 
Development Bank Harmonized Edition, prepared by the Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs -Conseil, or FIDIC 
(FIDIC MDB Harmonized Construction  Contract) available at  FIDIC MDB June 2010.  Two construction packages will 
follow the FIDIC Conditions of Contract for Design, Build and Operate Projects, Edition 2008.  
50. Prior to construction contracts procurement, the project will finance consulting services to design each 
construction package and provide support to WAF  to supervise the construction works and do the construction 
contract management. During the construction contractual implementation, the consultancy firm recruited will provide 
the day to day construction works supervision, to ensure compliance with the quality and technical specification 
requirements, compliance with all relevant administrative regulation, m onitor works progress to ensure construction 
implementation within the projected time frame, and record all works completed in compliance with the Bill of 
Quantities under the contract. Upon works completion, the supervision consultant will perform all the  required 
technical tests necessary to declare the acceptance of the works and will establish all the monthly progress 
certificates to be approved by WAF for issuance of Progress Claims by the contractor and related payment by WAF. 
The contractor will prod uce weekly reports on progress of its Construction Environment Management Plan (CEMP) 
implementation, and the supervision consultant will also produce monthly progress reports reflecting on contract 
implementation status, works progress, financial disburse ment and implementation time monitoring. When necessary, 
the consultant will coordinate with WAF to prepare and issue all necessary Variation Order under the contract.  
51. All the works completed under the project will be transferred to WAF after the satisfac tory commissioning 
period and issuance of the Completion Certificate. The facilities will be operated by WAF in accordance with WAF 
Standard Operation Procedures (SOP) to ensure adequate operation and maintenance, but will remain under the 
contractor's war ranty during the defect liability period. For the two works contracts that include operational period 
under the construction contract, the contractor will perform the operation and maintenance duties of the constructed 
facilities over the contractual opera tion period (5 years) and in compliance with the contractual requirements defined 
by WAF and following the WAF SOP  for operation and maintenance of treatment facilities.  
52. Regarding credit analysis and eligibility criteria, in accordance with the ADB Procur ement Guidelines (April 
2015, as amended from time to time), all contractors will be required to meet minimum average annual construction 
turnover and minimum financial resources to ensure it has the capability and resources to effectively carry out the 
contract as offered in the bid. Performance security shall be required from all contractors, based on the size and 
complexity of each particular contract.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM ME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
C.8. Timetable of Project  Implementation  
Task  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q1
0 Q1
1 Q1
2 Q1
3 Q1
4 Q1
5 Q1
6 Q1
7 Q1
8 Q1
9 Q2
0 Q2
1 Q2
2 Q2
3 Q2
4 Q2
5 Q2
6 Q2
7 Q2
8 
1.Improved access 
to reliable and safe 
water supply in 
GSA  
                             
1.1. Design -Build 
and Operate Rewa 
river new water 
supply systems    D D T T B B B B B B O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 
1.2.  Reduce NRW 
in GSA    X X X X X X X X                   
2.Improved 
wastewater 
Management in 
GSA                              
2.1 Increasing 
WWT capacity of 
Kinoya to 
approximately 
277,000    D D T T B B B B B B B O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 
2.2 Upgrading 
around 31 existing 
wastewater 
pumping stations    D D T B B                      
2.3 R eplacing of 
around 18km of 
wastewater trunk 
mains    D D T B B B                     
2.4 R elining of 
around 18km of   D D T B B B


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM ME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
wastewater trunk 
mains  
2.5 Sewer network 
extension    D D       T T B B B B             
3.Sector Capacity 
Building                              
3.1 Water demand 
management and 
NRW reduction    X X X X X X X X                   
3.2 Environmental 
regulations for 
municipal 
discharge    X X X X                       
3.3 National Trade 
Waste Program    X X X X X X X X                   
3.4 Corporatization 
of WAF    X X X X X X X X                   
3.5 Catchment 
Protection Plans     X X X X                      
3.6 Strengthening 
WAF Financial 
Management 
Systems    X X X X X    X    X              
3.7 P romotion of 
gender equity 
within WAF 
business practices    X    X    X    X              
3.8 WAF carries 
out a study on 
options and 
alternatives to 
reduce energy 
consumpt ion of the 
GSA wastewater 
treatment system     X X   X


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAM ME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 48 
 
 C C C C C 
 
4. Project 
Management                              
4.1 Recruitment of 
consultants  X X                           
4.2 
Implementation of 
communication 
and consultation 
plan   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X             
4.3 
Implementation of 
Social and 
Environmental 
Management 
Plans    X X X X X X X X X X X X X X             
4.4 Project 
Supervision and 
Monitoring    X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
4.5 Financial 
Closing a nd 
Project Completion 
Report                            X X 
 
D = Detailed Design/Concept Design; T = Tendering of Works; B = Building of works; O = Operation period for DBO contracts


---
*Page 22*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 48 
 
 
 F F D 
                                                             
15 Output 1is estimated at $102.92 million of which the GCF would finance $31.05 million.  See Cost Table 
by Output in Supporting Document Integrated Financial Model (under tab PAM Cost Tables).  D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
  
53. GCF involvement will provide approximately 30% of the financing  required to deliver  Output 1, which will 
significantly  increase water supply in the greater Suva area,  the ma in metropolitan center of Fiji,  and ensure that 
Fiji’s water supply syst em is increasingly resilient to  anticipated climate change impacts .15 
54. Critically, grant funding by GCF will allow Fiji, small island developing country , to undertake vital adaptation 
measures without further increasing external debt. The Fiji Government is committed to reducing total debt from 
49% to 45% of GDP. The Government is also committed to ensuring that external debt is capped at  30% of total 
debt. Current debt levels potentially constrain Fiji’s ability to borrow for investments in water and sewerage. The 
additional costs of adaptation a nd mitigation measures will substantially increase the cost of providing such 
infrastructure.  While this investment will have a strong social, economic, and environmental return to Fiji, the 
financial returns from such investments are limited.  Without gr ant funding from GCF, Fiji would potentially not be in 
a position to be able to fund additional adaptation and mitigation costs, or could only do so by diverting constrained 
resources from other development needs.  
55. GCF financing for the water supply compo nent will  finance adaptation measures for building a new water 
intake by the Rewa River, a new pumping station, a new water treatment plant, a new clear water reservoir and a 
pipeline to increase production by 30,000 m3 per day and supplement water supply for the GSA.  
56. GCF financing will cover  the additional costs associated with moving the facility from 29 km to 49km from 
the river mouth to avoid projected climate change impacts: (i) 19.6 km of DN750 mm transmission mains; (ii) 50% 
of site access costs; ( iii) costs of bringing electricity to the site and (iv) 50% of land acquisition and resettlement 
costs. All other costs are assumed to be identical for both sites, including capital costs of the river intake, raw water 
pumping station, WTP and balance rese rvoirs. These are not included as costs of adaptation. Please see cost 
tables in the project administration manual (PAM, Link 1).  The contingency costs associated to the GCF activities 
are calculated to be 15% of the base cost to take into account the high  risk of currency exchange and the difficulty 
to arrive to accurate cost estimates in the Pacific due to high dependence on imports for materials and equipment , 
need to recruit international experts  and limited number of qualified contractors with experien ce in similar projects 
in Fiji .    
57. The project will improve adaptive capacity and resilience of these activities through appropriate siting of the 
intake  higher up the river catchment , away from the projected salinity wedge moving up the river system due to 
expected  sea-level rise and lower river flows during pronounced droughts expected in future. In addition, by 
constructing a new raw water intake at the Rewa River an additional water supply source will be established, which 
will provide a more resilient  water supply system that is not just dependent on the Waimanu River system, as it is 
currently the case. While the water sources are still all reliant on surface water based systems, the Rewa River is a 
much larger river system and any impact on stream fl ows associated with future climate change impacts are less 
likely to impact extractions for urban water supply. The proposed Rewa water supply scheme will also be designed 
to be upgradable to allow future flexibility for demand increases and/or changing su pply source yields. In this 
regard it is highlighted that during extended dry periods and based on historical performance and yield 
assessments the Waimanu River is not capable of supplying the full 150  million liters/day ( ML/d ) calculated year 
2013 demand  during low flow periods. Therefore, it becomes clear that , until a new source is operational , 
additional demand can actually only be covered by reductions in NRW.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 48 
 
 
 F F D 
 D.2. Exit Strategy   
58. Since becoming a statutory authority in 2010, WAF has been focusin g on operational improvements to both 
the supply of water and wastewater systems. Some key achievements have included improvement of water treatment 
quality and the reduction of intermittent zones from 64 to 24 in the GSA . WAF however has yet to be fully c orporatized 
and key areas such as financial autonomy, human resources management, procurement process and role and 
governance of the board need to be strengthened. The capacity building aspect of this project which looks to fully 
corporatize WAF and give i t financial viability is crucial for the ongoing success of this intervention.    
59. Currently the government provides an operation and maintenance budget for WAF – although there is a need 
to strengthen WAF asset management strategies, WAF has the capacity to  maintain and operate the assets financed 
by the project .  Fiji’s 2015 budget, delivered in November 2014, prioritized water and sanitation, increasing funding for 
WAF  by almost $50 million to just over $120 million – equivalent to over 7% of total public spending.  In addition, 
government is committed to introduc ing the National Liquid Tradewaste Policy which will introduce fees based on 
discharge volumes and pollution levels and to review the water and sewerage tariff for commercial customers and 
domestic customers exceeding basic consumption levels.   
60. The use of design -build and operate contracts for the Rewa Water Treatment Plant and Kinoya Wastewater 
Treatment Plant expansion aims at ensuring high quality design and construction of the assets and provid ing WAF a 
period to build capacity to operate and maintain the assets in the long term.  
61. A detailed analysis of WAF financial capacity and sustainability of the project is include d in Linked Document 1 
(the Project Administration Manual, PAM)  of the Proje ct Appraisal Report.


---
*Page 24*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
62. Adaptation impact – Contribution to increased climat e-resilient sustainable development:  
- Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries:  
o 290,854  people  (projected population in service area in 2018)  
- Number of beneficiaries relative to total population:  
o 32 % of Fiji Population  
o Of which 15  % are of the most vulnerable groups  
- Degree to which the activity avoids lock -in of long -lived, climate -vulnerable infrastructure:  
o 16.6% of GSA water supply will be constructed in a climate -resilient way instead of locking in 
alternative long -lived, climate -vulner able infrastructure  
- Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks:  
o The new water source in Rewa river will allow WAF to serve areas (Korovou -Nausori corridor) that 
are prone to severe drought and currently rely on on -site ground water sources.   
o The new water treatment plant in Rewa river will prevent future incidences by diversifying the source 
of bulk water and increase resilience to flooding or other climate related events ; as well as sea level 
rise and associated salt  water intrusion.  
o The capacity of WAF will be strengthened through development of catchment protection plans and 
other institutional strengthening.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual   
Lifetime   
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population (adaptation only)  Total  290,854  
Percentage 
(%) 32% of Fiji Population  
Other 
relevant 
indicators   See E.1.1.  and Project Design and Monitoring Framework (Annex I of Project Appraisal 
Report)


---
*Page 25*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
Methodology for adaptation impact indicators  
63. More resilient water supply system:  The construction of a new intake at the Rewa River will lead to a 
direct improvement of the complete existing water supply system in GSA, since the new system is foreseen to be 
connected to the existing reticulation system. Current connection rates in GSA  to the water supply system are some 
95% and the project will allow 50,000 people to benefit from new connections. Therefore, 98% of the population will 
benefit.  The total number of beneficiaries was assumed to be equal to the projected population in the s ervice area in 
2022.  
64. Although the addition of the Rewa River offtake and WTP will result in a municipal water system for GSA that 
is more resilient to the impacts of present and future climate variability, only the incremental cost of climate change 
adapta tion are included in the financial request to the GCF.  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity  can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication  (Provide a numerical multi ple and  supporting rationale)  
65. It is critical that climate change mitigation and adaptation measures are integrated into WAF’s normal 
operating procedures and in particular any new water and sewerage infrastructure investments. Successful and 
measureable d emonstration of these proposed climate investments in the GSA will have a genuine potential to drive 
a social change initiative within WAF, government and relevant sector agencies to use this as a basis for future 
strategic planning and decision -making in water and wastewater sector investments. Through this project, WAF will 
acquire knowledge and experience in developing long -term investment strategies that integrate adaptation and 
mitigation considerations.  These practices can then be replicated in other urban centers around the country such as 
Nadi, Lautoka and Lambasa by WAF. Fiji is at the forefront of the Pacific Island countries in experience in water and 
wastewater management, and lessons can be shared at the Pacific Water Association, of which Fiji is an active 
member. This will enhance the replication of the best practices in urban areas in the Pacific with similar  geophysical 
characteristics, economic fragility, limited technical capacities and climate vulnerabilities.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowle dge and learning  
66. The project will support WAF in better addressing k ey knowledge issues and gaps related to adaptation 
which include inadequate integration of climate change adaptation and mitigation measures into urban water supply 
and wastewater plannin g and investment strategies. The project emphasis in optimizing investments taking into 
account longer term implications for operation and maintenance is expected to change WAF’s approach and learn by 
doing.  In addition, it will provide the appropriate me chanisms to address the difficult issue of measuring, reporting, 
and verifying actions related to adaptation and mitigation, such as technology transfer and capacity building. It will 
more importantly address the lack of tools, guidelines, and document goo d practices and  lessons learned, especially 
those related to mainstreaming adaptation and mitigation into national and sector policies, planning processes, and 
regulations in order to change the status quo.  
 67. The Appendix 1 of the Project Appraisal Report contains a design and monitoring framework with 
performance targets and indicators as well as a clear indication of potential data sources and clear responsibilities for 
reporting.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
70. Fiji is presently embarking on a strategic long -term development plan for low  carbon emission and climate 
resilient development. In the absence of such a strategic development plan, the implementation of the proposed 
project will support Fiji’s Green Growth Framework (2014) in achieving its overall objective of supporting and 
compl ementing actions which contribute to development that is sustainable for “A Better Fiji for All”. The project in this 
context will be fundamental to advancing the national legal and regulatory framework to systematically promote 
investment in low -emission and climate resilient development through addressing the environment pillar of building 
resilience to climate change and disasters, waste management and the social pillar of freshwater resources and 
sanitation management. In doing so, this will promote int egrated and inclusive sustainable development, strengthen 
environmental resilience, drive social improvement and reduce poverty enhancing economic growth and also building 
necessary capacity to withstand and manage adverse effects of climate change.  
71. Curre nt policies, strategies and plans that will guide this activity in meeting low -emission and climate resilient 
development and achieving the objective of the Green Growth Framework:  
1. Developed/Existing  
- National Climate Change Policy 2012  
- National Disa ster Management Act 1998  
- Clean Development Mechanism Policy Guidelines 2012  
2. Under Development/Draft  
- National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS)  
- Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA)  
- Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC)  
- Energy Policy  
- Energy Strategic Action Plan  
3. Yet to be developed  – It must be highlighted that Fiji is committed to the development of the following to 
enhance resilience;  
- Climate Change Act  
- National Adaptation Plan  
 E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
68. For ad aptation, proposed project investments will demonstrate how long term planning through appropriate 
siting of the water supply investment at a distance up the Rewa river catchment can ensure sustainability in light of 
expected salinity migration due to pote ntial sea level rise. In addition it can demonstrate climate resiliency in 
diversifying water supply through the provision of a second source of bulk water to address current shortfalls in the 
GSA brought on from employing only one river system as opposed to two.  
69. The project will introduce to WAF the use of Design, Build and Operate contracts for major infrastructural 
investments ..  One of the objectives of opting for this type of contract is to ensure that the O&M cost is factored in the 
proposed technolo gy which should encourage the use of more energy efficient technologies. Combined these 
proposed initiatives will create conditions conducive to low carbon development through offering capacity building 
and staged incentives to the private and public secto r to change from conventional designs and their present reliance 
on inefficient conventional methods to implement more efficient energy solutions. This will be integral to mitigating 
GHG emissions, providing the technical assistance is made available to im prove project performance, enable local 
maintenance of new technologies, and to disseminate good practices and lessons.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.3. Sustainable Development P otential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
72. Key poverty and social issues . Rural poverty has risen across the main ethnic groups of indi genous 
iTaukei and Indo -Fijians, now standing at 44% (2013) , leading to a steady migration to urban areas. The Suva 
Greater Area (GSA) contains 50% of the urban population of Fiji and is the fastest growing urban area with the 
urban growth rate of over 2% in the GSA, (with Nausori being 2.7%) against the national urban rate of 1.5%. In 
addition, the area has a high susceptibility to climate change, the type and scale of the works required to upgrade 
the water supply and sewerage network are more technically  challenging than for other networks. With 49% of the 
population living in rural areas, the rural –urban gap is widening, associated mainly with lack of income -earning 
opportunities, poor access to services, and isolation. Overall, 22% of people still rely on subsistence agriculture for 
their livelihoods and many more combine growing food for home consumption with cash sales of surplus produce. 
The extra produce is mostly brought by the women to Suva for sale. In the GSA, where subproject sites were 
studied,  a large number of informal settlements have come up with little access to clean water or sewage.  
73. Beneficiaries . Primary project beneficiaries are people living in the GSA and peri -urban areas —(i) 
squatter colonies will benefit from  a regular supply of clean and adequate water for their daily needs and 
reduction of time spent in collecting and storing water , (ii) women will be freed from drudgery to avail of economic 
activities (iii)  connection to piped sewers will  result in better living conditions, cleaner environment and costs 
saved of having septic tanks cleaned at regular intervals (iv) there will be a reduction of water borne diseases 
leading to reduced  costs due to less  expenditure on health. Specifically, beneficiaries will have a better qual ity of 
life  
3. Impact channels.  The main channel for impacts on the poor and vulnerable is through better access to basic 
human necessities such as clean water and sanitation, clean environment, economic opportunities such as jobs 
openings during project  implementation and through maintaining the expanded infrastructure.  
74. Design features . The project will prioritize rehabilitation, replacement, and construction of infrastructure 
based on agreed criteria of need of the urban and peri -urban population to e fficient and adequate supply of water 
and sanitation services. It will help reduce poverty by building/replacing old, leaking pipes with new, bigger pipes, 
both for waste water treatment and providing additional sewer pipes for new connections. The project  aims to 
provide better and more effective delivery of services by improving water and sanitation infrastructure, and by 
strengthening project management capacity in planning, executing  implementing the project and incorporating 
gender mainstreaming in ev ery aspect of the project design, during  implementation, monitoring  and  evaluation.  .  
Poorly built septic tanks and pit latrines over flow during heavy rainy season and are a main source of pollution of 
creeks and rivers and major threat to health, par ticularly in informal settlements which lack suitable drainage or 
concrete paths for pedestrians.  
75. See Annex I of the Project Appraisal Report for the Design and Monitoring Framework , including 
expected benefits and target indicators.   For detailed discuss ion of project benefits, see Economic Analysis  and 
the Summary Poverty Assessment  included as a Link documents to the Project Appraisal Report or RRP.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the ben eficiary country and populati on 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
76. The GermanWatch (Kreft & Ecstein, 2013)16 released the Climate Risk Index (CRI) for 2012 citing Fiji as 
fifth of the top ten countries with high CRI, with their averaged and weig hted ranking CRI score. The risk indicators 
used in the analyses are: death toll, deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, absolute losses in millions US $ PPP and 
losses in GDP (%). The Human Development Index (HDI)17 is included for purpose of comparing the level of 
development across countries. The HDI is also a measure of adaptive capacity. The results are presented in the 
table below. Using the same indicators but averaged over the period 1993 to 2012, the overall ranking of Fiji as 
countries most at risk to cli mate and weather events is 27, with a total CRI score of 43.5.  
Table: The GermanWatch Climate Risk Index for 2012  
Ranking 
2012 
(2011)  Country  CRI 
score  Death 
toll Deaths per 
100,000 
inhabitants  Absolute losses 
(millions $ PPP)  Losses 
in GDP 
(%) Human 
Development 
Index  
1 (37)  Haiti  6.83  128  1.23  1220.66  9.53  161  
2 (4)  Philippines  10.33  1408  1.47  1205.48  0.29  114  
3 (3)  Pakistan  12.67  662  0.37  6087.82  1.11  146  
4 (22)  Madagascar  15.67  113  0.50  356.98  1.69  151  
5 (131)  Fiji  17.00  17  1.89  135.55  3.18  96  
6 (36)  Serbia  17.67  28  0.39  1325.06  1.70  64  
7 (131)  Samoa  18.33  6  3.28  220.91  19.57  96  
8 (49)  Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  21.67  13  0.33  920.21  2.92  81  
9 (95)  Russia  22.17  716  0.50  1365.20  0.05  55  
10 (29)  Nigeria  22.33  405  0.25  837.45  0.19  153  
77. Fiji’s mean sea level is projected to continue to rise over the course of the 21st century. Global models 
simulate a rise of between approximately 5 -15cm by 2030, with increase of 20 - 60cm indic ated by 2090 under the 
high emissions scenarios18. Ocean acidification is expected to continue, and the risk of coral bleaching will 
increase in the future. By destroying natural coastal barriers, these changes will increase the country’s exposure to 
disast ers brought about by such climatic events as tropical cyclones and storm surges. Tropical cyclones are one 
of the most severe extreme events to affect Fiji on numerous occasions in the past four decades. They usually 
                                                             
16 Kreft, S. and Eckstein D., 2013: Briefing Paper, Global Climate Risk Index 2014: “Who Suffers Most from Extreme 
Weather Events? Weather -Related Loss Events in 2012 and 19 93 to 2012”.GermanWatch.  
17 HDI is a composite index that uses 4 indicators to repre sent the level of development: Life expectancy, Income, per 
capita GDP and average number of years schooling. The lower the HDI is, the higher is the development of the 
country. (Source:http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/table -1-human -development -index -and-its-components)  
18 Pacific Climate Change Science Program, Climate Change in the Pacific: Scientific Assessment and New Research, 
Volume 2: Country Report.


---
*Page 29*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
affect Fiji from November to April but have occurred in October and May. On average, one or two cyclones affect 
some part of Fiji every season, with the greatest risk during the El Nino season. Major droughts in Fiji have been 
associated with El Nino events, the annual rainfall is reduced by as  much as 20 -50% over most parts of Fiji, as 
experienced during the 1982/83, 1986/87, 1992/93 and 1997/98.  
78. Large -scale flooding in Fiji is mostly associated with prolonged heavy rainfall during the passage of a 
tropical cyclone, tropical depression and/or  enhanced, slow moving convergence zone. Localised flash flooding 
during the wet season (November to April) is quite common19. The intensity and frequency of days of extreme 
rainfall are projected to increase over the course of the 21st century.  Past floodi ng events in Fiji have resulted in 
water contamination, overflow of dams , damages to water supply infrastructure and disrupt ions in  water treatment 
and distribution.  
79. The Pacific -Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Pl anning Program20 (PACCSAP) reports  
reflect the results of Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (Phase 5) (CMIP5) -based global climate model 
(GCM) projections for individual countries. The CMIP5 models and scenarios are the most recent and scientifically 
credible model projections a vailable, and they also provide the basis for the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (2013), 
Working Group I on Physical Science.  
80. Among key findings described in the PACCSAP report Chapter 5 on Fiji Islands, there is very high 
confidence in the direction of lo ng-term change in a number of key climate variables, specifically an increase in 
mean and extremely high temperatures, sea level and ocean acidification. There is high confidence that the 
frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall will increase. However, it is unclear whether average annual rainfall and 
drought frequency will increase, decrease or remain similar to the current climate. With respect to El Niño and La 
Niña, these events will continue to occur in the future (very high confidence), but there i s little consensus on 
whether these events will change in intensity or frequency, and there is no agreement on the direction of annual 
average rainfall change in the models. In general, historical data is limited.  
81. Previous studies in Suva City, Lami Town  and Nausori Town point to their physical vulnerability to natural 
hazards, such as cyclones, coastal and riverine erosion, landslides, floods and projected mean sea level rise. This 
vulnerability is largely linked to the physical geography of the GSA. Als o, mangrove deforestation and coral reef 
extraction in order to accommodate urban development and for reasons of income generation are increasing the 
vulnerability of urban areas to coastal hazards. Both mangrove forests and coral reefs provide effective b arriers 
against storm surges and cyclones. Of particularly critical concern are the residents of informal settlements in 
towns and cities as many such settlements are located in highly vulnerable areas, such as riverbanks and pockets 
of coastal land. In 20 07, it was estimated that upwards of 140,000 people (15% of Fiji population) were living in 200 
informal settlements. The majority of these settlements are located along the Lami -Suva -Nausori corridor, Nadi -
Lautoka -Ba corridor, and Labasa.21 
82. Fiji’s vulnera bility to natural disasters comes at a big economic cost. Among the Pacific countries, Fiji tops 
                                                             
19 National Climate Change Policy 2012  
20 Australian Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO. 2014. Climate Variab ility, Extremes and Change in the Western 
Tropical Pacific: New Science and Updated Country Reports. Melbourne  
21 McKinnon. J, Whitehead, S. Chung, M. and Taylor, L. 2007. Report of the Informal Settlements Scoping Mission. 
NZAID. Wellington


---
*Page 30*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
the highest damage and losses from natural disasters in the Pacific with a sum of $1.2 billion, a record for the last 
30 years22. However, town planning schemes  elaborated by the municipalities contain very limited consideration of 
climate change or disaster risk management (UN -Habitat, 2012a)23. Due to projected increases in climate -related 
hazards and extreme events, as well as the increased size and density of urban areas, such costs are likely to 
increase unless municipalities consider climate change and disaster risk in urban planning and development 
operations. In the case of the GSA, in Lami town alone, the risk of flooding is substantial24 . These include coastal 
flooding from high waves in the Suva harbor, flash flooding from rivers , and surface flooding in low lying areas 
during intense rainfall. Overall, disasters that occurred in Fiji from 1995 to 2012 are largely weather and climate 
related events. Tropical cyclones -related disasters topped the frequency, list with floods coming as a poor second. 
However, as mentioned earlier, tropical disturbances are the major cause of flooding in the GSA. We can simply 
assume that floods, whether due to heavy rainfal l events or tropical cyclone passage will be a major threat to the 
GSA’s Urban Growth.  
83. Climate change can prevent Fiji from attaining its Millennium Development Goals and poses a particular 
threat to infrastructure  and water resources , which will inevitab ly result in economic losses , particularly critical in 
the GSA which is estimated that accounts for 40% of Fiji GDP.25 Any increase in frequency and severity of fl oods, 
drought, and saline water intrusion will jeopardize  WAF capacity to provide safe water s upply in the GSA and might 
result in the more widespread and frequent occurrences of vector -borne diseases. Sea level rise increases the cost 
of providing water and sewerage services in GSA through seawater intrusion into low lying coastal areas .  Higher 
frequency of drought events would increase pressure in WAF to increase their services to peri -urban populations 
currently relying in ground water . Flash flooding has damaged WAF critical infrastructure, with an event in 
December 2013 that damaged the water intake of Waila water treatment plant, which resulted in intermittent water 
supply for over one week in major areas of GSA. The project will provide an alternative source in a location less 
prone to flush flooding and which takes into account longer term r isk of salinity intrusion.  
84. As climate cha nge continue s to threaten  people’s livelihoods, infrastructure and ecosystems, it is 
imperative that proposed development investments develop, implement, replicate , and upscale adaptation and 
mitigation strategies  that are technically, financially and economically achievable.  The project seeks to incorporate 
climate pro ofing measures into the water and sewerage infrastructure , and to integrate climate change 
considerations into national development plans and sector  development plans.  The adaptation measures proposed 
for GCF financing intend to respond to the increased salt water intrusion due to sea -level rise  and increased risk of 
flooding due to increased frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall; and to increas e the resilience of the "locked -
in" investments in water supply systems to any future changes in rainfall variability and average rainfall.  
  
                                                             
22 Quoted from t he Minister for Works and Transport TimociNatuva while speaking at the opening of the Fiji National 
Platform for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change conference in August 19, 2014. http://fijione.tv/   
23 UN-Habitat,  2012a: Fiji’s National Urban Profile; ISBN Number (Series): 978 -92-1-132023 -7 
24 Rao N.S., Carruthers T.J.B., Anderson P., Sivo L., Saxby T., Durbin, T., Jungblut V., Hills T., Chape S., 2013: An  
economic analysis of ecosystem -based adaptation and enginee ring options for climate change adaptation in Lami 
Town, Republic of the Fiji Islands. A technical report by the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment 
Programme. – Apia, Samoa : SPREP 2013, 62 pp. ; 978 -982-04-0473 -1 (print) 978 -982-04-0474 -8 (on line)  
25 Cities Development Initiative for Asia. 2012. Pre-Feasibility Study for GSA Sustainable Urban Transport Project . Volume 1. 
Manila.


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
85. Although Fiji has achieved its Millennium Development G oal 7 targets for water supply and sanitation,26 
piped water supply in some urban areas is still intermittent , with demand for new connections growing faster than 
supply. The social dimensions of clean water and sanitation problems in the rapidly growing ur ban areas are 
exceeding the government’s capacity to finance services. Fiji’s urban population of around 457,900 is equivalent to 
53% of the total population. While poverty rates in Fiji are highest in rural areas, the rapid growth of peri -urban 
squatter s ettlements27 means that the majority of poor people in Fiji live in and around urban areas.   
86. In the Greater Suva Area (GSA),  the efficiency of urban infrastructure is adversely affected by low 
population densities, which in some areas are due to low covera ge of sewerage services as regulations for septic 
tanks limit the land occupancy ratio. In middle income residential areas, provision of piped water supply and 
sewerage might reduce urban sprawl and unlock potential for private investment in housing develo pment and lower 
the cost and efficiency of other urban infrastructure and services.28 With tourism becoming one of the key drivers of 
growth, proper wastewater management and conservation of fresh water is key to ensuring environmentally 
sustainable urban g rowth and subsequent economic growth.   
87. Water and other urban infrastructure have been identified as critical infrastructure for ongoing economic 
development by the Fiji Government. The project will focus on the GSA where approximately 224,000 (30% of Fiji’ s 
population) live.29 GSA includes Suva City and Lami, Nausori, and Nasinu town councils with Nausori and Nasinu 
being the fastest growing urban areas in GSA. Because of the size of GSA population and the geography of the 
city, the type and scale of works r equired to upgrade the water supply and sewerage network is technically more 
challenging than in other Fiji urban areas. Fiji’s 2015 budget, delivered in November 2014, prioritized water and 
sanitation, increasing f unding for this sector by almost $50 mill ion to just over $120 million – equivalent to over 7% 
of total public spending. E xperience in urban water supply and sanitation and good knowledge of the implementing 
agency was also considered when prioritizing water and sanitation as first investment in urban development sector 
after re -engagement (t he Asian Development Bank (ADB) engagement in the water and sanitation sector in Fiji 
had been  substantial, particularly through the $70 million Suva -Nausori Water Supply and Sewerage Project30 and 
facilitated a utility twining partnership31 between Water Authority of Fiji (WAF) and Hunter Water Australia). After 
                                                             
26  By 2012 Fiji’s urban population with access to safe water rose to 100% and access to improved sanitation to 92% 
(WHO and UNICEF. 2014. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation 2014 Update. WHO. Geneva)  
27  In 2007, it was estimated that upwards of 140,000 people (15% of Fiji population) were living in 200 informal 
settlements. The majority of these settlements are lo cated along the Lami -Suva -Nausori corridor, Nadi -Lautoka -Ba 
corridor, and Labasa (McKinnon. J, Whitehead, S. Chung, M. and Taylor, L. 2007. Report of the Informal Settlements 
Scoping Mission. NZAID. Wellington). 
28  Inclusive Urban Development in the GSA Pr efeasibility Study RETA: 6293 – FIJI: Drainage & Flood Management 
Project Final Report May 2012 
29 World Bank and Fiji Bureau of Statistics. 2011. Republic of Fiji: Poverty Trends, Profiles and Small Area Estimation 
(Poverty Maps) in Republic of Fiji (2003 -2009). World Bank. Washington DC. 
30  ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Fiji for Suva -
Nausori Water Supply and Sanitation Project. Manila and ADB. 2009. Report and Recommendation of the Preside nt 
to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Fiji for Suva -Nausori Water Supply and Sanitation Project – 
Supplementary. Manila. The project, which was completed in June 2014, expanded water supply and sewerage 
services benefiting an estimated 250,000. 
31  ADB.  2007.Technical Assistance for Knowledge and Innovation Support to ADB’s Water Financing Program  
   (TA6498 -REG). Manila.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
assessment of the sector and government discussions, the Fiji Country Partnership Strategy 2014 -2018 and the 
Fiji Country Operations Business Plan 2015 -2017 identified water and sanitation in urban centers as key areas for 
ADB assistance.32  
88. WAF is a commercial statutory authority promulgated under the ambit of the Public Enterprise Act 1996. 
WAF took over responsibilities, functions and operations previou sly carried out by the water and sewerage 
department in January 2010. WAF manages both water and wastewater services across Fiji in accordance with the 
functions and powers of the Promulgation reporting to the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport (MoIT ). Since 
becoming a statutory authority in 2010, WAF has been focusing on operational improvements to both the supply of 
water and wastewater systems. Some key achievements have included improvement of water treatment quality 
and the reduction of intermitt ent water supply zones from 64 to 24 in the GSA . While established as a commercial 
statutory authority, in practice WAF continues to operate through grants provided under the national government 
budget, and revenues collected are paid into the consolidated  fund. The tariff for water and sewerage services is 
controlled directly by the Government, with no independent regulator involved.  
89. WAF however has yet to be fully corporatized and key areas such as financial autonomy, human 
resources management, procureme nt process and role and governance of the board need to be strengthened.33 
For WAF to be able to improve its financial sustainability and to be more accountable to regulatory bodies, 
government is tasked with tackling water and sewerage tariff reform, intro ducing and enforcing liquid waste trade 
regulations and reviewing regulations that affect municipal waste water management. Key support areas under the 
project are to (i) implement the recently developed liquid trade waste policy to ensure processes at mai n 
wastewater treatment plant are not affected by sludge from commercial and industrial customers ; and (ii) lower 
average water consumption of residential customers from the current 200 liters per day per person, translating to a 
reduction in capital invest ment needed. WAF has signed a twinning program with Sydney Water to advise WAF on 
a strategy on water demand management and trade waste, the project will provide support for its implementation. 
MOF has formally requested technical assistance on financial m anagement planning and tariff review from the 
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Fund.  Supporting document 14  provides further information on on -going activities in 
the area of Non -Revenue Water and water demand management;  and Supporting document 15  provides  
information on tariff review activities and commitment of Government to review water and sewage tariffs.   In 
addition, the project will finance consulting services to support WAF with detailed design and supervision of all 
major works and with monitoring and reporting of the project activities . 
                                                             
32 ADB. 2014. Country Partnership Strategy: Fiji, 2014 -2018. Manila; ADB. 2014. Country Operations Business Plan: 
Fiji, 2015 -2017 . Manila.  
33 WAF is undergoing an assessment using Aqua Rating, which is a tool developed by the International Water 
Association to assess water utilities’ performance. The assessment covers all areas, including quality of service, 
asset management, operati on and maintenance, customer service, financial sustainability, corporate governance, 
etc. The assessment is then audited by an independent technical team certified by the International Water 
Association and its recommendations will allow WAF to prepare a road map to implement key reforms.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, includin g NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
90. Fiji is currently in the development of a draft National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS). The 
draft NCCAS lays out an approach to identify and implement efficient and effective activities to manage the existing 
and anti cipated consequences of climate change for all land -based resources sectors in Fiji, namely, agriculture, 
biodiversity, forestry, land and water. These sectors play dominant and essential roles in the economy of Fiji and 
contribute to livelihoods and the g eneral well -being of the people and the country as a whole. In addition to the 
NCCAS, Fiji is currently formulating its Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) in collaboration with 
UNDP, and will submit its Intended Nationally Determined Contribut ion (INDC) to the UNFCCC in September 2015. 
Fiji also has a ready -made commitment to develop a Climate Change Act and a NAP in the immediate future.  
91. The proposed adaptation and mitigation actions of the draft NCCAS are aligned with proposed project 
activi ties and directly linked to the policy objectives and strategies of the existing Fiji National Climate Change 
Policy (NCCP, 2012). This inter linkage between the two documents allows the NCCAS and the NCCP to directly 
support the implementation of proposed  mitigation and adaptation project activities. In addition, the project will be 
timely in piloting and demonstrating on -the-ground mitigation and adaptation infrastructure measures with 
complementary supporting institutional changes that Fiji can replicate  elsewhere in the country.   
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
92. The Fiji Government has extensive experience implementing investments by ADB and other partners.  
Since 1970, and ADB has committed over $417 million in investments in Fiji with a successful track record.  
93. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) will be the executing agency for the project.  MOF has extensive 
experience as executing agency for infrastructure projects and is currently the executing agency for a $100 million 
Transport Infrastructure Investment Sector Project (approved in Dec 2014).  MOF has also been the executing 
agency for a range of other recent ADB investments that have now been successfully completed, including: a $68 
million third Fiji Roads Upgr ading Project (approved in 1997 with supplementary financing in 2009); and a $70 
million Suva -Nausori Water Supply and Sewerage Project (approved in 2003 with supplementary financing in 
2009).  MoF is very knowledgeable of ADB process and project cycle and  has ensured all covenants in the loan 
agreements of previous projects financed by ADB , including complex policy reforms , have been complied with.   
94. As executing agency, the functions of the Ministry of Finance are to work with line agencies (in this case  
the Water Authority of Fiji) to implement the project as agreed in the project documents, submit withdrawal 
applications to ADB, and submit required annual audit reports and financial statements of project account.  MOF 
will also coordinate appropriate go vernment representation for loan negotiations, loan signing, and loan 
effectiveness and will chair the Project Coordination Committee. The role of the MOF and overall project 
implementation structure is described in Appraisal Report, Link 1: Project Admini stration Manual.  
95. The Water Authority of Fiji (WAF) is the implementing agency for the project. ADB is confident in 
continuing to provide financing to investments with WAF as the implementing agency. WAF is a commercial 
statutory authority promulgated unde r the ambit of the Public Enterprise Act 1996. WAF took over responsibilities, 
functions and operations previously carried out by the water and sewerage department in January 2010. WAF 
manages both water and wastewater services across Fiji in accordance wi th the functions and powers of the 
Promulgation reporting to the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport (MOIT). Since becoming a statutory authority 
in 2010, WAF has been focusing on operational improvements to both the supply of water and wastewater 
systems.  WAF has been the implementing agency for ADB’s $70 million Suva -Nausori water supply and sanitation 
project (approved 2003 with supplementary financing in 2009, and which completed in 2014) and one of the 
implementing agencies for the Emergency Floo d Recovery Sector Project (approved in August 20 09).  A risk 
assessment of WAF was undertaken and included in the project appraisal report, Link 8: Risk Assessment.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
Specific measures have been built within the project to mitigate the risks identified, in cluding financing consulting 
services to strengthened WAF financial management and procurement processes among others.   
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
96. ADB and the Go vernment of Fiji identified th e proposed project during the discus sions on Fiji's Country 
Partnership  Strategy 2014 -2018  and it was included in  Fiji Op erations Business Plan 2014 -2018 . In 2013 ADB 
approved financing of a Technical Assistance to Fiji for Urban Development Planning and I nstitutional Capacity 
Building  and since April 2014, it  has been working in close collaboration with the Ministry of Local Government, 
Housing and Environment, the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Ministry of Finance to identify water and sanitation 
sector priorities and to support the Water Author ity in prioritizing the sector  investment s and defining the project 
scope , addressing critical policy and sector issues and carrying out the required project due diligence. Discussions 
and consultations took pla ce with the Climate Change Division in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to ensure that the 
project was in line with national policy and that climate change considerations were integrated within the project. 
ADB has also carried out consultations with local government, affected communities and other key stakeholders  as 
part of the project due diligence . All discussions and agreements reached at each stage of project preparation 
have been reflected in the project Aide Memoirs and Memorandum of Understandings.   Consultations with 
communities and civil society are reflected in the Poverty and Social Analysis and the environmental and social 
safeguards documents.  
97. A combined Poverty and Social Analysis and Survey was conducted during Project Preparation Due 
Dilige nce. Consultations conducted were designed to cover family  composition; indicators of economic status; 
water source(s), usage and problems encountered; drainage arrangements and flooding; sewage arrangements 
and problems encountered; current expenditures f or water and sewer; and willingness to pay for new or improved 
services. Questions were included to identify women -headed households, sex -differentiated water usage patterns, 
and recent diarrheal and febrile infections. The key findings are summarized belo w: 
98. Participation and Empowering the Poor . The project has been prepared in consultation with key sector 
stakeholders including communities where the project will be implemented. C onsultations will continue to be 
conducted throughout the project cycle and this will strengthen participation of the poor and vulnerable in project 
implementation. Affected people will be consulted through village meetings, social surveys, and informant 
interviews at (i) planning phase of subprojects; (ii) during detailed feasibi lity studies and design; (iii) before and 
during construction; and (iv) during operation, maintenance, and monitoring. At each subproject site, a focal point 
for more detailed information sharing, and community development activities will be established, u sually through an 
existing village committee. Poverty and socioeconomic assessments at subproject sites will also identify local civil 
society organizations and ensure that they are included in consultation activities. NGOs, churches, leaders, and 
youth gr oups will provide channels for communication with the affected  community to ensure that they understand 
the subproject, delivery process, schedule, potential impacts, and opportunities. Information gathering and sharing 
will include consultations , collabor ation  with NGOs working on poverty and partnership  with village communities 
where possible.  Finally, a  project level participation plan will be prepared to strengthen participation of civil society 
as interest holders for affected  persons particularly th e poor and vulnerable mostly living in squatter settlements.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
99. The net economic benefits and costs in the analysis of the overall project were derived by comparing the 
'with' and 'without' project scenarios. The project benefits from the water supply investments comprise: (i) 
reduction in economic cost of water supply as a result of displacing higher cost supply alternatives, such as tanker 
trucks, in unserved areas; (ii) costs savings from a reduction in NRW. Savings in the economic costs of supply by 
reducing NRW, taking into account the avoided costs of producing, treating and distributing water; (iii) e limination 
of current and future potential suppressed demand for water supply by adding additional water supply production 
capacity to the system;34and (iv) benefits that accrue from households with illegal or unmetered connections from 
improved water suppl y services. The project benefits from the sewerage investments comprise: (i) avoided costs 
of septic tanks for new connections; (ii) increase in urban land values associated with allowance for higher density 
development; (iii) avoided decline in sewerage c onnections due to reduction WWTP capacity in the near future; 
and energy generation from production of biogas at Kinoya WWTP. The economic internal rate of return for the 
project is 13.8% and the sensitivity analysis confirms the project is viable under ad verse conditions. A detailed 
economic analysis and financial analysis for the project are included as link documents  to the project appraisal 
report.  An economic  analysis of only GCF contribution could not be carried out as it would not be feasible  without  
the rest o f the investments.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
100. In due course, a  submission for GCF  financing of the mitigation and adaptation activities under component 2: 
Wastewater will be submitted to the GCF Secretariat for consideration in the March 2016 Board  Meeting . 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
101. The financial viability was carried out for the overall project.  The WACC of the project exceeds the FIRR for 
the proje ct which is currently negative . However th e project is economically viable with an  internal rate of return for 
the overall project of 13.8% . A detailed analysis of the financial viability of the project is included as a link document 
to the Project Appraisal Report . 
E.6.4. Application  of best practices  
Please refer to project descriptio n and feasibility studies  includ ed in the supporting documents . 
  
                                                             
34 Average willingness to pay for improved water supply among domestic customers was based on the results of a 
contingent valuation survey carried out as part of the Project Preparatory Technical Assistance. Average willin gness to 
pay for improved water supply among commercial users was estimated at the cost of investing in alternative supply 
arrangements.  There are a range of accepted methodologies to assess willingness to pay for basic services, including 
survey of potent ial customers. The avoided cost scenario was not considered appropriate in this case since the 
majority of households have already a piped water supply connection; the majority therefore do not invest in 
alternatives.  The willingness to pay values were ca lculated to be low since household already receive a good service 
for which they are used to paying a very subsidized price. Any increase in willingness to pay would improve the EIRR 
of the project.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 48 
 
 
 F F E 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
Not applicable  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project  and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
Not ap plicable  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit generated as a result of the project)


---
*Page 37*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 48 
 
 
 F F F F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
102. Access to piped water supply services among the GSA’s population has reached 95%.  However current 
water supply capacity is 151 ML/day, while current peak day demand is estimated to be around 168 ML/d, resulting 
in a significant shortfall in bulk water supply and water treatment plant (WTP) capacity. This contributes to water 
shortages and low pressure in some areas during peak demand dry periods.  The short fall is around 18 ML/d, which 
can be expected to increase to 27 ML/d by 2033.  In absence of the project, the water supply gap can be expected 
to continue to increase with growing urbanization and clima te change which might reduce production from these 
intakes. In addition, current water production facilities are running at full capacity for 24 hours per.  The lack of 
redundancies in the system poses a significant risk to water supply security in the GSA , in the event of equipment 
failure or other event such as damage to the intakes due to flash flooding. Without investments to upgrade the 
system, a 30% reduction in production capacity by 2033 is expected.  
103. Around 36% of the GSA population is connected t o the reticulated sewerage system. There are five 
wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) servicing the GSA. The major plant at Kinoya has a capacity of 105,000 
equivalent persons (EP) and serves over 90% of connected customers. However, the current capacity of  Kinoya 
WWTP is overloaded, and the asset is deteriorating. This is compounded by increasing sea water intrusion in the 
sewerage system and lack off a trade waste program. The limited capacity of the sewerage network and the high 
reliance on septic tank ca n result in overflows to nearby creeks particularly during wet weather. The limited coverage 
of the sewerage network also contributes to urban sprawl in the GSA. This is because the Local Authority Act 
restricts high density development in unsewered areas.  In absence of the investments, it is projected that WWTP 
capacity will decline and service connections will decline by 10%.  
104. Economic analysis. The economic analysis was carried out for the  water and sewerage components and 
for the project as a whole35 and in accordance with the Asian Development Bank’s Guidelines for the Economic 
Analysis of Projects36 and Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Water Supply Projects.37 All prices are expressed 
in the domestic price numeraire at constant 2015 prices. Transfe rs such as taxes and duties, are excluded from the 
analysis. Traded components are converted into economic prices using a shadow exchange rate factor (SERF) of 
1.014.  A shadow wage rate factor (SWRF) of 0.86 is used to convert financial into economic wage  rates for 
unskilled labor.  The period covered by the analysis is 40 years.  
105. A least -cost analysis of water supply and sewerage options for the GSA was carried out to determine 
whether the project investments represent the least cost means of addressing t he water supply and sewerage needs 
of the GSA over the period of analysis. Proposed project investments described above were compared with 
technically feasible alternatives. The alternative water supply investment considered was the development of an 
intak e on the Rewa River with an expansion in the treatment capacity of the existing Waila WTP. Alternative 
sewerage investments considered include the implementation of a ‘decentralized’ sewerage strategy with new 
WWTPs located in growth areas at the extremiti es of the sewerage network in Waila and Lami. The present value of 
life-cycle costs of each option was compared, including capital investment, operation and maintenance costs, over 
the period of the analysis. In the case of sewerage investments, only alter native treatment options were considered, 
since in both cases wastewater trunk mains would need to be upgraded and expanded. The present values of the 
costs associated with each option were compared, and the project investments are estimated to be the leas t-cost 
option compared with the feasible alternatives, even when a discount rate of 16% is applied.  
106. The net economic benefits and costs in the analysis were derived by comparing the 'with' and 'without' 
                                                             
35 Although the economic analysis was carried out for the overall project, separate EIRRs were calculated for the water 
supply and sewerage investments.  The Project Appraisal Report Link Document 2 provides the detailed economic 
analysis.  
36 ADB. 1997. Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects,  Manila . 
37 ADB. 1998. Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Water Supply Projects,  Manila .


---
*Page 38*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 48 
 
 
 F F F F 
project scenarios. The project benefits from the wa ter supply investments comprise: (i) Reduction in economic cost 
of water supply as a result of displacing higher cost supply alternatives, such as tanker trucks, in unserved areas. 
This benefit is valued at F$30.0038 per cubic meter, which is the cost of su pplying water by tanker truck; (ii) costs 
savings from a reduction in NRW. Savings in the economic costs of supply by reducing NRW, taking into account 
the avoided costs of producing, treating and distributing water. The average cost of producing water is F$1.81 per 
cubic meter; (iii) Elimination of current and future potential suppressed demand for water supply by adding 
additional water supply production capacity to the system, and by avoiding decline in service levels. Suppressed 
demand is valued at aver age willingness to pay (WTP) of F$0.41 per cubic meter for domestic customers, and 
F$10.00 per cubic meter for non -domestic users;39 and (iv) Non -technical NRW. The benefits that accrue to 
households with illegal or unmetered connections from improved water  supply services. The value of non -technical 
NRW is valued at average willingness to pay for domestic users.  
107. The project benefits from the sewerage investments comprise: (i) avoided costs of septic tanks for new 
connections. In absence of an expansion in  the sewerage network, and increased wastewater treatment capacity, 
it is assumed that households would instead need to investment constructing and operating septic tanks. The 
annualized cost of onsite treatment and pump out is estimated to be F$487.(ii) I ncrease in urban land values 
associated with allowance for higher density development. Once a land plot is connected to the sewerage 
network, it can be fully developed without the restrictions that apply to unsewered plots. Holding other factors 
constant, land values are estimated to increase by F$16,000 for a 800 cubic meter plot in a new subdivision 
developments, and by 50% in developed areas once connected to the sewerage network based on average land 
values of $40,000;40 (iii) Avoided decline in sewerage  connections due to reduction in WWTP capacity. In absence 
of investments to substantially upgrade WWTP capacity, it is projected that capacity will continue to decline 
resulting in 10% decrease in service connections. It is assumed that this would require  some existing sewerage 
users to invest in onsite sanitation alternatives to collect and treat wastewater; (iv) Biogas production. In absence 
of the investment, methane gas produced at Kinoya will be burned. Production of biogas at Kinoya WWTP is 
estimated  to save 50 percent of the electricity costs at the plant. This avoided cost is valued at the estimated cost 
of diesel generated electricity production for the power utility41, on the assumption that incremental demand is met 
from this source; and (v) CO2 abatement. Biogas production replacing diesel generated electricity production by 
the power utility is associated with CO2 abatement, which is valued at international market rates42. 
108. The proposed investments are also expected to result in reduction of CO2 e missions from septic tanks 
and increase resilience to climate change, particularly flooding and draught.  Substantial public health and 
environmental benefits will also be achieved by reducing the incidence of water -borne disease and abating 
pollution. Due  to the difficulty in estimating and quantifying the values in monetary terms, these benefits were 
excluded from the analysis.  
109. Economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated by calculating the discount rate at which the total 
present value of bene fits and the total present value of costs are equalized. The EIRR was calculated for: (i) water 
                                                             
38 1 Fiji dollar (F$) = 0.489 US$  
39 Average willingness to pay for improved water supply among domestic customers was based on the results of a contingent 
valuation survey car ried out as part of the Project Preparatory Technical Assistance. Average willingness to pay for improved 
water supply among commercial users was estimated at the cost of investing in alternative supply arrangements.  
40 Land value estimates were derived fro m expert advice provided by real -estate agencies and property value assessors 
operating in the GSA. The Housing Authority of Fiji provided expert advice on land values for new subdivision developments.  
41 Refer Table 1 in Dornan, Matthew and Jotzo, Frank, Electricity Generation in Fiji: Assessing the Impact of Renewable 
Technologies on Costs and Financial Risks , Resource Management in Asia -Pacific Program, Crawford School of Economics 
and Government, The Australian National University, February 2011, for est imates of electricity generation costs in Fiji for 
different technologies.  
42 Using the rate for carbon emissions futures in the European market, which stood at just over €8 per tonne in late July 2015.


---
*Page 39*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 48 
 
 
 F F F F 
supply investments, (ii) wastewater investments, and (iii) water supply and wastewater investments combined. The 
results presented in Table A4 indicate that in all three cases, the EIRR is 12% or higher.  
110. Sensitivity Analysis . Analysis was undertaken to test the sensitivity of the estimated EIRRs of the 
proposed investments are to adverse changes in key variables and to confirm their economic viability under 
unfavorable conditions.  Major risks considered are: (i) an increase of 10% in capital costs; (ii) an increase of 10% 
in operating and maintenance (O&M) costs; and (iii) a 10% decrease in benefits. A summary of the results of 
sensitivity analysis due to change s in the major parameters is included in Table A3.  
Table A3: Sensitivity Analysis of Economic Internal Rate of Return  
Sensitivity Case Scenario  EIRR  
Water Supply  Sewerage  Water Supply and 
Sewerage  
Base Case  12.0%  14.6%  12.8%  
1. Increase in capit al cost by 10%  11.0%  12.0%  11.3%  
2. Increase in operating costs by 10%  11.8%  14.6%  12.6%  
3. Decrease in benefits by 10%  10.7%  11.7%  11.0%  
EIRR=economic internal rate of return.  
111. Financial analysis  has been  prepared in accordance with Asian Development B ank (ADB) Financial 
Management and Analysis of Projects .43 The financial analysis was conducted to determine the financial viability and 
sustainability of the overall  project consisting of; (i) Output 1: Increasing water supply and reliability of services w ithin 
the Greater Suva Area (GSA) by reducing non -revenue water by meter replacement, improved leak detection and 
pressure management, building a new intake and water treatment plant by the Rewa river and increasing production 
by 30m3/day; (ii) Output 2: i ncreasing sewerage coverage in the GSA and improving the treatment of wastewater 
through upgrading of the capacity of the Kinoya wastewater treatment plant by 100,000 E.P  (iii) Output 3: institutional 
strengthening of WAF through the demand management pro gram and liquid waste program (iv) Output 4: effective 
project management during implementation.  The implementation of these activities is expected to be carried out by 
the state -owned water utility, Water Authority of Fiji (WAF).  
112. The last WAF audited fi nancial statements are available only up to 31/12/2011. A team at WAF is looking into 
account reconciliation and other issues highlighted by the auditor - hence the delay in submission of financial 
statements for audit. WAF expects to finalize audited fina ncial statements for period of 2012 -2014 by end of 2015, at 
that time, after the financing plan of the project is confirmed the project financial analysis will be finalized.  As regards  
DSCR, liquidity management etc. at WAF, these are not applicable to WA F since at present cash and debt 
management is entirely by the government and not the institution. The government advances funds from the national 
budget for WAF as an operational grant for salaries and operational costs and a capital grant for capital exp enses. In 
turn, the government retains all WAF tariff revenues which it shows as national budget income.  
113. The financial analysis was conducted separately for the water and wastewater components and the project 
as a whole. The analysis was carried out usin g a cashflow analysis by projecting future revenue and cost streams 
from the project based on certain assumptions. Two streams of cashflows were developed, “with” and “without” 
project and the incremental cashflow determined. This stream of incremental cas hflow is then discounted to its 
present value and financial indicators such as the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) and Financial Net Present 
Value (FNPV) calculated.   
114. The WACC has been  calculated in real terms for the project. The funding source s would be the ADB, EIB , 
                                                             
43 ADB. 2005. Financial Management and Analysis of Projects. Manila.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 48 
 
 
 F F F F 
GCF  and Government / WAF Funds. Funding from the ADB will be from its commercial lending window, Ordinary 
Capital Resources ( OCR). The OCR loan will be at the 15 -year LIBOR USD swap rate, currently at 2.51%44 to which 
the ADB will a dd a spread of 0.5% and a maturity based premium of 0.2%45, and the resultant cost to the borrower 
will be 3.21%. The loan funds will not be on -lent to WAF. ADB forecasts a long term annual local inflation rate of 2.7% 
and foreign inflation of 1.8%. The EIB  loan will be on broadly similar terms to the ADB loan. The GoF funding is based 
on the cost of long term government borrowing of 5%46 funding. The GCF funds are assumed to have an opportunity 
cost equivalent to government funding.  
115. The FIRR of the water c omponent (Output 1) is a negative 3.8% and the FNPV is a negative F$ 383.5 m.  
The WACC is 1.8%.   The Average Incremental Financial Cost (AIFC) of Output 1, discounted at the WACC is F$ 
0.76/m3. The AIFC represents the incremental capital and recurrent co st in the production of a unit of water and is 
compared to the average tariff to demonstrate the extent the customer is subsidized and the basis for any potential 
future tariff increase. The FIRR of the wastewater component (Output 2) is a heavily negative  and the FNPV is a 
negative F$ 645 million.  The WACC is 1.4%.   The Average Incremental Financial Cost (AIFC) of Output 2, 
discounted at the WACC is F$ 1.11/m3. The AIFC represents the incremental capital and recurrent cost in treatment 
of wastewater and is compared to the average tariff to demonstrate the extent the customer is subsidized and the 
basis for any potential future tariff increase.  The FIRR of the overall project is the summation of the water and 
wastewater FIRR/FNPV.  The FIRR of the overall project is negative and the FNPV a negative F$ 1039 million.  
116. Project Risks and Sensitivity:  One major project risk is that customer will not be willing to connect to the 
system, especially for wastewater. The average cost for a water connection is about  F$ 500 and the cost of 
connecting to the sewer maybe in the region of F$1,000 -2,000 depending on the location of the premises. This is a 
very significant cost and although the law requires connection to the sewer if it is within 30m of the premises, it is  
difficult to implement this for customers with septic tanks who are required to make a substantial investment for 
connection. The availability of output -based aid47 (OBA) to finance the cost of service connections must be 
investigated. Under OBA, the subsi dy is given to the service provider, i.e. WAF, based on independently verified 
performance who is expected to pre -finance connections.  
117. At the request of the GCF, t he project has included a provision of 7% for physical contingencies.  This 
contingency is considered low given the  difficulty to estimate pricing by contractors for complex civil works which have 
not been undertaken recently in Fiji.  This contingency also accounts for unpredicted cost overruns during 
construction.  However, a reduction in cost  does not have a major impact in the financial viability of the project which 
would remain to be negative.  Only with a very substantial increase in water and sewerage tariffs would WAF 
revenues increase sufficiently for the investment to have a positive F IRR.  
Project FIRR and FNPV Base Case and Sensitivity Analysis  
Scenario  FIRR (%)  FNPV ($mn)  
Base Case  -7.5 -1,048.5  
10% reduction in costs  -7.4 -981.0  
Increase in WAF revenues  through tariff increase  0.3 -358 
Source: ADB Estimates   
  
                                                             
44 As at 25 May 2015, ADB Treasury Department  
45 Based on the t enor of the loan  
46 Based on Fiji 10 year Viti Bond rate  
47OBA is a strategy for using subsidies to deliver basic service to poor households and is used for water and sanitation, 
electricity, transport, telecommunications, education and health care.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 48 
 
 
 F F F F 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
118. The technical evaluation has been prepared for the overall project.  The project will utilize the biogas 
produced in the digesters for the production of electric and/or thermal energy, in their combined form also called 
combined heat and power (CHP) production. Prior to its utilization, the gas is balanced in a gas holder and purified, 
as required. A flare is typically used to burn gas that cannot be utilized and for emergency situations.  
119. Cost efficiency in the operation and main tenance (O&M) of treatment plants is essential. One important 
aspect to achieve this is by selecting appropriate treatment technologies that are generally low -energy consumers. If 
these technologies are properly chosen and designed they do not have higher investment costs than straight forward 
technologies such as conventional activated sludge processes but are characterized by significantly lower needs for 
operational expenditure, which have a big impact on the long term economic sustainability of the inve stments. At 
Kinoya WWTP it is foreseen that WAF reinstates the existing but currently nonoperational conventional activated 
sludge technology and it remains to be seen which technology will be proposed for the extension of the plant. 
However, above describ ed aspects will be brought to their attention and followed up during project implementation. 
With WAF being aware of these possibilities they will be able to consider them in case of new WWTP are 
implemented in Fiji in future.   
120. The project will introduce  to WAF the use of Design, Build and Operate contracts for major infrastructural 
investments ..  One of the objectives of opting for this type of contract is to ensure that the O&M cost is factored in the 
proposed technology which should encourage the use o f more energy efficient technologies.  
121. The wastewater system in the GSA consists of 86 sewage pump stations, 44km of sewer rising main and 
trunk gravity mains, and over 330km of sewerage reticulation. In addition, there are 5 WWTP servicing the area. 
Howe ver, in fact only Kinoya WWTP is of real importance as it services about 97% of connected customers. 
Currently, Kinoya is foreseen to be further extended and be the central WWTP for GSA, since the other 4 small 
WWTP have limited scope for extension. This w astewater system, however, may have potential for being optimized. 
The number of 86 sewage pump stations seems to be high for a catchment area of the size of GSA, even though it is 
recognized that the topography is rather hilly and varied. The aim of an op timization would be to reduce the number 
of pump stations, and, eventually, increase the capacity of the remaining ones, which would improve the overall 
efficiency of sewage pumping. At the same time the need for sewage pumping may be reduced by introducin g one or 
more additional WWTP in other parts of GSA area rather than centrally treat the vast majority of wastewater in the 
Kinoya WWTP only. Apart from other considerations, the preparation of a hydraulic model, which needs to be 
calibrated by using real flow and pressure measurements taken in the field, will contribute to define an optimized 
sewage reticulation system. A comprehensive evaluation of pros and cons including a cost benefit analysis should 
define whether a central or decentralized approach fo r wastewater treatment will be the preferred one. In this context 
it needs to be noted that independently of the outcome of the latter analysis the envisaged treatment capacity in 
Kinoya will not be below the 277,000 EP envisaged under the project, if the backlog areas continue to be connected 
and the sewer connection rate reaches 90% as targeted by WAF.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
122. Environment and Social Impact Assessment . ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement 2009 i s aligned to the 
GCF’s ESS and is generally understood to be operational policies that seek to avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse 
environmental and social impacts, including protecting the rights of those likely to be affected or marginalized by the 
deve lopment process.  It provides  guidelines for conducting an environmental and social impact assessment and 
some of these features include guidance on the environmental assessment process such as (i) project screening and 
categorization; (ii) scoping for envi ronmental assessment; (iii) analysis of alternatives; (iv) applicable policy, legal and 
administrative framework and standards; (v) baseline environment (vi) impact and risk analysis; (vii) mitigation 
measures and residual impacts; and an (viii) environmen tal management plan (EMP).  
123. The EMP prescribes actions to be taken to implement the mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting ,


---
*Page 42*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 48 
 
 
 F F F F 
institutional arrangements , and EMP implementation schedule and cost estimates . Supporting these critical 
assessments are ( i) consultation and participation  requirements for information disclosure , meaningful consultation 
and participation ; (ii) a g rievance redress  mechanism; (iii) o ccupational and community health and safety  
requirements  –  which includes impacts on workers a nd communities involved in both construct ion and operation; and 
(iv) pre identification of p hysical cultural resources – protection through environmental assessment and management 
via screening, consultation, management, chance find and removal  (Refer to supporti ng documents and link 
documents of the Project Appraisal Report for detailed assessment) . 
124. Gender . The project is classified as ‘effective gender mainstreaming’. (i) Key issues identified : In the labor 
force, the incidence of poverty is higher among  women (40%) than men (32%). This figure rises to 75% if unpaid 
household workers are included. Rural women with little education have the highest incidence of poverty. Fiji is 
ranked 120 out of 136 countries for women’s economic participation by the Globa l Gender Gap Index, reflecting 
women’s low rates in formal employment, although they play significant roles on smallholder farms and in marketing 
of fresh produce. Women are concentrated in informal employment, unpaid domestic work, and in low -paying and 
less secure occupations that have been hit hard by declines in tourism and the garment industry but where they 
constitute the majority of workers. Women have full legal ownership rights in access to land and property, but limited 
knowledge of these rights, and in practice they are often not recorded as co -owners of family assets or allowed to 
decide on the use of communal land. In village organizations, men dominate. Women are also poorly represented in 
provincial and local governments and institutions. Acco rding to the 2010 Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination again Women report, gender -based violence against women is widespread in Fiji, and cultural 
attitudes make it difficult for women to gain justice in cases of rape or sexual assault.  
125. A gender  action plan (GAP) has been prepared to ensure that women are consulted, and that their priorities 
are reflected when planning activities for construction of the upgraded and expanded infrastructure. The designs will 
factor in women’s needs for regular and  clean water and safe sewage disposal. Sewerage coverage encourages 
indoor sanitation facilities, as opposed to outdoor facilities which in peri -urban areas in the GSA can be unsafe for 
women. Whenever possible, pipes a re to be laid, the designs will  reflect women’s needs includ ing stairs to the water 
and concrete  laundry tubs. The GAP will  encourage women’s participation in labor and  maintenance, provide equal 
pay for equal work to men and women, and ensure income restoration measures to assist those who h ave lost assets 
or access to land. There will be representation of women and men in any community consultations, on decision -
making committees, and in awareness training to mitigate the potential spread of sexually transmitted infections and 
HIV by encoura ging contractor to hire local labor during construction work. At least 20 -30 % of the workers should be 
women  (Refer to the GAP  included as a link ed document of the Project Appraisal Report  for more details ). 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
126. A financial management assessment (FMA) for the proposed project was carried out in accordance with 
ADB’s Financial Management Guidelines48 and Financial Due Diligence Methodology Note, under a project 
preparatory technical assistance. The FMA considered the MOF as the proposed executing agency (EA) and the 
Water Authority of Fiji (WAF) as the proposed implementing agency (IA). The FMA consisted of (i) completing the 
FMA Questionnaire; (ii) assessing the FM Internal Control and Risk; and (iii) evaluating the im plementing agency’s 
FM personnel, accounting policies and procedures, internal and external audit, and information systems for financial 
reporting. Interviews were conducted with WAF’s finance division and senior management, officers of MOF’s Debt 
and Cash  Flow Management Unit, and staff of the Office of the Auditor General (OAG).  
127. All advance contracting and retroactive financing will be undertaken in conformity with ADB’s Procurement 
Guidelines (February 2007, as amended from time to time) (ADB’s Procurem ent Guidelines)49 and ADB’s Guidelines 
                                                             
48  ADB. 2005. 2010. Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects . Manila.  
49  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Procurement/Guideli nes-Procurement.pdf .


---
*Page 43*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 48 
 
 
 F F F F 
on the Use of Consultants (2007, as amended from time to time) (ADB’s Guidelines on the Use of Consultants).50 The 
issuance of invitations to bid under advance contracting and retroactive financing will be subject to AD B approval. 
The borrower, MOF and WAF have been advised that approval of advance contracting and retroactive financing does 
not commit ADB to finance the Project.   International competitive bidding procedures will be used for civil works 
contracts estimate d to cost $5 million or more, and supply contracts valued at $400,000 or higher. Shopping will be 
used for contracts for procurement of works and equipment worth less than $100,000   Before the start of any 
procurement ADB and the Government will review th e public procurement laws of the central and state governments 
to ensure consistency with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines.   
128. See Section V and VI of the  Project Administration Manual  for the detailed financial management 
assessment and procurement plan  
                                                             
50  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Consulting/Guidelines -Consultants.pdf .


---
*Page 44*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 40 OF 48 
 
 G G G G G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
130. Project  risks and assumptions  are included in the Design and Monitoring Framework – Annex I of the 
Project Appraisal Report.  Financial management risks are detailed Section V of the Project Administration Manual.   
Details on the social and environmental risks and mitigation measures  are included in the social and environmental 
assessments attached to Section I.  
 G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
  
Risks  Mitigating Measures  
Insufficient funding is allocated to WAF for 
operation and maintenance  WAF, with support from the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility is 
carrying out a water and sewerage tariff study to support a tariff 
review.  
ADB will provide assistance to establish an independent multisector 
regulator who will be responsible for setting water and sewerage 
tariffs. (to be confirmed)  
ADB is providing assistance to MOIT to strengthen its capacity to 
assess and s upport proper asset management plans in the water 
sector.  
Households not willing to connect to the 
water supply system and/or the sewerage 
system  WAF has agreed to review its connection fee policy to introduce 
payment schemes and a flat rate.  
A technical  working group has been established to coordinate with 
the activities under the informal upgrade program lead by the MLGHE 
and assistance provided by the Department of Social Welfare to 
vulnerable groups.  
Government does not support the 
implementation of the National Liquid Waste 
Trade Program  
 The project includes technical assistance to support WAF with its 
implementation.  
The commitment to approve the policy and regulations has been 
covenanted  
MLCHE = Ministry of Local Government, Housing and Environ ment; WAF = Water Authority of Fiji  
Source: ADB  
129. For more details, refer to Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan included as a linked  document  of the 
Project Appraisal Report.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 48 
 
 
 H H H H H 
H.1. Logic Framework .  
 H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level51 
Paradigm shift o bjectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  Not applicable in this submission  
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development  Climate change adaptation measures promoted in the project support scaling up of 
adaptation measures in the urban water sector . This is accomplished through climate 
proofing of existing and proposed infrastructure investments  and through building the 
necessary capacity to strengthen adaptation knowledge, skills and practices of 
government and relevant sector  agencies.  The objective is to effectively integrate and 
replicate climate change  adaptation considerations into national development initiatives.  
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term  
 Final  
Fund -level i mpacts  (Submitted for GCF Funding)  
A2.0 Increased  
resilience of health and 
well-being, and food and 
water security  2.3 Number of 
males and 
females with 
year round 
access to 
reliable and 
safe water 
supply  
despite 
climate 
shocks and 
stresses  WAF annual 
reports , project 
monitoring reports  174,512   290,854  Households willing 
to connect to the 
water supply 
system  
  
                                                             
51 Information on the Fund’s expected results  and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 46*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 48 
 
 
 H H H H H 
  H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  
Mid-term 
(if applicable)   Final  
Project outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  (Submitted for GCF Funding)  
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems  5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for low emissions 
planning and 
development and 
their effective 
implementation.  Government 
Gazette  and 
WAF annual 
reports  
 0 
 NA 3 Recommendations 
are accepted by 
policy makers  
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development  5.1 Institutional 
and reg ulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for climate 
resilience and their 
effective 
implementation.  Government 
Gazette and 
WAF annual 
reports  
 0 NA 2 Political will to 
enforce the plans  
and regulations   
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposu re to 
climate risks  7.1: Use by 
vulnerable public -
sector services of 
Fund -supported 
tools, instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to climate 
change and 
variability  Project 
progress 
reports  0 NA 1


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 48 
 
 
 H H H H H 
Project outputs  Outputs that contribute to out comes  (Submitted for GCF Funding)  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
1. WAF increases 
access to reliable and 
safe water supply in 
the GSA   1a. Quantity of w ater 
production and 
treatment capacity  of 
GSA water su pply 
system increased  1a.WAF and MoIT 
Reporting  
 150 
Ml/day in 
2014  180 
Ml/day 
by 
2019 WAF allocates 
sufficient budget 
to carry out proper 
asset 
management  
 1b. % of NRW in GSA 
reduced  1b.WAF and MoIT 
Reporting  from 50% 
in 2014  36% by 
2022   
 1c. Number  of new 
connections in GSA 
peri-urban  areas and 
informal settlements 
increased  1c.WAF and 
Department of 
Social Services 
Reports and 
Department of 
Town and Country 
Planning Reports  0 1000 of 
which 
10% 
benefit 
women 
headed 
HH by 
2020  HH willing to 
connect to the 
water supply 
system  
3.1.a. WAF 
management and 
sustainable service 
delivery  capacity for 
water supply improved  3.1.a. Percentage of 
uncollected tariff in 
GSA reduced  
 3a. WAF Annual 
Reports  
 
 12% in 
2014  6% by 
2022  WAF management  
support s 
Customer  Team 
in their initiatives 
to reduce 
uncollected tariff  
 3.1.b. Water demand 
management program 
implemented  3c. WAF Annual 
Reports  and 
Department of 
Environment 
Reports  0 1 by 
2020  Sufficient political 
willingness to 
enforce water 
demand pr ogram  
 3.1.c. Percentage of 
new WAF technical 
recruits that are 
women  3c. WAF Annual 
Reports  3%2014  10% by 
2022  WAF leadership 
supportive of 
increasing 
women’s 
opportunities in 
WAF – women 
interested in 
working for WA F 
 3.1.d Percentage  of 
female WAF staff 
participating in  
training opportunities  3d. WAF Annual 
Reports  10% in 
2014  20% in 
2022  WAF leadership 
supportive of 
increasing 
women’s 
opportunities in 
WAF


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 48 
 
 
 H H H H H 
 Climate change related a ctivities  to be considered for funding by GCF in November 2015 Board Meeting*  
Activity  Description  Inputs  Description  
Design and construction 
of Rewa river intake, 
water treatment plan t, 
pumping station and 
water reservoir  This adaptation activity will 
address the existing shortfall in 
bulk water supply and water 
treatment during peak dry 
weather periods, therefore 
improving water supply reliability 
and continuity across the GSA 
water s upply system. This will 
allow WAF to meet growing GSA 
population demand. In addition 
the siting of the proposed site on 
the river ensures its sustainability 
in the long term due to projected 
rising sea levels and salinity 
migration concerns in the Rewa 
river. $74.6 million of 
which $31.04  million  
to be financed from 
GCF  
 
 GCF financing will cover  the 
additional costs associated 
with moving the facility from 
29 km to 49km from the river 
mouth to avoid projected 
climate change impacts: (i) 
19.6 km of DN750 mm  
transmission mains; (ii) 50% 
of site access costs; (iii) 
costs of bringing electricity to 
the site and (iv) 50% of land 
acquisition and resettlement 
costs . 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term (if 
applicabl
e)  Final  
Project o utcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  (not submitted  for funding by GCF 
in November 2015 Board Meeting ) 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems  5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems  that 
improve incentives 
for low emissions 
planning and 
development and 
their effective 
implementation.  Government 
Gazette and 
WAF annual 
reports  
 0 
  3 Recommendations 
are accepted by 
policy makers  
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, indus tries and 
appliances  7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances as a 
result of Fund 
support.  WAF annual 
reports  
(progress on 
NRW reduction 
and energy 
production at 
Kinoya WWTP)  0 kWh  5,088.4  
MWh  Sufficient fu nding 
is allocated to WAF 
for operation and 
maintenance


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 48 
 
 
 H H H H H 
Project outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  (Not submitted for GCF Funding)  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
2. WAF increases 
sewer coverage , 
capacity and reliability of 
WWT processes in the 
GSA  2a. Treatment capac ity 
of Kinoya WWTP 
increased   2a. WAF and MoIT 
reporting  128,000 
in 2014  277,000 
EP by 
2022   
 
2b. Number of HH 
connect to the 
sewerage network in 
GSA  2b. WAF and Town 
and Country 
Planning Reports  
 29,000 
HH in 
2014  39,000 
HH by 
2022  HH willing to 
connect to the 
sewerage 
system and 
connection is 
affordable  
 2c. WAF  capacity to 
pre-treat industrial 
waste increased  
 2c. WAF and MoIT 
reporting, 
Department of 
Environment 
Reports  0 ML/yr  
in 2014  37 Ml/yr 
by 2022   
 2d. Compliance  with 
Kinoya Environmental 
Permit  discharge 
standards of effluent 
flows discharged from 
Kinoya  WWTP during 
dry weather  2d. WAF and 
Department of 
Environment 
reports  
 Generally 
not 
compliant  80% 
complian
ce  by 
2022  Government 
supports 
implementation 
of the waste 
trade program  
 
 2e. Number of women 
that participate in 
WASH programs 
delivered in peri -urban 
and informal 
settlements under the 
project  2e. Project Reports  0 in 2015  1,500 
women 
by 2022   
3.2. WAF management 
and sustainable service 
delivery  capacity for 
wastewater 
management  improved  3.2.a Percentage of 
customers meeting 
BOD discharge 
standards approved 
under  trade waste 
program increased  3.2.a. WAF Annual 
Reports  
Department of 
Environment 
Reports  0 80% of 
commerc
ial 
customer  
by 2022  Sufficient 
political 
willingness to 
enforce waste 
trade program  
and technical 
capacity to 
monitor 
discharge s 
 3.2.b Environmental 
regulatory framework 
for municipal 
wastewater treatment 
discharg e standards is 
reviewed and enforced  3.2.b Department 
of Environment and 
MoIT reports  
 0 1 by 
2020  Sufficient 
technical 
capacity to 
monitor 
discharges


---
*Page 50*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 48 
 
 
 H H H H H 
*Only includes a ctivities related to climate change mitigation and adaptation; please refer to the Project 
Design and Monitoring Framework  in the Project Appraisal Report  for overall project outcome, outputs and 
activities.  
  Climate change related a ctivities   
(not submitted for funding by GCF in November 2015 Board Meeting)  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
2.2. Sewer Extension 
into GSA backlog areas  This mitig ation activity will 
reduce GHG emissions 
from GSA households 
that currently operate with 
septic tanks  and will 
reduce pollutions levels in 
Laucala Bay negatively 
impacting the coral reef 
ecosys tem. $31.7 million from ADB, EIB 
and Government, of which 
$18.5  million contribute to 
mitigation.  
 
 
 Cost of extension of the 
sewerage reticulation 
network (not including pump 
stations or trunk mains for 
future growth)  
2.3. Kinoya Wastewater 
treatment plant biogas 
initiative  This mitigation activity will 
refine curre nt biogas 
production in Kinoya to 
reduce energy 
consumption of the plant.  $3.4 million from ADB, EIB 
and Government.   Cost of retrofitting Kinoya 
WWTP with technology to 
allow it to produce energy 
from biogas production  
3.1 Wastewater 
treatment optimizati on/ 
decentralization study  This mitigation activity will 
explore options and long 
term alternatives to 
reduce energy 
consumption of the GSA 
wastewater treatment 
system  $1.32  million from 
Government  Cost of technical assistance 
to WAF to undertake this 
study


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 48 
 
 
 H H H H H 
 
 
                                                             
52  Project completion report format is available at: http://www.adb. org/Consulting/consultants -
toolkits/PCR -Public -Sector -Landscape.rar  H.2. Arrangements fo r Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
3. ADB will undertake 2 project reviews a year to assess  progress of project implementation activities, compliance 
with covenants and project agreements, monitor progress in achieving project outputs and agree on any re quired.  ADB 
will undertake a mid-term review within 3 years of project being effective or at any time that ADB and Government 
consider it necessary. The midterm review mission will (i) review institutional, administrative, organizational, technical, 
envir onmental, social, economic, and financial aspects of the project based on the assumptions and risks included in 
the design and monitoring framework and updated PPR; (ii) review covenants to assess whether they are still relevant 
or need to be changed, or w aived due to changing circumstances; (iii) assess  the need to restructure or reformulate the 
project and the effects of this on the immediate objectives (purpose) and long -term goals of the project; and (iv) updat e 
the project’s design and monitoring frame work if restructuring or reformulation is necessary or its immediate objectives 
will change. Within 6 months of physical completion of the Project the MOF will submit a project completion report to 
ADB.52 
4. The MOF will provide ADB with (i) quarterly progres s reports in a format  consistent with ADB's project 
performance reporting system; (ii) consolidated annual reports including (a) progress achieved by output as measured 
through the indicator's performance targets, (b) key implementation issues and solution s; (c) updated procurement plan 
and (d) updated implementation plan for next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 6 months of 
physical completion of the Project. To ensure projects continue to be both viable and sustainable, project acco unts and 
the executing agency AFSs, together with the associated auditor's report, will be adequately reviewed.  
5. See Project Administration Manual for further details on reporting, monitoring and evaluation.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 48 
 
 
 I I I I I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
 I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposa l 
☒ 1 - NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ 2 - Feasibility S tudy 
☒ 3 - Integrated Financial M odel that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format)  
☐ 4 - Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment   
☐ 5 - Term Sheet  
☒ 6 - Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
☒ 7 - Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  
☐ 8 - Evaluation R eport  of the baseline project  
☒ 9 - Map indicating the location of the project  
☒ 10 - Timetable of project implementation  
☒ 11 - Project  confirmation (see the template in Annex I to the Accreditation Master Agreement)  
☒ 12 - Results of  AWARE Assessment of the Project  
☒ 13 - Map indicating the locat ion of the proposed Namosi Mine and location of Intake  
☒ 14 - WAF Non-Revenue Water Reduction strategy and on -going technical assistance on NRW and water 
Demand Management  
☒ 15 - Water and Sewage Tariff Review Studies and Government Commitments to Tari ff Reform  
☒ 16 - Aquarating Assessment


---
*Page 53*
---

G
CF/B.11/04/Add.08  
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority  
________