=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20151009191024+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.10
/ModDate: D:20151015165335+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.10
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

∗ The agenda item number will be determined when the final sequence of items in the provisional agenda is 
confirmed by the Co -Chairs.  Consideration of funding 
proposals  – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP00 2 GCF/B.11/04/A dd.02 
15 October 2015  Meeting of the Board  
2 – 5 November 2015  
Livingstone, Republic of Zambia  
Provisional Agenda Item 14∗ 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following two parts:  
(a) A funding proposal entitled “Scaling Up the Use of Modernized Climate Information 
and Early Warning Systems in Malawi” submitted by the United Nations 
Development Programme; and 
(b) A no -objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority or focal point, respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.11/04/Add.02  
Page b 
Table of  Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-o bjection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 4*
---

	
							
	
Contents 
 
 
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY   
 Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAIN ST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AN D MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
 Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accre dited entity. For all 
other sections, including the A ppraisal Summary in section F, a ccredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information.  Accredited entities can either  directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with c ross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name c onvention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[ Date]-[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

	
		 		PROJECT / PROGR AMME SUMMARY 
    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 65 A
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / p rogramme title Scaling Up the Use of Modernized Climate Information and 
Early Warning Systems in Malawi1 
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region Malawi 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) Ms. Tawonga G. Mbale 
Director, Environmental Affairs Department 
National Designated Authority (NDA)  
A.1.5. Accredited entity United Nations Developm ent Programme (UNDP) 
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☐  Direct ☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary Executing Entity:  Department of Disaster Management Authority 
(DoDMA) 
 
 
# (total) of beneficiaries (people): About 2 million 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD) ☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250) ☒  Small (10<x≤50) 
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☐  Mitigation ☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
          Date of resubmission 29/07/2015 
25/09/2015 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, position Srilata Kammila 
Regional Technical Specialist - Adaptation 
Organization UNDP 
Email address srilata.kammila@undp.org   
Telephone number +66 2 304 9100 ext. 5264 
Mailing address United Nations Service Building,  
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue, Bangkok 10200 Thailand 
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off- grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ Low emission transport 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off- grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-ef ficient equipment for companies and supply chain 
management, etc.) 
☐ Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricul tural irrigation, water treatment and 
management, etc.) 
																																																													
1 This is the short title; the fu ll title “Saving Lives and Prot ecting Agriculture based Liveli hoods in Malawi: Scaling Up the Use of Modernized Climate 
Information and Early Warning Systems” is used in some of the a nnexes, including the No-objection Letter.


---
*Page 6*
---

	
		 		PROJECT / PROGR AMME SUMMARY 
    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 65 A
Increased resilience of: 
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate ch ange – diversification of supply sources and supply 
chain management, relocation o f manufacturing facilities and wa rehouses, etc.) 
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, et c.) 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conse rvation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 ☐ 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. The proposed project supports Government of Malawi (GoM) to take steps to save lives and enhance livelihoods 
at risk from climate-related d isasters. It will address technic al, financial, capacity, and access barriers related to weather  
and climate information (CI) by investing in enhancing hydro-me teorological capacity for early warnings (EWs) and 
forecasting, development and dissemination of tailored products  including for smallholder farmers and fishers, and 
strengthening capacities of communities to respond to climate-r elated disasters. The objective  of the project is to 
reduce vulnerability to climate change impacts on lives and liv elihoods, particularly of women, from extreme weather 
events and climate change. The expected key Fund level impact  is increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of 
the most vulnerable people communities and regions. The primary measurable benefits  include approximately 1.4M 
direct and 0.7M indirect benefic iaries (total 12% of the popula tion) who will gain access to c ritical weather information.
 
2. The project is aligned with GoM’s strategies such as the Mal awi Growth and Development Strategy and the 
National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) and was designed  following extensive stakeh older consultations. It 
advances a paradigm shift in the use of EWs and CI. By facilita ting a demand-based model for climate information and 
use of mobile platforms, the project promotes private sector pa rticipation and market development. It yields sustainable 
development benefits by saving liv es (18 lives per year) and as sets (average USD5M) and enhancing agricultural 
productivity (annual benefit USD3.8M), safety and well-being, s oil and water quality, and livelihoods of women (about 
160,000). It yields a positive ec onomic rate of return of 31%, leverages domestic financing (USD2.17M), and builds 
capacities for sustained impact. GCF grant resources address th e needs of highly vulnerable populations of Malawi by 
supporting the non-revenue generati ng investments in provision of EWs and CI. The NDA has issued a no-objection 
letter for the project. 
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 01/02/2016 
Estimated implementation start and end date Start: 01/04/2016 
End:  31/03/2022 
Project/programme lifespan 6 years


---
*Page 7*
---

 
    FINANCE / COST INFORMATION 
                                                            GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 65 
 
		 	 	B
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Program me 
3. A grant-financing instrument is used for this project with G oM seeking maximum concessionality to undertake the 
proposed adaptation investments.  Without grant resources, the p roposed interventions would not be financially 
sustainable in the long term. First, as a Least Developed Count ry and a Low Income Economy, there is limited capacity 
in the country for concessional debt financing for its adaptati on investments. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
in its 2014 update of Malawi’s  debt sustainability noted that t he country’s external public debt was at “moderate risk” 
of debt distress with recent det erioration in public finances.2 Second, the project targets highly vulnerable rural 
populations, more than half of whom are women, living in disast er prone and food insecure districts dependent on 
climate sensitive and marginal livelihoods. Finally, the public  good nature of the solution to address the current 
deficiencies in climate observat ion systems and dissemination p latforms entails zero cost recovery from the proposed 
measures to save lives and liv elihoods of vulnerable population s in the country. 
 4. Upgrading Malawi’s climate information and early warning sys tem, including the acquisition and maintenance of 
radar and other conventional weat her systems is expensive and v ery demanding in terms of human resources and 
supporting infrastructure. Private sector financing, including concessional financing, of these investments is 
challenging given that at present revenue generation potential is limited, as are cost-recov ery opportunities. The public 
goods nature of these investments means that public financing i s required to overcome seve ral barriers that constrain 
Malawi’s ability to scale up the use of early warning systems a nd climate information. These barriers are detailed in 
Section C2 and include limited availability of financial, techn ical and human capacity for hydro-meteorological services, 
limited availability of tailored,  sector-specific climate infor mation and early warning products, lack of access to and 
awareness of use of early warning and climate information by vu lnerable populations, limited demand and markets for 
generation and use of climate information, and limited accessib ility to early warnings and low capacity at community 
level to prepare for and respond to climate-related disasters. 
 
5. Current financing gaps in domestic financing are hampering M alawi’s ability to implement adaptation measures 
and overcome these barriers. Wit hout GCF resources, Malawi will  continue to experience loss of lives and and assets 
due to climate-related disasters. Therefore, GoM seeks to combi ne GCF grant-resources with co-financing from its 
budget allocations and from UNDP co re resources to achieve the project objective by: 
 Investing in meteorological and hydrological observation netwo rk and capacities of hydromet agencies to 
ensure spatial coverage and accu racy covering vulnerable areas;  
 Investing in packaging and use of tailored, demand-based clima te information/products/services to enhance 
‘last-mile’ access; and  
 Investing in empowering the co mmunities in preparedness and re sponse to climate rela ted disasters through 
participatory and decentralized ea rly warning systems and disas ter risk reduction measures. 
 
6. Co-financing sources  
 
1) Government funds including DC CMS, DODMA, DWR, DAES, and DoF will also co-finance the proposed 
measures of the project. ( Total Co-financing USD2,170,000 ) Co-financing from DWR (USD400,000) will 
focus on Operations & Maintenance (O&M) of hydrological sensors , as well as staff support for flood 
forecasting and operating the decision support system, which wi ll be used to support the investments of the 
proposed project. Co-financing fr om DoDMA (USD576,000) will sup port staff time for coordinating and 
overseeing the early warning diss emination and disaster risk ma nagement activities under the proposed 
project as well as O&M for community-based EWS. Co-financing fr om DCCMS (USD535, 000) will focus on 
the O&M of equipment (including AWS, lake buoys and lightning s ensors among others), staff training (through 
Training of Trainers (ToT)), and staff support on formatting an d packaging data for the tailored products. Co-
financing from DoF (part of Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation , and Water Development - MoAIWD) 
(USD227,000) will focu s on extension suppor t and community outr each, as well as provision and dissemination 
of tailored early warning and weather messages for ‘safety on l ake’ for fishing communities targeted under the 
project. Co-financing from DAES (part of MoA IWD) (USD432,000) w ill provide extension support, as well as 
co-development, provision and di ssemination of tailored message s for farming communities. Refer to Annex 
II, Feasibility Assessment, Secti on 2.3, for additional informa tion on these agencies. 
2) UNDP Malawi Country office is providing its core resources t o co-finance the project contributing to various 
project activities including: support for capacity building of the hydro-met and DoDMA staff, agriculture and 
fisheries extension staff, and community members; strategic res ourcing for the operational and management


---
*Page 8*
---

 
    FINANCE / COST INFORMATION 
                                                            GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 65 
 
		 	 	B
																																																													
2 IMF (2015). Malawi. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/pd f/2015/dsacr1583.pdf 
3 The budget includes project mana gement costs of the executing entity.  (O&M) plan and sustainability of project outcomes; undertaking M&E activities including sharing of lessons 
learnt and best practices ; and, project management. ( Co-financing of USD1,800,000 ) 
 
7. Breakdown of cost estimates analysed by sub-component in local and foreign currency  
 
Component Sub-component 
(if applicable) Amount 
 Currency of 
disbursementAmount 
 Local 
currency 
Scaling up the use of modernized early 
warning systems 
and climate information to 
enhance lives and 
livelihoods in 
vulnerable 
communities Expansion of networks that 
generate climate-related 
data to save lives and 
safeguard livelihoods from extreme climate events 4.023 million USD 
($) 1,733,913,000 
 Malawian 
Kwacha 
Development and dissemination of products and platforms for climate-
related information/services 
to communities engaged in agriculture based livelihoods5.451 
 million USD 
($) 2,349,381,000 
 Malawian 
Kwacha 
Strengthening communities capacities for use of EWS/CI in preparedness for 
response to climate related 
disasters 2.821 million USD 
($) 1,215,851,000 
 Malawian 
Kwacha 
Total3 12.295  5,299,145,000 
  
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  16.265 million USD 
($)  
(b) 
Requested 
GCF 
amount  
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees (v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants *  …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
………………… 
………………… 
 
12.295 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) (  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
  
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
  
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is 
expected to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please  specify difference in tenor and price 
between GCF financing and that of accredited entities. Please n ote that the level of concessionality 
should correspond to the level of the project/programme’s expec ted performance against the investment 
criteria indicated in section E .


---
*Page 9*
---

 
    FINANCE / COST INFORMATION 
                                                            GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 65 
 
		 	 	B
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  12.295 million USD 
($)  
(c) Co-
financing 
 Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of 
Institution Tenor Pricing Seniority 
Grant 
 
Grant 
 2.17 
 
1.8 
 million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
 Government 
of Malawi  
UNDP(Core 
resources) 
 (   )   
years 
(   )   
years 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
 Options  
Options  
 
Lead financing institution: Not Applicable 
* Please provide a confirmation l etter or a lette r of commitmen t in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
B.3. Fee Arrangement  
8. While not included in this proposal as per the instructions of the GCF Secretariat, an additional cost of 10% of the 
value of the project will be neces sary to cover quality assuran ce and oversight services performed by UNDP as a GCF 
Accredited Entity over all phases of the project cycle. This in cludes as follows: (i) oversi ght of proposal development; 
(ii) appraisal (pre and final) and oversight of project start-u p; (iii) supervision and oversigh t of project implementation; 
and (iv) oversee project closure. UNDP awaits confirmation from  the GCF Board on this matter and expect that the AE 
fee, over and above the project cost, will be approved by the G CF Board prior to commencement of implementation 
activities. 
B.4. Financial Market Overview (if applicable)  
9. The public goods nature of the proposed project entails no r evenue-generation or cost-recovery. With GoM 
seeking 100% grant resources fo r the proposed project, the fina ncial market overvie w is not applicable.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 65 
	 C
C.1. Strategic Context 
10. Malawi is a landlocked country with a population of just ov er 16 million and is expected to reach 22.8 million by 
20254. Approximately 85 percent of Malawi’s population lives in rura l areas with the majority engaged in smallholder- 
rain-fed agriculture. Smallholders, primarily subsistence farme rs, account for 80 percent of production.5  The high level 
of subsistence farming is a majo r contributor to poverty with a bout 56% of rural population liv ing in poverty compared 
to 25% in urban areas. As one of the poorest economies, Malawi is among the world’s poorest economies, ranking 
174 out of 187 countries on the United Nations Human Developmen t Index (2013). Agriculture remains a key source 
of economic growth for the country  accounting for 40% of its GD P and over 85% of its total export earnings. 
 
11. Malawi faces a number of climate-induced disasters includin g floods, droughts, stormy rains, and strong winds. 
The intensity and frequency of climate-related hazards in Malaw i have been increasing in recent decades, due to 
climate change as well as other factors, including population g rowth, urbanization and environmental degradation. The 
impacts of such hazards have already severely disrupted food pr oduction, led to the displacement of communities, 
loss of life and assets, and caused an overall reduction of com munity resilience.  The Lower Shire, for instance, which 
constitutes a key agricultural  region of the co untry, is prone to cycles of recurrent floods  and droughts. Between 1967 
and 2003, the country experienced six major droughts and 18 inc idences of flooding, which heavily impacted 
smallholder farmers. The 2011-12 droughts had severe effects on  food security in many districts, with ~2 million people 
affected, particularly in  the southern districts. 
 
12. Malawi has just recovered fr om an intensive flood event in 2015, which left many lives and livelihoods destroyed. 
The country received rainfall am ounts that were the highest on record for the country and which have been associated 
with changes in climatic systems. These rains caused flooding –  predominantly in the Southern Region, exacerbating 
an already precarious situation for rural households in this re gion. This led to the declaration of a state of disaster in 
the 15 districts, some of the poorest in the country. It is est imated that the floods affected 1,101,364 people, displaced 
336,000 and killed 104 people6. Evidence suggests that the likelihood of past drought and int ense rainfall events has 
increased due to climate change7 which, combined with projected increases in temperature, will result in more frequent 
and intense droughts, floods and s evere weather – including the  potential for strong winds and waves over Lake 
Malawi. Climate change impacts in the form of increased tempera tures and reduced rainfall ar e also likely to result in 
considerable loss of agricultural output and a reduction in the  extent of land suitable for rain-fed agriculture production 
of the staple maize crop. Amidst the backdrop of these climate vulnerabilities (further exami ned in the baseline section 
below), there is a strong polit ical context to strengthen adapt ive capacity and disaster risk management action.  
 
13. The GoM recognizes that no meaningful reduction in poverty can be achieved in the country without addressing 
the deleterious impacts of disast ers and climate change. Thus, it is indicated in Theme 3 of the Malawi Growth and 
Development Strategy (MGDS II) for the period 2012-2016 (GoM, 2 011) that, in responding to these challenges, the 
government will implement a number of strategies, including: i)  strengthening disaster risk management coordination 
mechanisms; ii) developing an in tegrated national early warning  system; and iii) implementing mitigation measures in 
disaster prone areas. This str ategy will be supported by focusi ng on activities ensuring effective early warning systems 
(supporting agriculture-based statistics and forecasting) and i mproving weather and climate monitoring, production 
systems and information and knowledge systems.  
 14. Other relevant national strategies and policies provide str ategic direction for early warning systems, climate 
information, and preparedness for climate related disasters. Th ese include the Disaster Preparedness and Relief 
(DPR) Act of 1991, a draft National Disaster Risk Management (N DRM) Policy, and the National Climate Change 
Policy. The National Strategy for Sustainable Development (NSSD ) complies with United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNF CCC) objectives: i) to provide  effective weather and climate disaster early 
warning and enhance awareness, uptake and response by the gener al public; and ii) to provide reliable weather and 
climate information and advisories for use in agricultural prod uction, industrial production and water resource 
management. Further, Malawi’s NAPA (2006) highlights the need f or strengthened EWS to support improved 
																																																													
4 US Census Bureau (2011) , International Database. 
5 World Bank (2012). Country Assistance Strategy for the Republi c of Malawi for the period of FY13-FY16. Report No: 74159-MW  
6 GFDRR, UN, EU (2015) Malawi 2015 Floods Post-disaster needs as sessment report. June 2015. 	
7 Omar Bellprat, Fraser C. Lott, Carla Gulizia, Hannah R. Parker , Luana A. Pampuch, Izidine Pinto, Andrew Ciavarella and Peter A. Stott, 
Unusual past dry and wet rainy seasons over southern Africa and  south America from a climate perspective, Weather and Climate Extremes, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2015.07.001


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 65 
	 C
agricultural production under e rratic rains and changing climat ic conditions, and to improve Malawi’s preparedness to 
cope with droughts and floods, inc luding strengthening drought and flood forecasting and early warning systems 
through human and technical capacity building.  Malawi has init iated the process to formulate a National Adaptation 
Plan (NAP), and the improved hydr omet services will provide a s trong basis for vulnerability and risk assessment and 
implementation of adaptation actions that require detailed weat her data. 
 15. The National Climate Change Investment Plan (NCCIP) (2013-2 018) identifies investment gaps in focal areas of 
capacity development including gaps in hydrological and climate  monitoring systems and expertise in modelling and 
weather forecasting. Enhancing disaster risk management is one of the key priority investment areas for adaptation 
under the NCCIP. The primary objec tive for this investment plan  is the reduction of loss of life and property due to 
climate change related disast ers. The plan envisages the enhanc ement of weather and climate monitoring; prediction 
and information and knowledge management systems; expansion of weather observational networks; strengthening 
the production of weather and climate seasonal forecasts; devel oping capacities for CI collection and use; and 
promotion of telecommunication sy stems that can target communit ies. 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Baseline Scenario  
 
16. Malawi is particularly vulnerable to climate change and var iability. Observed changes in climate include a shift in 
the rainfall season, with later  onset and cessation, as well as  increases in the length of the dry season and reductions 
in the length of the growing season.8,9 Temperature increased by 0.9°C between 1960 and 2006, at an av erage rate 
of 0.21°C per decade, with the highest increases during Decembe r-February (mid-summer) and lowest during 
September-November (early summer)10. The number of hot days per year increased by 30.5 days betwee n 1960-
2003, particularly in summer, whilst the average number of hot nights increased by an additi onal 41 days per year over 
the same period11. The projected climate change scenario in Malawi shows an incr ease in mean temperature of 
between 2 and 3ºC by 2050, a decrease in total annual rainfall and water availability and an increase in erratic rainfall 
events. These changes are projected to lead to an increasing fr equency and intensity of droughts, floods and severe 
weather over the coming decades.  Over the last four decades, Ma lawi has experienced several climatic variations that 
have resulted in the occurrence of extreme weather events, rang ing from droughts (7 recorded) to floods (18 recorded) 
and flash floods (4 recorded).12  An Economic Vulnerability and Disaster Risk Assessment13 demonstrates that whilst 
drought poses a more extensive threat than floods in terms of g eographical range and economic effects, floods are 
more common and cause severe economic hardship. Floods occur in  the south, particularly in the Lower Shire River 
valley and the lakeshore areas of Lake Malawi, Lake Malombe and  Lake Chilwa, as well as in the lower reaches of 
the Songwe river in the norther n region, and the Bua and Linthi pe rivers in the central region. 
 
17. Expected increases in the fr equency and severity of extreme  events such as floods and storms will increase the 
hazards faced by both farmers and fishermen. This is true espec ially on Lake Malawi where fishermen are already 
forced to search for fish further offshore and hence regularly encounter more severe weather, while taking longer to 
reach the safety of the shore. With a largely agrarian economy,  impacts of extreme events will affect agriculture sector 
productivity.  These events, pai red with climate variability an d increases in water stress, will negatively affect crop 
growth14,15 and many aspects of the agricultural value chain including dry ing, storage and transport to market. 
																																																													
8 COSMO NGONGONDO, LENA M. TALLAKSEN & CHONG-YU XU (2014) Growin g season length and rainfall extremes analysis in 
Malawi. Hydrology in a Changing World: Environmental and Human Dimensions Proceedi ngs of FRIEND-Water 2014, Montpellier, Franc e, 
October 2014 (IAHS Publ. 363, 2014). Available online at: http://folk.uio.no/chongyux/papers_SCI/IAHS_363_Cosmo.pdf   
9 Tadross M., Suarez P., Lotsch A., Hachigonta S., Mdoka M., Ung anai L., Lucio F., Kamdonyo D., M uchinda M. (2009) Growing-seas on 
rainfall and scenarios of future change in southeast Africa: im plications for cultivating maiz e. Climate Research. Vol. 40. 14 7-161. DOI: 
10.3354/cr00821 
10 Vincent, K., Dougill, A. J., Mkwambisi, D. D., Cull, T., Strin ger, L. C. & Chanika, D. (2013) Deliverable 1: Analysis of Exis ting Weather 
and Climate Information for Malawi. Leeds: University of Leeds.  
11 McSweeney, C., M. New and G. Lizcano (2012). UNDP Climate Chan ge Country Profiles. New York: UNDP 
12 EM-DAT (July, 2015) : The OFDA/CRED - International Disaster D atabase http://www.emdat.be   Université catholique de Louvain 
Brussels - Belgium 
13 IFPRI/RMSI (2010) Malawi: Econo mic Vulnerability and Disaster Risk Assessment. Economy-Wide Impacts of Droughts and Floods. 
14 Lobell, D.B., M.Bänziger, C.Mag orokosho, and B.Vivek 2011. "No nlinear heat effects on African maize as evidenced by historica l yield 
trials." Nature Climate Change 1(1):42-5 
15 Zinyengere, N., O. Crespo, S. Hachigonta, 2013. Crop response to climate change in Southern Afri ca: A comprehensive review. G lobal 
and Planetary Change


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 65 
	 C
Monitoring of the predicted increases in temperature and rainfa ll variability is therefore nec essary to allow Malawi to 
effectively adapt to the impacts of climate change. In particul ar, daily and seasonal weather information to subsistence 
farmers and fishermen has proven to be of crucial importance fo r agricultural productivity and food security. Similarly, 
information on impending floods, t aking into account current en vironmental and social condi tions as well as expected 
and current rainfall across river catchments, enables preparedn ess activities, which are critical to reducing the 
vulnerability of disaster-prone communities and livelihoods.  
18.  A key objective for the GoM is to take meaningful steps to  save lives at risk from climate-related disasters and 
enhance resilience of vulnerable populations, many of whom are women and reliant on agricultural-based livelihoods, 
through scaling up the use of modernized early warning systems and climate information and through enhanced 
disaster risk management at national, sub-national, and local l evels. To achieve this objective, GoM aims to mobilize 
funding for the incremental costs of adaptation investments rel ated to: 
a) Intensifying coverage of the hydromet observational systems and capacities to generate timely, reliable, and 
geographically relevant early war ning and weather forecasting i nformation to respond to and manage climate 
impacts; this enhanced data coverage will assist in climate vul nerability and risk assessment as part of the process 
to formulate and implement NAPs. 
b) Enhancing capacities to package, diffuse, and use climate an d weather information for disaster response and 
adaptive planning and implementati on of risk transfer mechanism s among public and private sector actors as well 
as communities. 
c) Mainstreaming and implementing climate risk management acros s national, sub-national, and local levels to 
ensure preparedness and urgent r esponse to climate-related disa sters. 
 
19. The proposed project will build  on existing initiatives (at  both national, regional and international levels), including 
regional African initiatives either through the Southern Africa n Development Community (SADC) or the Climate for 
development (ClimDev) programme, which is a joint initiative of  the African Union Commission(AUC), the United 
Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) and the African Development Bank (AfDB). The project will, 
additionally, complement the following ongoing efforts to addre ss the above investment needs towards GoM’s 
objective: (see Annex II, Feasibilit y Assessment, Section 4 for  further details) 
 “Strengthening climate information and early warning systems in Eastern and Southern Africa for climate 
resilient development and adaptation to climate change – Malawi ” (UNDP, 2013-2017, $3.6million) 
(hereafter UNDP EWS project) funded through Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) focuses on  7 disaster-
prone districts and aims to estab lish a functional network of m eteorological and hydrological monitoring stations; 
develop weather and climate info rmation including early warning s and alerts, hazard and vulnerability maps to 
meet the needs of public and privat e sector actors; and integra te weather and climate information into national 
and sectoral plans.  
 Programme Support to Disaster Risk Management (UNDP, PS DRM, 20 12-2016, $ 1.35 million)  focuses on 
undertaking capacity development a t a national, district and co mmunity level to reduce disaster risks and shocks 
to vulnerable communities, c ontributing to (c) above. 
 The Integrated Flood Risk Management Plan (IFRMP) (World Bank, 2012 -2018, $3.9 million)  for the Shire 
Basin is a component of the $100 million World Bank Shire River  Basin Management Programme (SRBMP) that 
supports priorities (a) and (b) above. 
 The Enhancing Community Resilience Project (ECRP, 2011-2016, US$1.3
6 million) is funded largely by the 
British Department for Internat ional Development (DFID). The pr oject focuses on developing flood and drought 
early warning systems with a f ocus on mitigation and risk reduc tion initiatives in 11 vulnerable districts contributing 
to government priorit ies (b) and (c) above. 
 The Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS) - The Climate Services Adaptation Programme in Africa 
implemented by World Meteorol ogical Organization (WMO) and 	Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security 
(CCAFS) under the Global Framework  for Climate Services (GFCS) is helping develop user-driven climate 
services for food security, health, as well as disaster risk re duction, and contribute to (b) above. There is no 
evaluation available of the ongoi ng project; however, a CCAFS s tudy16 has assessed these services and delivery.
  
																																																													
16 CCAFS (2015) Which climate serv ices do farmers and pastoralists  need in Malawi? Working Paper No. 112. CGIAR Research Program 
on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS)


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 65 
	 C
Key Barriers addressed by the project 
 
20.  The development and dissemi nation of climate and early war ning information and the capacity to use this 
information for local planning, as well as to take urgent respo nsive action, is constrained by a number of barriers, as 
further detailed in Annex II, F easibility Assessment Section 3.  
 
21.  Limited financial, technical and human capacity available for hydro-meteorological services, which has 
resulted in reduced capacity of DCCMS, DoDMA and DWR to fulfill  their core mandates: One of the main reasons 
for the current state of the climate information and early warn ing system in Malawi is a la ck of public sector support.  
With limited funding provided to DCCMS, DWR and DoDMA, as well as other engaged ministries, departments and 
district councils, there has been i) a steady decline in the st ate of the hydro-meteorological observation networks in 
Malawi over the last 20-30 years and ii) a limited ability of t hese entities to issue early warning systems and climate 
information as per their mandate. There are human and financial  capacity and resource limitations constraining 
expansion of observational network coverage and forecasting as well as appropriate communication and packaging 
of warnings for local communities. Problems include the spatial  and temporal scale of climate information, often not 
appropriate for decision-making,  poor accessibility of informat ion, untimely weather/climate warnings, and lack of 
explanation of links between locally held and scientific inform ation.17  These problems are compounded by the low 
density of hydromet stations and data available to support vuln erability and risk analyses and implementation of risk 
transfer solutions such as weather index insurance.  
 
22. Limited availability of tailored, sector-specific climate infor mation and early warning products relevant for 
public and private sector actors: Systematic development of sector-specific information and packa ging and 
dissemination of weather/climate information is still nascent i n Malawi, particularly for use in the agriculture and 
fisheries sectors and for responding to floods and managing wat er resources. The use of c urrent weather and seasonal 
climate information by farmers and those undertaking crop and l ivestock management activitie s is currently minimal 
for a variety of reasons, including: the timing when informatio n/advisories are received; the content of the 
information/advisories (average rainfall change for a seasonal forecast; as opposed to information on onset, cessation 
and seasonal duration); whether t he information is applicable f or the local environment; and the ability to interpret 
information (translation to local languages, scientific concept s and tying in with local knowledge)17. Forecasts received 
by fishers are not specific to their lakeshore areas and do not  include variables of interest such as wind and wave 
forecasts, nor warnings of severe weather. Whilst there has bee n progress on flood forecasting using the Flash Flood 
Guidance System, forecasts are still for general areas, with no  indications of which areas are predominantly at risk, 
and neither flood nor water reso urce models are utilised. 
 
23. Lack of access to and awareness of use of early warning and cli mate information by vulnerable 
populations for urgent responsive action and adaptation plannin g: Access to weather/climate information is 
limited for vulnerable communities as “last mile” dissemination  channels are inadequate.  At present a range of 
dissemination methods is used, including radio (national and lo cal), email, television, print media, internet websites, 
telephone, regional and national workshops and cell phones. The re is limited understanding of the effectiveness of 
these methods and uptake of this information by vulnerable comm unities, in particular women.  This is partly because 
information, particularly scientific information and concepts, is not understandable or communicated effectively, nor is 
it clear how to integrate it with local knowledge and socio-cul tural and gender-differentiated contexts. Technical and 
resource constraints limit the capacity of extension services t o provide guidance and suppor t adoption of information 
and products by smallholder farmer s and fishers. While the reac h of mobile networks is extensive, use of ICT/mobile 
platforms for EWs and climate information is nascent and faces challenges of technology adoption and cost-
effectiveness without scale. T here is also limited knowledge ge neration, sharing, and collective learning to promote 
awareness and understanding by c ommunities of the importance of  weather and climate information and effective use 
of early warnings.  
 
24. Limited demand and markets for generation and use of climate in formation at scale across public and 
private sector actors: Currently, the development and di stribution of climate and earl y warning information products 
is primarily done by the public sector – driven by DCCMS and re levant line ministries. This has led to a number of 
																																																													
17 Vincent K., Chanika D., Dougill A.J., Mkwambisi D.D., Cull T.,  Dixon J., Stringer L.C. (2015) Using climate information to ac hieve long-
term development objectives in  Malawi. FCFA policy brief.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 65 
	 C
challenges, including limited dat a generated, limited packaging  of that data into useful products, and limited ability to 
disseminate existing products to  the private sector.  There are  limited incentives as well as financing, policy, regulatory 
and capacity barriers for development and diffusion of climate information/services in Mala wi. Sectors important for 
development, including agriculture, fisheries, energy, transpor tation, telecommunications, mining, tourism and 
financial services, need weather information and often lack the  access to, or pay higher costs for, this information than 
could be achieved in collaboration with the hydromet services. Public Private Partner ships (PPPs) can enhance 
collaboration between DCCMS/DWR a nd private companies in the co llection and analysis of weather data, as well as 
the communication of the resulting information products and ser vices to the public and business users with specialized 
data needs.  The lack o f demand-based, value- added products als o restricts privat e sector engagement.  
 25. Limited accessibility to early warnings and low capacity at com munity level to prepare for and respond to 
climate-related disasters: Communities need to have the appropriate decision-relevant info rmation, as well as 
gender-sensitive tools, resources  and capacity to act upon rece iving warnings and advisories. However, decentralized 
and participatory early warning systems and the capacity to man age them are limited in Malawi.  For example, the 
2015 flood emergency response highlighted the need for improvin g the management and effectiveness of district 
emergency centres. This has led to a limited availability and e ffective communication of early warnings to communities. 
According to the 2015 Post-Disaster Needs Assessment, ”Decentra lisation is key to enhanced preparedness and 
response and needs to be accompanied by adequate financial and human resources.”  Currently, except where NGOs 
are present in the area, most Ci vil Protection Committees have limited capacity and do not have trained personnel 
within the villages who can provide support for relocation and rescue activities. Risk assessments and early warning 
systems are not upgraded and updated to meet the challenges pos ed by disasters (e.g. the use of automated alerts 
transmitted from strategically pla ced sensors directly to commu nities).  
 26. This proposed project aims  to address the above barriers an d improve on the baseline scenario. First, it will enable 
the use of weather and climate information by the vulnerable co mmunities by expanding coverage of the physical 
climate and weather observation network. Second, it will help t o enhance the capacity of the hydromet staff to generate 
accurate and timely climate and early warning information. Thir d, the proposed project w ill support development and 
dissemination of tailored information relevant for various sect or stakeholders. It will cata lyze ‘last mile’ access for 
weather and climate information by vulnerable communities throu gh use of ICT/mobile platforms and community 
outreach channels. Fourth, it will invest in communication, out reach, and knowledge sharing to enable increased 
awareness and uptake and sustained used of diffused information . Fifth, the project will engage Micro and Small 
Enterprises (MSEs) in climate-se nsitive sectors and service pro viders such as telecom companies to stimulate demand 
for specialized information. It will facilitate policy and regu latory support for PPPs and enh ance market scope for use 
of climate information. Finally , the proposed project will esta blish people-centered, community-based early warning 
systems to build the capacity o f district and community level a ctors on disaster and climate risk management. The 
project will use a participatory approach including through sen sitization, co-development of information and products, 
use and evaluation of the products and invest in capacities of institutions and end-users to assure uptake and use of 
the products by authorities and communities.
 
 
27. The main goal of this project is to contribute to climate-r esilient sustainable developm ent of Malawi. The project 
expects to increase the resilience and enhance the livelihoods of the most vulnerable people and communities in the 
country. The project aims to strengthen the adaptive capacity a nd reduce exposure to c limate risks of vulnerable 
populations drawing on enhanced generation and use of early war nings and climate information. The project targets 
rural populations, more than half of whom are women, mainly rel iant on agricultural livelihoods and vulnerable to 
climate disasters and variability. The project expects to resul t in enhanced capacity of hyd romet networks and staff to 
generate climate-related data and forecast extreme weather and climate change; development  and dissemination of 
tailored climate information/products and decision-support plat forms for agriculture, fisheries, and flood risk 
management; and strengthened capacities of communities for use of EWS/CI in preparedness for and response to 
climate related disasters.  
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
28. The proposed project supports GoM to take meaningful steps to save lives at risk from climate-related disasters 
and enhance resilience of vulnerable populations reliant on agr icultural-based livelihoods, many of whom are women. 
The key component of the project is Scaling up the use of modernized early warning systems and clim ate


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 65 
	 C
information to enhance lives and livelihoods in vulnerable comm unities . The component comprises three inter-
linked “sub-components” (which refer to outputs as per the GCF logic framework) that will (i) Address gaps in the 
DCCMS and DWR’s existing meteorological and hydrological observ ation network to ensure spatial coverage and 
accuracy covering vulnerable and service delivery areas. (Outpu t 1); (ii) Develop and disseminate tailored, demand-
based climate information/products/services to support urgent r esponsive action and adaptation planning for 
vulnerable populations including farming and fishing communitie s. Capacities will be strengthened for the service 
providers as well as end-users to package and assimilate these products to ensure sustained diffusion of EWS/CI. 
(Output 2); and (iii) Empower the communities to prepare and re spond to climate related disasters through participatory 
and decentralized early warning systems and capacities to imple ment disaster risk reduction measures (Output 3). 
  
Output 1: Expansion of networks that generate climate-related d ata to save lives and safeguard livelihoods 
from extreme climate events  
29. The project Feasibility Assess ment (attached as Annex II) d etails the status of infrastr ucture and current activities 
to support the use of climate-related information and early war ning systems, as well as the gaps and needs which 
need to be addressed to enhance the delivery of services and pr oducts.  The capacity and skills required to effectively 
interpret and analyse measured data to identify climate-related  risks and forecast their impacts is also inadequate to 
provide a sustainable platform for service delivery (as envisio ned in Output 2), which is partly linked to the lack of 
adequate equipment, tools, and human resources/capacity which w ill be addressed through Output 1. This Output 
includes two key activities: 
 Activity 1.1: Expanding coverage  of Meteorological and hydrolo gical infrastructure through installation of AWS, 
hydrological monitoring stations , lightning detection systems, and lake-based buoys. 
 Activity 1.2: Capacity-building of hydromet staff on operation s & maintenance, data analysis, modeling, and 
forecasting. 
 Activity 1.1: Expanding coverage of Meteorological and hydrolog ical infrastructure through installation of 
AWS, hydrological monitoring st ations and sensors, lightning de tection systems, and lake-based buoys 
 30. This project will support the expansion and scale-up of cur rent Meteorological and hydrological infrastructural 
investments in targeted district s of Malawi, through the additi on of automatic weather stations (for both 
agrometeorological and rainfall intensity monitoring) and hydro logical monitoring stations (for flood forecasting and 
water resource monitoring), li ghtning detection sensors (to mon itor severe weather) and w eather/wave buoys on lake 
Malawi (to improve severe weather warnings for fishers). These investments build on on-going infrastructure efforts, 
including that through the UNDP EWS project, and are detailed i n Annex II, Feasibility Assessment, Section 5. In 
particular, the following infrastr ucture will be established an d/or enhanced: 
 Hydrological water level stations (37) with telemetry will be procured and installed to improve flood risk monitoring, 
forecasting and monitoring water resources in areas to which th e Operational Decision Support System (ODSS) 
for flood forecasting and water resource monitoring in the Shir e river basin will be extended (See Output 2). These 
will cover rivers and water resource authorities (catchments) m ostly in the central and northern areas, in addition 
to sensors installed through UNDP EWS project. Automatic Weathe r Stations (AWS) (34) will be installed in key 
districts to service both hydrological modelling (i.e. providin g information on catchment rainfall for the ODSS) and 
the need for localised weather dat a for developing the agricult ural advisories (see output 2), and will 
report/disseminate via DCCMS and DWR. (see Annex II, Feasibilit y Assessment, Section 2.3) 
 Lightning detection sensors (2 ) will be procured and installed  as a proxy for more expensive and difficult to maintain 
weather radars. They provide information on severe thunderstorm s and rainfall for flood forecasting, as well as 
warnings of lightning strikes and severe weather. This will ext end an existing system being installed through UNDP 
EWS project (installation of 5 sensors), and provide valuable d ata for developing products that can be combined 
with existing satellite-based now casting systems. This will ena ble more accurate and timely warnings for fishers 
over lake Malawi as well as helping forecasters at DCCMS to ide ntify where high intensity rainfall may fall, thus 
improving their ability to utilise the existing WMO Flash Flood  Guidance System (FFGS) and provide more accurate 
rainfall predictions for use in the ODSS.  
 A set of two lake-based weather a nd wave buoys will be install ed on Lake Malawi, to mea sure weather  and wave 
conditions and provide data and information that is not current ly available. This will enable DCCMS to better predict 
inclement weather, which poses a danger to fishers, as well as improving improve their forecasts of the Lake 
Malawi region, including the ability to predict Mwera winds. It  will also provide weather/wave information, which


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 65 
	 C
will be used as the basis for d eveloping warnings and services for fishers in Output 2. Initially it is proposed to 
install 2 of these buoys (one in the centre and one in the sout h of lake Malawi), with a view to installing more once 
it is demonstrated that the syst ems and arrangements for operat ions and maintenance (jointly undertaken with the 
Malawi Defence Force) work well. 
 
31. Procurement of infrastructure will be through international  bidding, though open for local companies. Maintenance 
and service contracts (for 3 y ears) are usually bundled in the procurement notices, beyond which O&M is provided by 
the hydromet agencies through their budget allocations. Data fr om all observing stations is cu rrently archived in central 
databases held at DCCMS (current ly installing Climsoft) and DWR  (Hydrostat) – see Annex II, Feasibility Assessment., 
Section 2.3.3. Through UNDP EWS project, a Linux cluster system  has been established at DCCMS, which will hold 
the central Climsoft database. How ever, the establishment of DC ICs (see Activity 2.5) allows for a decentralised 
process (Climsoft databases established at climate centres and local observers trained to analyse climate data) that 
will be promoted through this pro ject. The target districts for  the placement of observing equipment were established 
through consultations with the GoM, based on requirements to de liver Output 2 services. These infrastructure and the 
districts in which they will be placed, as well as their geogra phical coverage (footprint), are detailed in Annex II, 
Feasibility Assessment and summarized in Annex IX, Figure 1 and  2. Upon project initiation the exact locations for 
AWS (and target farming communities) within each district will be determined through an analysis of existing risk 
assessments (on weather/shock pr evalence, household insecurity,  nutrition, farming syst e m s ,  e t c ) ,  a s  w e l l  a s  
consultations with local communities and agricultural extension  services. 
 
Activity 1.2: Capacity-building of hydro-met staff on O&M, data  modeling, and forecasting 
 32. Forecasting facilities with in DCCMS will be improved throug h training and implementing new techniques to 
improve forecasts at the local level. This will include the cap acity to use Numerical Weather Prediction tools (enhancing 
support through UNDP EWS project) and Model Output Statistics a pplied to internationally available forecast products 
at DCCMS and the development of satellite-based products, as we ll as the inclusion of these products into the 
forecasting decision process (s ee Annex II, Feasibility Assessm ent, Section 3.4). This will improve local forecasts by 
providing objective downscaled and bias corrected data for dist ribution and use in the tailored products developed 
through Output 2. These short- term forecasts will allow quantit ative assessments of rainfall for planting/farm 
management decisions, as well as flood risk and warnings to dis aster management. Seasonal forecasts will be 
improved by utilising dynamical se asonal forecasts , as well as the Climate Prediction Tool (CPT), to develop 
predictions of user-impact variables (e.g. rainfall onset, cess ation), where prediction skill allows. These products will 
also feed into integrated data and information management syste ms being developed for disaster management 
through the UNDP EWS project, a s well as for developing tailore d products for dissemination to agricultural and flood 
prone communities . Hydromet staff c apacities will also be developed for development and communicat ion of 
information and knowledge products envisioned under Output 2. A long-term benefit will be the production of data and 
systems for climate hazar d, risk and scenario modeling.  
 
33. Currently, DCCMS and DWR dev elop and submit training plans annually based on the needs for specific trainings. 
They also conduct refresher courses in use and maintenance of t he equipment and generation of information. This 
activity will align with and build on the training plans of the  agencies. Capacity building activities are summarized below 
(additional details are in Annex XIII, Activity 1.2): 
 Training for staff at DCCMS for data rescue of non-digitized d ata for tailored product development, production of 
de-biased satellite products to imp rove accuracy of satellite b ased estimates of rainfall and severe weather alerts 
(in combination with lightning data), developing a MOS correcti on for weather and seasonal forecasts, improved 
seasonal forecasting techniques (e.g. predicting onset, cessati on and user-impact variables), development of 
climate change scenarios (contributing to the NAP process), as well as the use, operation and maintenance of the 
lightning detection system. 
 Training for staff from DCCMS, DWR and the Malawi Defence Forc e on O&M of the lake-based weather and wave 
buoys and to assimilate/combine these data with forecasts to im prove the accuracy of forecasts from Numerical 
Weather Prediction models or int ernational forecasts, as a basi s for developing tailored products for fishers. 
 Training for technicians at DCCMS and DWR to operate & maintai n the installed AWS and hydrological water level 
stations and associated telemetry systems and calibration of se nsors. Training of trainers for both district observers 
and community-based EWS equipment (including establishing commu nity based responsible technicians) to 
provide basic maint enance and safety care of the AWS/hydro met stations.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 65 
	 C
 Training of staff at DWR in t he use of flood forecast and wate r resource models and production of water products 
(yearbooks etc) for all catchments.  
 Training for DCCMS and DWR staff in the development and commun ication of tailored products (Output 2) for 
agriculture and fisheries. 
 
Output 2: Development and dissemination of products and platfor ms for climate-related information/services 
for vulnerable communities and livelihoods  
34. This output builds on and complements the efforts of the LD CF financed UNDP EWS project including (a) 
generation of weather and climate information and alerts (warni ngs, integrated cost-benefit analyses and hazard and 
vulnerability maps) for public and private sector use, b) mainstreaming of weather and CI into operationalization of 
national sectoral policies, annual budgets, and development pla ns, c) strengthening of communication channels and 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) through alert disseminatio n systems and establishment of a national and sub-
national coordination strategy, (c) and development of a busine ss model for revenue streams for the met services. 
Besides these efforts, there is a significant need to improve d issemination, learning, and knowledge sharing to ensure 
‘last-mile’ access to, awareness,  and adoption of weather/climate information by vulnerable comm unities. This Output 
will therefore support knowledge sharing and collective learnin g to improve understanding of weather/climate forecasts 
and data (including inherent uncertainties), their limitations and how they may be interpreted in light of local knowledge 
and experience. Risk and vulnerability assessments (such as con ducted by the World Food Programme) will be used 
to clearly identify target users of this information.  The tail ored products will be co-developed with co mmunities through 
participatory initiatives and establishment of climate field sc hools where feasible. This output supports the packaging 
and adoption of tailored information, stimulating a demand-base d model for CI and services to catalyse public and 
private sector stakeholders, and strengthening knowledge transf er and management through national, sub-national, 
and local linkages. The key acti vities under this output are: 
 Activity 2.1: Develop tailored weather/climate based agricultu ral advisories for 14 food insecure districts and 
disseminate through ICT/mob ile, print, and radio channels 
 Activity 2.2: Develop and disseminate tailored warnings and ad visories for fishing communities of Mangochi, 
Salima, Nkhata Bay and Nkhotakhota around Lake Malawi 
 Activity 2.3: Develop and depl oy the flood and water resource modelling and decision support system to enhance 
coverage for disaster risk and water resource management 
 Activity 2.4: Enable a demand-based model for climate informat ion and services stimulating private sector 
engagement 
 Activity 2.5: Knowledge sharin g and management for development , dissemination and use of EW and CI to 
enhance resilience  
 
Activity 2.1: Develop tailored weather/climate based agricultur al advisories for 14 food insecure districts and 
disseminate through ICT/mobile, print, and radio channels 
 35. The project will build on the pilot intervention being unde rtaken by the Norwegian-funded GFCS project in Balaka 
and Nsanje (see Annex II, Feasibilit y Assessment section 4.11).  Discussions with DCCM S (the government lead in 
the GFCS project) and DoDMA highlighted 14 priority districts ( See Annex IX, Figure 3), which are known to be food 
insecure (see Annex II, Feasibility Assessment, Section 1). Cur rently, NASFAM (See Annex XIII on details of 
membership and district coverag e) and DAES contribute to the de velopment of content (which is regulated by the 
national agricultural content development committee for ICT ext ension) for the 3-2-1 service
18 which allows anyone to 
access crop advisories through mobile phones. This service will  be enhanced to include weather and climate 
information (seasonal forecast information, weather conditions) . NASFAM has also established a two way mobile 
communications system (using Frontline SMS open source software ) in Mchinji and South Mzimba19 to disseminate 
information and get quick feedbac k on service delivery. This en ables quick and timely outreach even to remote areas. 
A similar system has been devel oped by ESOKO and is used by DAE S for interaction with farmers. Agreements with 
																																																													
18 Human Network International and  Catholic Relief Services subsi dize the costs to the end-user. An estimated 500,000 farmers na tionally 
use this service. 
19 Currently, there are1930 NASFAM members in the FrontlineSMS da tabase (392 are from Lilongwe South, the rest are from Mzimba a nd 
Mchinji).


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 65 
	 C
telecom operators exist for 3- 2-1 and Esoko services but these services do not include weather/climate EWs (see 
Annex II, Feasibility Assessmen t, sections 2.3.4 & 4.8). 
 36. The proposed project will st rengthen NASFAM’s and DAES’ cap acity to incorporate climate and weather related 
information into available communication materials and enable e xpansion of ICT/mobile platforms. The project will 
strengthen the engagement of the telecom sector in this service  through increased reach and demand for the value-
added products (Refer to Activity 2.4). This activity will bene fit directly the farmer households that are targeted around 
10Km of each AWS installation and the 16000 lead farmers under NASFAM, as well as indirectly benefit the other 
households in the districts through knowledge sharing as well a s the 150,000 remaining members of NASFAM 
nationally that are provided the information through the lead f armers. An estimated 500,000 farmers avail of 3-21 
nationwide and at least half of  them can indirectly benefit fro m the project (as this is not specifically targeted through 
DAES/NASFAM outreach) . Specifically, this activity will include : 
 Community-based and gender-sensitive participatory initiatives  and sensitisation, including facilitating dialogues 
with farmers, communities, schools, women, and church groups.  
 Capacity building at the distri ct and community levels to prov ide intermediary support (Extension workers and 
NASFAM lead farmers) for the interpretation and adoption of new  products and information, including co-
production of materials and information products.  
 Mapping out agricultural areas, farming systems and crop types  in target districts and communities, using existing 
surveys, databases and remote sensing data 
 Design and deliver tailored weather/climate and agricultural a dvisories for assimilation into the 3-2-1, ESOKO, and 
Frontline SMS services (as well as for range of media including  radio, TV and print) given available data and co-
exploration initiatives with communities.  
 
Activity 2.2: Develop and disseminate tailored warnings and adv isories for fishing communities of Mangochi, 
Salima, Nkhata Bay and Nkhotakhota around Lake Malawi 
 
37. Department of Fisheries (DoF) emphasized that the informati on on extreme weather conditions in and around 
Lake Malawi is currently inadequate and not suitable for planni ng fishing activities, especially for the majority of 
fishermen who operate from dugout canoes (and are responsible f or 90% of the fish caught). Data on casualties show 
the impact of extreme weather on lives and property (See Annex XIII, Activity 2.2). Currently  fishers receive the general 
forecast issued by DCCMS, which is a daily forecast of expected  general weather (rainfall and temperature) for wide 
regions (See Annex II, Feasibility Assessment, Appendix B). The  proposed equipment in Output 1 (weather/wave 
buoys and lightning (thunderstorm) detection equipment) will pr ovide enhanced data indicating wave and thunderstorm 
activity and when extreme conditions are likely to prevail. How ever, this data needs to be translated into tailored 
products that will allow fishers to clearly understand and asse ss the risks, as well as the timing.  This activity will 
support the DoF, in collaboration with the Community Outreach U nit (CoU) and Beach Village Committees (BVCs), in 
engaging fishing communities in t he targeted districts (See Ann ex IX, Figure 3) to reduce t heir vulnerability to climate 
change induced weather patterns.  Besides the 30,000 fishers dir ectly targeted, the information will indirectly benefit 
approximately 30,000 more people reliant on fishing activities (e.g. the fish traders and processors, many of whom are 
women). It includes: 
 Setting up a system to generate and disseminate early warning messages (for safety at sea) and weather 
advisories targeted to fishers, fish processors, and fish trade rs in the vulnerable communities of Mangochi, Salima, 
Nkhata Bay and Nkhotakhota districts
20. 
 Capacity building for relevant DoF staff and the Community Out reach Unit located in Mangochi (part of the 
Fisheries Extension Unit) to package and disseminate the inform ation to the targeted communities working in 
collaboration with the community  members of the Beach Village C ommittees (BVCs) and traditional leaders.  
 Promoting dissemination and adoption through community awarene ss campaigns, including COU mobile units to 
disseminate messages and trainings, outreach to BVCs, developme nt of communication materials, and enhancing 
use of community radios. 
 Raise awareness of end users in the use of information for res ponsive action and planning. 
 
																																																													
20 According to DoF, the fishing communities in Mangochi, Salima and Nkhotakota districts are highl y vulnerable to variations in  weather. 
The districts comprise both sm all- and large-scale operators (l atter mostly in Mangochi). The districts have large areas that are shallow 
that require fishers to reach deeper areas to access good fish stocks as the shallower areas are generally overfished. This pu ts the lives of 
the fishers at higher risk; la ck of information on weather vari ations and early warnings result s in accidents and loss of live s.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 65 
	 C
Activity 2.3:  Develop and deploy the flood a nd water resource modelling and d ecision support system to 
enhance coverage for disaster risk and water resource managemen t 
 
38. The proposed project will address a critical need for an in tegrated flood modelling system to be implemented in 
additional river systems because flooding in the high risk area s towards the lakeshore (as categorised by DoDMA – 
see Annex II, Feasibility Assessme nt, Section 1) is largely dep endent on catchment rainfall that falls in the upper 
reaches. The project will expand the ODSS developed under the I FRMP (see baseline studies) to provide 
comprehensive modelling and decision support coverage for the r iver basins and districts in the central and northern 
regions of the country. The geogra phical focus for this expansi on is summarized in Annex IX, Figure 3. 
 
39. The upper reaches of targeted river systems are found in ne ighbouring districts which themselves are categorised 
as low flood risk and have traditionally been neglected in term s of observing/monitoring equipment. The ODSS applied 
to the whole basin will allow a more holistic approach to flood  forecasting, incorporating rainfall and flows from other 
districts in these areas. This is expected to significantly imp rove the forecasting of floods, as well as the modelling and 
monitoring of water resources in these areas, thereby improving  information available for drought management, 
irrigation scheduling and related activities. Through automated  procedures (incorporating weather forecasts [with MOS 
downscaling] and automated monitoring data from the AWS and hyd rological sensors), forecasts will be made every 
6 hours or less, increasing flood warning lead times from 6 hou rs or less to 24-48 hours. The improved lead time will 
allow flood victims to organize  the removal of assets, build fl ood defenses and evacuate t he old and infirm. It will also 
enable emergency services and disaster management more time to requisition supplies and transportation when 
needed enhancing disaster preparedness and response. This activ ity will also support capa city building of the DWR 
and DCCMS to use monitoring data (from AWS, satellites and hydr ological gauges), as well as short-term weather 
forecasts, to forecast floods and water resources. The activity  will directly benefit the populations of the flood-risk 
communities but also indirectly benefit the populations of uppe r catchment districts with increased monitoring and 
forecasting of water resour ces. This will include: 
 Extending the hydro-meteorological database and knowledge base  system supporting multi- source data capture, 
temporal and spatial data processing and analysis, and visualiz ation capabilities; 
 Adapting multi-disciplinary mathematical modelling tools (incl uding calibration for new catchments), which 
accommodate a range of weather and seasonal predictions; 
 Extending the web-based platform  supporting basin wide and com munity-oriented early warnings; and 
 Supporting a sustainable operationa l framework, including inst itutional workflow process guidelines, 
comprehensive education of staff to ensur e competent operation and maintenance of all components 
 Capacity building for DWR and DCCMS staff to assimilate data f rom monitoring stations and short-term weather 
forecasts to forecast fl oods and water resources 
 
Activity 2.4: Enable a demand-based model for climate informati on and services stimulating private sector 
engagement 
 
40. This activity will enhance nascent opportunities for enabli ng a demand-based model for tailored and sector-specific 
information. These opportunities are further detailed in Annex XIII, Activity 2. 4 and include: 
 Engaging the ICT and Mobile sector:  As detailed in Activity 2.1, t he use of 3-2-1, Esoko, and Fron tlineSMS 
services to provide crop advisory and information regarding mar kets and agricultural practices presents a viable 
opportunity to enhance collaboration between telecom and NASFAM /DAES to cost-effectively disseminate the 
tailored information to reach farmers and farming enterprises a nd extend reach to other sectors and communities.
 Promoting Micro and small enterprises (MSEs): MSEs, such as small-holder farmers, agri-businesses, small-
scale fishers, commercial scale fishers, fish processors and tr aders, are a dominant part of the private sector in 
Malawi. Through demand-based and value-added products tailored for livelihoods, the project creates 
opportunities to catalyze MSE engagement. Beyond the disseminat ion of early warnings, t he advisories serve as 
business information that can lead to enhanced productivity and  income gains. 
 
41. This activity will support the development of incentives an d enabling conditions for participation of the private 
sector and market development. It will directly benefit the MSE s and telecom sector but also indirectly benefit other 
sectors through improved, speci alized products and market devel opment: 
 Address the barriers around l egal and institutional arrangemen ts around PPPs to support the participation of 
private sector actors while c ontributing to the operational and  financial viability of the national hydromet services.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 65 
	 C
o Explore viable policy and institutional arrangements for poten tial investments in O&M of infrastructure and 
dissemination of EWs and CI th rough private state actors 
o Building on hydromet business development plans (existing and revisions through UNDP EWS project) 
provide technical suppor t to formulation of PPPs 
 Promote market development for the tailored products and packa ged information viable through enhanced 
hydromet capacity 
o Review agricultural, water, and fisheries policies on data and  information provision for MSEs and private 
sector 
o Evaluate costs and benefits of a ccurate, timely and accessible  weather and climate forecasts in these and 
other sectors such as trans port, energy, and insurace 
o Undertake market feasibility (including demand and willingness -to-pay assessments) for the developed 
tailored information for these various sectors 
 
Activity 2.5: Knowledge sharing and management for development,  dissemination, and use of EWs and CI to 
enhance resilience  
42. Knowledge generation, sharing,  transfer, application, and i terative learning from experiences are critical needs for 
building resilience through EWs and/or CI. Continued awareness and learning of climate change risks, impacts, and 
potential response is needed as knowledge and understanding of climate change evolves and the needs and priorities 
of targeted communities change. Extension support staff require  capacity and training to disseminate and target the 
end users in their districts and/or communities. At the same ti me, end-users, small-scale farmers and fishermen, need 
awareness and training to understand and learn how to use the i nformation and advisories.  Existing District Climate 
Information Centres (DCICs) lo cated in Karonga, Kasungu, Salima , Zomba, Mulanje, Nsanje and Chikwawa can serve 
as knowledge management hubs to link the information and produc ts generated by Outputs 1 and 2 with the end users 
including the communities preparing to cope with climate relate d disasters (Output 3). These DCICs have been 
supported by a number of programmes, including Africa Adaptatio n programme, the Africa Climate Adaptation and 
Food Security Projec t, and the National Clim ate Change Programm e (NCCP), among others. However, there are key 
constraints to full effectivenes s of these centers due to limit ed financial and human resources. (See Annex XIII, Activity 
2.5)  
43. The proposed project will stre ngthen these 7 DCICs. Current ly DCCMS and other technical agencies do not have 
an open data policy, though the inter-agency/sectoral collabora tions with agricultural res ource centres, BVCs and 
COUs will promote the sharing of data between government agenci es. Additionally all derived products (not the original 
data) can be distributed and the use of open source databases s uch as MASDAP
21 for wider dissemination will be 
encouraged. This activity can benefit, conservatively, about 30 % of the district populations with improved knowledge 
and awareness.  As an ongoing initiative under DCCMS, costs of maintaining and upgrading are being incorporated 
in the annual budgets. In addition to  central budget s, costs ar e allocated in the hosting dist ricts as well. DCICs will be 
strengthened through: 
 Radio links: Existing partnerships with local radios will be s trengthened and new partnerships will be established 
for disseminating weather bulle tins. The DCICs will be linked t o rural radios and the DCCM S will also be linked to 
Malawi Broadcasting Station (M BC) which is the national media h ouse with wider coverage.  
 Information materials and awareness activities: Information fl ows in local language will be established via different 
instruments and channels (documents, posters, cell phone, radio , awareness campaigns, Disaster Risk Reduction 
(DRR)/Environmental School Club s, etc.) to enhance the understa nding among end users, focusing on information 
needs of women. Field surveys and community meetings will be co nducted to provide feedback from farmers and 
fishermen on the information se rvices provided by the DCICs and  other information sources. This will be 
complemented by the use of mobile technologies for two way comm unications with farmers under Activity 2.1. 
Translation services will be inc luded to provide information, d ocumentation and materials in vernacular languages.
 Equipment, transmission and deliv ery facilities. Infrastructur e for communication with DCCMS will be strengthened 
and facilities upgraded to ensure centers are fully operational  – including computers for housing databases and 
statistical analysis software to  undertake locally relevant ana lyses. 
																																																													
21 http://www.masdap.mw/


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 65 
	 C
 Capacity building for staff: Capacities will be enhanced for s taff as well as end users on how to manage, access 
and use information, including es tablishment of databases of lo cal weather/climate information (Climsoft) and 
training on statistical analysis of these data. 
 
Output 3: Strengthening communiti es capacities for use of EWS/C I in preparedness for response to climate 
related disasters  
44. A recent assessment of the effectiveness of decentralized E WS in Malawi
22 has shown that EWS must be people 
centered and include an end-to-end warning system with a comple te set of components that  connects those who need 
to hear messages to others who compile and track the hazard inf ormation of which messages are composed. DoDMA 
intends to learn from and scale-up best practices (see Annex XI II, Output 3) in community-based flood early warning 
systems in the country (CBEWS). Both communities and local auth orities will be empowered to manage and reduce 
disaster risk by having access to the necessary information, re sources and capacities to implement actions for disaster 
risk reduction. 
 
45. GCF resources will scale up the best practices and ongoing efforts by catalyzing community-based efforts and 
investments to enhance community readiness to respond to disast ers and mitigate the risk they pose. Both 
communities and local authorities will be empowered to manage a nd reduce disaster risk by having access to the 
necessary information, resource s and capacities to implement ac tions for disaster risk reduction. Community members 
will be engaged in sensitization and capacity will be built thr ough peer-learning, exchange of best practices, training 
of trainers approach, and engagement on preparedness and respon se activities through design to implementation to 
enable behavior change. This Output builds on Outputs 1 and 2 t hat aim to strengthen the foundation for the 
development of an EWS working with communities. It will also be  situated inside the comprehensive DRR efforts 
across local, regional and national systems in the country. Imp lementation will be coordinated with the UNDP PS DRR 
programme to ensure that the proposed community-based EWS and d isaster preparedness measures informs the 
development of the enabling policies, planning, and information  systems being supported under the programme. The 
key activities under this Output include: 
 Activity 3.1: Scale-up community-based EWS in flood-disaster p rone areas of Karonga, Salima, Dedza, 
Nkhotakota, Nkhata Bay, Rum phi, Phalombe and Zomba  
 Activity 3.2: Capacity developm ent of national, district and c ommunity level actors on disaster and climate risk 
management 
 
Activity 3.1: Scale-up communi ty-based EWS in flood-disaster pr one areas of Karonga, Salima, Dedza, 
Nkhotakota, Nkhata Bay, Rumphi, Phalombe and Zomba  
46. Community based approaches for establishment of the EWS rec ognize that the first response to a disaster always 
comes from the community itself and therefore empowers communit ies to develop resilience to risks and disasters. 
This activity will directly benefit about 115,000 people in the  target districts (See Annex IX, Figure 4), but can also 
indirectly benefit the neighboring communities through knowledg e sharing and learning related to disaster and climate 
risk management. The activity w ill incorporate be st practices s uch as proper linking of up-stream and down-stream 
communities (through Civil Prot ection Committees (CPCs)), using  schools to disseminate early warning messages to 
communities, and using local communication channels based on lo cal knowledge. This activity will support: 
 Awareness raising at the community level on hazards and vulner ability: The installation of the EWS needs to be 
preceded by community sensitizat ion on the prevailing hazards a nd their vulnerability. This activity will create 
awareness at community level on the intended capacities to ensu re security and effective use of the infrastructure. 
Additional information will be gathered through gender-sensitiv e surveys on local perceptions of vulnerability to 
allow a more nuanced and gender-disaggregated view of those at risk. Discussions will in volve schools, as well 
as local women and church groups to ensure a broad set of views  are incorporated. Local climate schools will 
provide training on climate va riability and change in larger co mmunities. 
 Installation of automated rainfall and hydrological monitoring  and telemetry systems in the targeted districts: 
Installation of automated telemetry systems can lead to more ac curate estimates of water levels and hence 
flooding extent, as well as providing adequate lead time for wa rnings and enabling emergency procedures to 
proceed in time. These monitoring equipment will be placed in u pstream locations which communities will identify 
																																																													
22  GoM (May 2015) Decentralized Early Warning Systems in Malawi.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 65 
	 C
as being indicative of flooding which happens downstream, as we ll as areas where the community will take 
responsibility for t heir security. Communities will be trained to provide basic maintenance and servicing of 
infrastructure (though DCCMS and DWR will be responsible for ma intaining the equipment) and consistent and 
effective monitoring. 
 Implementation of risk reduct ion and management measures:  This activity will leverage local indigenous 
knowledge to implement DRR measures such as simulation training  (e.g., using schools as an entry point), 
evacuation drills and EW testing, e mergency response training, and establishment of appropriate communication 
channels to strengthen the capacity of at-risk communities to r eceive, analyse and act-on warnings in a timely 
manner. These measures will focus on needs and vulnerabilities of women to ensure their participation and 
preparedness. 
 Implementation of the existing DRM communication strategy:  Th is activity will support the implementation of the 
national DRM communication strategy that provides key messages for preparedness and includes EWS as one of 
the key components. It will promote dissemination of EWs throug h various communication channels (text 
messages, blowing of horns/megapho nes, drums, radios and TV) fo r different audiences.  
 
Activity 3.2:  Capacity development of nationa l, district and community level actors on disaster and climate 
risk management 
47. The 2015 flood emergency response exposed gaps in capacitie s at the district and local l evels in dissemination of 
EW information and response. This was particularly noted in the  limited capacity and effectiveness in the use of the 
Cluster System23 as well as management of the dist rict emergency centers. The C luster System had just been 
introduced in the districts that were affected by the January 2 015 floods without proper orientat ion/training of the district 
councils. Similarly, Emergency O peration Centers (EOCs) were op ened in these districts without any 
orientation/training of the district council on the running and  management of the EOCs. EOCs are currently focused 
on emergency response and do not consider longer term planning e.g. there is limited capacity  at the district level to 
interpret seasonal forecasts of droughts or floods and to disse minate weather/climate-based EWs through Area Civil 
Protection Committees (ACPCs) and Village Civil Protection Comm ittees (VCPCs) 
 
48. Furthermore, the first respo nders of any emergency in the c ountry are the community members led by the ACPCs 
and VCPCs. Most of the members have not been trained in both cl imate risk management and DRM leaving them 
vulnerable and ineffective in managing and responding to disast er risks and making provisions ahead of time in light 
of weather and seasonal forecasts (as distributed by DCCMS thro ugh the DCICs). This activity will address capacity 
barriers at the local level and empower districts and communiti es to ensure ‘last mile’ reach and effectiveness of EWs 
and climate information generat ed and disseminated through the national and sub-national systems. Capacity building 
efforts will also be linked to t he knowledge management hubs es tablished and utiliz ed through Output 2 . This Activity 
will include: 
 Strengthening the Emergency Oper ation Centers (EOCs): EOCs are  critical to planning for disaster preparedness 
(evacuation plans, contingency plans, media information, etc.),  monitoring disasters, m obilizing resources to 
manage them, and coordinating with relevant stakeholders on DRM  activities. Under the current UNDP PS DRM 
and UNDP EWS programmes, several EOCs will be established; howe ver there are funding and capacity gaps to 
ensure full and effective operat ion of these centers. This acti vity will build upon the effo rts of these projects and 
strengthen the operations of EOCs including: 
o Upgrading the EOCs: equipping them with satellite phones, GPS,  computers, emergency lights, GIS 
information system, and high speed internet 
o Development of operational guidelines for the EOCs 
o Training for staff of EOCs in operations and management of EoC s as well as use of climate information in 
preparedness activities 
o Learning tours for regional knowledge sharing 
																																																													
23 Following the declaration of a state of disaster, the GoM, thro ugh DoDMA, activated the ‘Cluster System; to coordinate disaste r 
responses across sectors. Part of a humanitarian system, the Cluster Approach , initiated by the United Nations Inter-agency Standing 
Committee (IASC)  in 2005, operates at two level s. At the global level, the aim is to strengthen system-wide preparedness and technical 
capacity and ensure predictable leadership and accountability i n the main eleven sectors. At t he country level, the aim is to ensure a more 
coherent and effective response by mobilising agencies to respo nd strategically across all key sectors. In this approach secto r-specific 
activities in emergencies are c oordinated through the relevant cluster.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 65 
	 C
 Capacity building of national, district and community level ac tors on disaster and climate risk management:  
National and sub-natio nal actors including DoDMA staff, Distric t Civil Protection Commitees (DCPCs) and 
community members will be trained in the disaster-risk priority  districts and where CBEWS systems will be installed 
through Activity 3.1 (Karonga, Salima, Dedza, Nkhotakota, Nkata  Bay, Rumphi, Phalombe and Zomba). The 
national and district level officers of DoDMA will be trained i n the use of the cluster system in emergency response, 
as well as setting, running and management of district EOCs. EO Cs will also function as core channels for utilising 
climate risk management approaches e.g. building resilience thr ough identifying appropriate flood and drought 
management options based on weather/climate forecasts distribut ed through the DCICs. Ca pacity will be built at 
the Area and Village levels by training of ACPCs and Village Ci vil Protection Committees (VCPCs) in these target 
districts. The activity will ens ure women participation in the training activities. These include: 
o Short courses (ToT approach) for 10 national and 15 district l evel staff in DoDMA as well as the EOC staff 
in the areas of disaster risk management, climate change and cl imate risk information/early warning 
information and practices (local, regional, and international),  and use of the cluster system. 
o ToT approach to train at least 50 district officers in the DCP Cs (which include government and civil society 
members). 
o Training for at least 200 communi ty members (through ACPCs and  VCPCs) on disaster risk management 
(DRR, preparedness and response ), climate change, and utilising  early warning information facilitated by 
DoDMA, DCCMS and DWR.   
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  
49. The Disaster Management Affairs in the Department of Disast er Management Affairs (DoDMA) of Malawi is the 
sponsor for the proposed project. DoDMA is a Government agency in the Office of the President and Cabinet and is 
mandated to coordinate and oversee disaster risk management pro grams and projects being implemented by various 
stakeholders in the country, with the aim to build and improve resilience of households, communities and the nation to 
disaster risks. The Department was established in 1994 by the D PR Act (1991), which was enacted after the Phalombe 
floods catastrophe to coordinate and implement measures to alle viate effects of disasters. The Act emphasized 
establishing the institutional f unctions required for the coord ination of disaster risk management programmes and 
activities in the country, comprising: i) the Secretary and Com missioner for Disaster Management Affairs in the 
Department of Disaster Management Affairs (DoDMA); and ii) the National Disaster Preparedness and Relief 
Committee (NDPRC), Civil Protection Committees (CPCs).  The DoD MA has an annual operation and maintenance 
budget of US$253,515. 
 
50. DoDMA acts as the mouthpiece through which weather related early warning messages are announced by the 
DWR and DCCMS. The NDPRC provides policy level guidance to DoDM A and is responsible for coordinating the 
implementation of measures to alleviate disasters, while the Ci vil Protection Committees constitute the frontline 
decentralized institutions at the Area and Village levels (ACPC  and VCPC), providing community level coordination of 
preliminary disaster impact a ssessments in the affected communi ties before any relief operations are initiated. These 
institutions also serve as entry  points for any dissemination o f disaster early warning information at the community 
level. DoDMA is coordinating a number of projects and programme s including the UNDP PS DRR, UNDP EWS, and 
the Malawi Floods Early Recovery Programme funded by World Bank . It has successfully  implemented projects in 
partnership with UNDP. It has undergone a capacity assessment o f its financial procedures and standards and has 
met the UNDP requirements to manage the project of funds on its  behalf.  In the context of several UNDP supported 
projects, DoDMA had been fulfilling its responsibilities for al l requisite functions according to the management 
arrangements, including developing implementation and annual wo rk plans together with the District Councils of the 
target districts; ensuring overall coordination of the project including joint supervision with UNDP of activities 
implemented through other responsible parties of the project (L ine ministries, NGOs, etc.); s upervision of the activities 
coordinated by the District Counc ils of the priority districts;  appropriate use of funds which are advanced to DoDMA in 
line with the approved budget and annual work plan; accurate ac counting and timely reporting of the use of project 
funds; and monitoring the achievement of results and providing timely progress reports. 
 51. Financial status and project support:  DoDMA receives operational funds for disaster response and als o 
manages contributions for DRR/DRM projects with development par tners such as UNDP, DFID, and Irish Aid. To date, 
DoDMA has managed a maximum of USD900,000 per annum. State budg et allocations for DoDMA typically range 
from USD130,000 to USD170,000. For 2015, DoDMA has received an annual allocation of USD620,000 from the 
government for implementation of recovery programmes in respons e to the flooding that occurred In January. Detailed


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 65 
	 C
financial assessment has been carried out by UNDP as part of th e capacity assessment. DoDMA, as the Implementing 
Partner, will provide project m anagement support for the projec t. In addition to carrying out t he responsibilities for the 
functions outlined above, through its cofinancing commitments, DoDMA will support O&M, staff capacity and time, and 
infrastructure and facilities  for project implementation. 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
52. The products generated by the project include tailored agri cultural advisories, fisheries warnings and advisories, 
and a flood and water resource m odeling and decision-support sy stem. These value-added produ cts are relevant for: 
(a) MSEs such as small-scale farmer enterprises, agri-businesse s, small-scale fishers, commercial fishers, fish 
processors, and fish traders; (b) Public sector agencies and pr ivate service providers in sectors such as agriculture, 
fisheries, energy, transportation, telecommunications, mining, and tourism.  Agro- and hydro-meteorological 
information is used for informing integrated farm management, w ater resources management, and energy production, 
transportation, etc. Finance and insurance services provision c ould also be tied to hydromet data and tailored products.
 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  
53. There are no applicable licenses or permits for the impleme ntation of the project. In addition, there are no tax 
implications or regulations applicable to meteorological and hy drological infrastructure. Hydromet departments are 
responsible for the establishment and calibration of infrastruc ture and have dedicated engineering units who do this 
work. There is no licensing or permitting authority for hydrome t infrastructure in the country. For activities related to 
procurement of services, including training, through UNDP, acco rding to the SBAA signed with the GOM, taxes are 
not applicable. Section 7 of the Convention on the Privileges a nd Immunities of the United Nations provides, inter alia, 
that the United Nations, including its subsidiary organs, is ex empt from all direct taxes, except charges for utilities 
services, and is exempt from customs duties and charges of a si milar nature in respect of articles imported or exported 
for its official use.  If the services are procured directly by  the GOM implementing partners, then the national 
procedures apply, which entail t he payment of the Domestic Tax (VAT) amounting to 16% where applicable (e.g. venue 
and food for training).  
 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
54. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National I mplementation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Govern ment of Malawi, the United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) Action Plan for Malawi  (see http://www.mw.one.un.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/U NDAF-Action-Plan-2012-2016.pdf ), and policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP 
POPP. (see https://info.undp.org/gl obal/popp/ppm/Pages/De fining-a-Project. aspx ) The national executing entity - also 
referred to as the national ‘Imp lementing Partner’ in UNDP term inology - is required to implement the project in 
compliance with UNDP rules and  regulations, policies and proced ures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, 
this is ensured through the national Government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement 
(SBAA), together with a UNDP p roject document24, which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the 
use of the funds (once the funds are secured). The Standard Bas ic Assistance Agreement  (SBAA) was signed with 
the GOM on July 15th 1977.   
55. The Implementing Partner for this project is Disaster Manag ement Affairs in the Department of Disaster 
Management Affairs (DoDMA). DoDMA is accountable to UNDP for ma naging the project, including the monitoring 
and evaluation of project interv entions, achieving project outc omes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources.  The 
following parties will enter into agreements with DoDMA to assi st in successfully deliveri ng project outcomes and are 
directly accountable to DoDMA a s outlined in the terms of their  agreement: DCCMS, DWR, DAES, DoF, and NASFAM. 
A stakeholder engagement table and map elaborating on the roles  of thee partners are provided in Annex XIII (Section 
IV). The management arrangements fo r this project are summarize d in the chart below: 
																																																													
24 An example of a signed project document (cover page) is provide d at http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g4958/g2_19062/Prodoc 
Signature Page for PIMS 4958.pdf  
A sample letter of agreement between IP and Responsible Party i s provided at 
http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g4710/g2_19222/2013-12-0 4_MoU_LDCF2_Final_Signed.pdf


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 65 
	 C
 
 
56. UNDP’s overall role  as an Accredited Entity is to provide oversight and quality as surance through its 
Headquarter and Country Office units.  This role includes: (i) project preparation oversight; (ii) project 
implementation oversight and supe rvision, including financial m anagement; and (iii) project completion and 
evaluation oversight.  It also in cludes oversight roles in rela tion to reporting and kn owledge-management.  The 
‘project assurance ’ function of UNDP is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent 
project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures a ppropriate project management milestones are 
managed and completed. Project assurance has to be independent of the Project Manager; therefore, the 
Project Board cannot delegate any  of its assurance responsibili ties to the Project Manager. A UNDP Programme 
Officer, or M&E Officer, typically holds the Project Assurance role on behalf of UNDP. The ‘ senior supplier ’ role 
of UNDP is to represent the interests of the parties which prov ide funding and/or technical expertise to the project 
(designing, developing, facilitati ng, procuring, implementing).  The senior supplier’s primary function within the 
Board is to provide guidance re garding the technical feasibilit y of the project. The senior supplier role must have 
the authority to commit or acquire supplier resources required.  If necessary, more than one person may be 
required for this role. Typically, the implementing partner, UN DP and/or donor(s) would be represented under 
this role. 
 
57. The Project Board  is comprised of the following organisations: Disaster Risk Man agement and EWS 
Committee25, DoDMA, and the NDA for GCF. As  the Senior Beneficiary, the im plementing partner is part of the 
board. Furthermore, as the Senior Supplier, UNDP provides quali ty assurance for the project and ensures 
adherence to the NIM guidelines. The Project Board26 is responsible for making, by consensus, management 
decisions when guidance is required by the Project Manager. Pro ject Board decisions will be made in 
accordance with standa rds that shall ensure management for deve lopment results, best value money, fairness, 
																																																													
25 Secretary and Commissioner for Di saster Management Affairs, Se cretary for Environmental Affairs and Climate Change Management , 
Director of Meteorological Serv ices and Climate Change, Secreta ry for Agriculture, Food Security and Irrigation (Both PS’ for Water 
Development and Irrigation and Agriculture and Food Security), Secretary for Economic Planni ng and Development, Secretary to t he 
Treasury, Secretary fo r Local Government and  Rural Development,  Secretary for Lands and Housing, Secretary for Health, Surveyo r 
General, UNDP Resident Represent ative, Country Representative, DFID - Country Representative, W orld Bank, Chairperson, Civil S ociety 
Network on Climate Change, Secretary General, Malawi Red Cross Society. 
 
26 Sample ToR for Project Board: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603T ORProjectBoard.pdf  
Project	Manager
DoDMA: 	Project	personnel	
(Project	manager,	Technical	
Advisor,	Project	finance	and	
Admin.	Assistant)  
Project	Board
Senior	Beneficiary:  
DoDMA 
Executive:
Disaster	Risk	Management	and	
EWS	committee,	National	Designated	Authority	(GCF) 
Senior	Supplier:  
UNDP 
Project	Assurance  
UNDP
Project	Organization 	Structure
District	Level	Coordination  
Civil	Protection	Committees	(CPCs ,	VCPCs),	Climate	Centres,	NAS FAM	
associations,	Community	Outreach	 Units,	Agricultural	Resource	C entres,	
CSOs.	(incl	CISANET ,	Red	Cross ,	Christian	Aid ,	Concern	Universal ).
Project	Support  
Government	line	
ministries	and	other	
stakeholders:	DCCMS,	
DWR,	MoAIWD	(DoF,	
DAES),	NASFAM,	CSOs.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 65 
	 C
integrity, transparency and effective international competition . In case a consensus cannot be reached within 
the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP Programme Ma nager (Mia Seppo). The Project Board will 
meet three times a year.  
58. The Project Manager
27 will run the project on a day-to-day basis on behalf of DoDMA within the constraints laid 
down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will en d when the final project terminal evaluation report and 
other documentation required by  the GCF and UNDP has been compl eted and submitted to UNDP.  The Project 
Manager is responsible for day -to-day management and decision-m aking for the project. The Project Manager’s prime 
responsibility is to ensure that  the project produces the resul ts specified in the project document, to the required 
standard of quality and within the specified constraints of tim e and cost.  
 
59. Project Support comprises stakeholders including relevant government ministries  and departments at national 
level and local government with local offices in the districts (DCCMS, DWR, MoAIWD), the community members from 
targeted districts, the civil so ciety and other local and inter national NGOs. District level coordination  of project 
activities will be done through the Directorate of District Pla nning which is headed by the Director of Planning and 
Development (DPD). The DPD will be the overall coordinator of t he project at the district lev el. District level planning 
is further informed by decentrali zed structures such as the Vil lage Civil Protection Committees (VCPC) and Civil 
Protection Committees (CPC). VCPCs comprise community members o f the village and enable the collective 
community expression and information sharing. The CPCs (also co mprised of community members) coordinate and 
operate as vehicles of transmitting information and represent c ommunities in decision-making at the District level. 
Malawi also has Ward Councillors , who as community members, are  involved in decision-maki ng at the District level 
on projects and utilisation of f unding based on vulnerable comm unity needs, concerns and interests. 
 
60. Local stakeholders and communi ty members have a key role in  the implementation and monitoring of the project. 
During the inception phase of the project, DODMA working togeth er with UNDP, will consult with all stakeholders, 
including vulnerable community m embers, VCPCs, CPCs and the War d Councillors, and facilitate an understanding 
of the roles, functions, and responsibilities within the Projec t's decision-making structures, including reporting and 
communication lines, and conflict resolution mechanisms. The pr oject Logic Framework (indicators, means of 
verification, assumptions) will be reviewed and the quarterly a nd annual plans will be refined engaging the communities 
from the targeted districts. T he stakeholders will also be enga ged during the mid-term and final evaluations to assess 
the progress of the project and enable adaptive project managem ent in response to the needs and priorities of the 
communities targeted. Community participation will be tracked t hrough tools developed by the project management 
recognising the existing decentralised government structures to  implement the project and the role and views of the 
community members. Community representation in the Board is thr ough the decentralized stru cture of the IP, DoDMA.
 
61. Timetable of Project Implementation:  The implementation schedule with detailed activity progress tim eline and 
output completion is provided in  Annex X. Implementation of the  project will follow a schedule  that will install all the 
monitoring equipment in the firs t 3 years by the time of the mi dterm evaluation. Whilst so me products/services will be 
dependent on the monitoring equipment and data they collect, ef forts to derive and develop new 
products/advisories/warnings will start immediately upon commen cement of the project. This is to ensure that enough 
time is devoted to co-explorati on and sensitization efforts wit h communities and u sers of the climate products, so that 
their views and requirements are taken into account during deve lopment. Where products will rely on data from 
equipment that has yet to be installed or reach a long enough r ecord to be useful, examples will be developed for 
locations where sufficient data is available and used to explor e user/community requirements. Some climate products C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
																																																													
27 Sample ToRs for project manager: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603T ORProjectManager.pdf ; 
Sample ToR for Project Adminis trative and Financial Assistant: 
http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603T ORProjectFinanceAdmin.pdf


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 65 
	 C
will start to be used when they  are available before the projec t midterm, with all developed and used operationally 
during years 4 and 5 during whi ch time they will be evaluated t horoughly.  The final year of th e project will be used to 
re-design the products to include feedback from users and incor porate any of the new data sources that will have 
become available. The products  will be further tested, refined and operational procedures defined to ensure long term 
sustainability after the project ends. This approach to product  development will ensure that t he effectiveness of early 
warnings will improve from the project outset and there will be  improvements in flood warnings (through the ODSS 
and CBEWS) and weather forecasting by the time of the mid-term assessments ensuring early project impacts and 
further development, refinement, and incorporation of tailored climate information (including for agricultural and 
fisheries advisories) will enabl e long-term adoption and impact s.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 65 
	 D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
62. Without GCF involvement to complement ongoing efforts and a ddress gaps, GoM cannot take adequate steps to 
help vulnerable communities adapt to climate-related disaster r isks and impacts.  GCF support enables additional 
investments that allow scaling up existing efforts for transfor mative reach and impact acr oss the country.  GCF 
involvement is critical to: 
 
63. Address gaps and barriers to financing: At present, domestic finance for enhancing climate and early wa rning 
systems is negligible in Malawi.  A review of the expenditure f or the DRM sector during 2006/7 and 2011/12 years 
revealed that the expenditure incurred through the national bud get amounted to US$4 million. Development partner 
funding during the same years amounted to about US$50 million. While improving the disaster risk management 
systems for the sectors and enhancing dissemination and use of EWs is a key priority for the government given its 
frequent exposure to and impacts from floods and droughts, impl ementation is constrained due to limited resources 
(both financial and human) among the relevant national, sub-nat ional and local level actors. Without GCF supporting 
the incremental costs of adaptat ion, adaptation efforts in the country will be constrained, leaving the populations 
vulnerable to the frequent climate-related disasters the countr y has been facing. As an LDC and a low-income economy, 
Malawi is also unable to incur costs of financing of debt instr uments and requires maximum concessionality through 
GCF grants to undertake adaptation measures.  There are no othe r current funding sources available, including from 
the LDCF or SCCF, for Malawi to draw upon. 
 
64. Crowd-in  other financing both from public and private sector actors and mobilize adaptation investments 
at the community level: Modernization of early warning and climate information services  will be facilitated by the 
project, which then creates conditions for investments by publi c and private sector actors to package and use this 
information to serve specialized needs across sectors and busin esses. The project will remove barriers including those 
related to adoption to new technologies and practices such as I CT/mobile technologies for EWs and weather advisories. 
The project will provide the priv ate sector (telecom, small-sca le farmer enterprises and fisheries, agri-businesses, 
commercial fishers, fish processors, and fish traders) with the  weather and climate information that is required to make 
informed decisions to increase productivity and make medium and  long term investments. GCF involvement and its 
ability to leverage public and private sector financing through  reduction of barriers for such investments promotes 
ownership and long-t erm financial sustainability of the investm ents and their impacts. In particular, the strengthening of 
GoM’s capacity to modernize its h ydromet systems and stimulate an ecosystem of weather and climate information and 
services creates conditions for enhanced budgetary support and financial viability in the long-term. 
 
65. Impact highly vulnerable populations: As noted in Section C.1, over 85% of Malawi’s population lives in rural 
areas and about 56% of them live in poverty. A majority of the population is engaged in smallholder, rain-fed agriculture. 
The impacts of climate-related hazards in Malawi have already s everely disrupted food production, led to the 
displacement of communities, loss of life and assets, and cause d an overall reduction of community resilience, 
especially affecting women, who are the most vulnerable to clim ate change impacts. The proposed project is focused 
on ensuring that the early warni ng systems and climate informat ion generated by the observational networks is tailored 
to protect the lives and livelihoods of the rural and vulnerabl e populations in disaster prone, food insecure, and marginal 
communities. GCF involvement is critical to scaling up existing  efforts and engendering a paradigm shift for sustained 
generation and use of EWs and CI fo r enhanced resilience of the se populations.  
 
66. Without the proposed project, GoM cannot mobilize developme nt of the national and sub-national systems to 
provide the requisite information for reducing mortality for it s disaster prone populations and decreasing risks on 
agriculture based livelihoods among small holder farmers and fi shers, more than half of whom are women.


---
*Page 29*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 65 
 
	D
 
D.2. Exit Strategy  
67. The proposed project has been designed through extensive co nsultations and involvement of government, 
public sector, private sector, NGOs, and CSOs to ensure ownersh ip of the interventions and effectiveness of their 
impact. Relevant government departments (national and sub-natio nal level), as well as local communities, have 
been involved in the proposed design and will be leading on imp lementation of project interventions. This 
participatory approach has been in itiated through collaboration  on developing the Feasib ility Assessment (Annex 
II) as well as design of the proposed measures. Building on thi s foundation, the project ensures that the 
investments as well as the results are sustained beyond the pro ject duration and for the long-term through the 
following: 
 
68. Leveraging domestic financing: Domestic resource allocations fo r the project creates ownership  a n d  
enables capacity for sustained O&M of the infrastructure as wel l as planning and management of the generation 
and use of the products. The proposed project ensures that thes e activities strengthen the delivery of the mandates 
of the relevant government agenci es and public sec tor actors. D CCMS and DWR are invest ing in enhanced staff 
capacities that will allow these agencies to not only operate a nd maintain the infrastructure beyond the project 
time frame but also to plan for new investments and continue to  upgrade the technical capacity for data analysis 
and forecasting. Hydromet agencies have also committed to under take replacement of equipment such as the 
community based hydrological sensors through budget investments  and will establish SOPs between them and 
the communities. As the Implementing Partner, DoDMA is investin g in enhanced coordination with other 
stakeholders, project management, and staff capacity for disast er risk management. Furthermore, DAES, 
NASFAM (non-state actor) and DoF are financing extension suppor t, communication, and messaging to reach 
vulnerable farming and fishing communities. Furthermore, the pr oject will address the barriers around legal and 
institutional arrangements arou nd PPPs to support the participa tion of private sector actors while contributing to 
the operational and financial vi ability of the national hydrome t services. 
 69. Ex-post plan for Operations and Maintenance of observing equipm ent: An O&M plan (project and for 
post-project O&M) including the budgeting for the human and fin ancial resources required for O&M for the project 
investments is presented in the Feasibility Assessment section 5 (Annex II). The plan reflects GoM's vision and 
commitment for the long-term sustainability of the project acti vities and outcomes. This will be further refined during 
project inception and implementation, based on a more detailed examination of current human and financial 
resources, as well as an accurate estimate of the required incr eases needed to service the equipment.  The costs 
of developing a long term strategy for O&M, is provided for in the first two years, and the strategy will be reassessed 
towards project completion (final two years). GCF resources wil l finance the human resources, tools, equipment 
and travel (including site visits) for O&M initially, with a de creasing contribution to these activities towards the end 
of the project lifetime, after which domestic financing (from t he budgets of designated autho rities) will continue to 
support O&M. For this purpose it  is planned that both DCCMS and  DoF will finance O&M co sts associated with 
lake-based buoys, DCCMS will finance the lightning detection sy stem, DCCMS will finance AWS costs, DWR will 
finance O&M associated with hydro logical stations, and DoDMA wi ll finance O&M associated with the community 
based rain gauges and water level sensors. The first three year s after installation of each set of equipment, spare 
parts will be covered through bundled maintenance contracts wit h suppliers. Project resources also include a 
provision for spare parts to be procured during the last 2 year s of the project, which will last beyond the lifetime of 
the project and are to be used once servicing and maintenance c ontracts with suppliers have been terminated. 
There may yet be requirements for spares post-project and these  will be supported through domestic financing. 
Training for O&M will be funded through GCF resources for the l ifetime of the project and will not be needed after 
the project is completed (a train the trainers approach will en sure adequate capacity to train new employees is left 
in each institution. Contingency  funding (for unforeseen events  e.g. floods washing away equipment, lightning 
strikes, vandalism etc) is prov ided for each of the 6 years of the project. Letters of commitment towards the O&M 
for project duration and post-implementation (in line with O&M schedule above and detailed in the Feasibility 
Assessment Annex II) have been prov ided by DCCMS, DWR, DoDMA, a nd DoF and appended in the Feasibility 
Assessment, Annex II.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 65 
 
	D
 
  
70. Capacity building: The proposed project invests in building country capacities for  generation and use of EWS 
and CI. The focus of these activities is on ensuring that there  is knowledge and skills transfer as well as peer-to-
peer learning (e.g. through ‘trai ning of trainers’). Improving forecasting capacity and ex panding trained personnel 
and equipment to operate and maintain the CI and EWS creates th e conditions for hydromet agencies to sustain 
the generation and use of these sy stems beyond the project time  frame. The project also addresses the barriers 
around legal and institutional arrangements around PPPs to supp ort the participation of private sector actors while 
contributing to the operational and financial viability of the national hydromet services. MoAIWD’s agricultural and 
fisheries extension support systems will be strengthened to pac kage and diffuse tailored products; this would 
enable iterative development and adaptation of the products bey ond the project. Training of district councils on 
operationalization of the Cluste r System for DRM will also enge nder long-term capacity for disaster planning and 
response. Outreach, engagement, and capacity building of commun ities and MSEs in the agricultural and fisheries 
sector as well as the sensitization and training of communities  for O&M of CBEWS will ensure communities 
continue to monitor, prepare for, and respond to disasters beyo nd the project lifetime. By strengthening last-mile 
access, the project facilitates effective adoption and use of t hese systems, which w ill ensure sustained 
participation, as well as replicat ion of best practices after t he project. 
 
71. Strengthening demand-based model for CI/products: Developing value-added products tailored to 
agricultural and fisheries that enable livelihood planning and lead to economic and social benefits is foundational 
to creating a sustainable ecosystem of CI and services catalyzi ng business opportunities and private sector 
engagement. NASFAM aims for its members – at the very least, th e MSEs and agri-businesses – to value the 
ICT/mobile services. Through outreach, training, and support, N ASFAM foresees that the willingness-to-pay for 
the tailored agricultural advis ories will increase over the dur ation of the project. There is also potential to both 
reduce the costs of these services over time through negotiated  bundled costs as the reach of the services scales 
as well as incentivise cross-subsidization for the CI service t hrough packaging with other services offered by the 
mobile platforms. The project will explore and facilitate these  mechanisms through Activity 2.4. There is a value-
proposition in the information produced through bulletins and y earbooks through DWR based on the expanded 
flood and water resource use mo deling and decision support syst ems. This information is valuable for the energy 
sector (for e.g. hydropower planni ng), water boards (for water supply systems), and water resource management 
across other sectors. Through Ac tivity 2.4, market feasibility studies will be developed to explore demand-based, 
sustained generation and use of t hese products to meet speciali zed needs of wider set of public and private sector 
actors in the long-term. 
 72. Learning and knowledge management: The project strengthens knowledge generation, transfer, and 
collective learning to ensure long term sustainability of the r esilience building activiti es and impacts. Through 
extension support, awareness raising, and community level engag ement on use of tailored products and 
community-based early warning systems, the project promotes par ticipatory and peer-to-peer learning. The 
District Climate Information Cent res (DCICs) will also catalyze  knowledge management and sharing acting as 
learning pathways fostering a culture for information sharing o n climate change risks, impacts, and best practices 
in adaptation and risk reduction for replication and scale acro ss communities. Knowledge generation, sharing, and 
management through the DCICs not only strengthens the linkages across the national, sub-national, and local 
levels for diffusion of CI, but it also promotes feedback and a daptive learning to increase the resilience of the 
populations as climate change risks and impacts evolve. 
 
73. 
Policy and legal frameworks: The proposed project contributes  to the operationalization of k ey national 
policies including MGDS, NCCIP, and NDRM policies as well as to  the mainstreaming of weather and climate 
information into the national policies, annual budgets and loca l development plans, including the National Disaster 
Risk Management Policy and district development plans supported  with UNDP leveraged financing. Furthermore, 
the data and knowledge will inform decision-making and strength en the frameworks for disaster risk management 
(through the EOCs, District Cluster System, etc.). Through this  support, the proposed project ensures that the 
capacities and infrastructure built will continue to be relevan t, sustained, and scaled through mobilization of 
domestic and external financing for long-term impact.


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 65 
 
	E
 
E.1.  Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/progra mme to contribute to the achieve ment of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
 
74. The project incorporates lessons learned and best practices  from several successful international efforts, to enable 
transformative impact through the scale up of the use of early warning systems and climate information in Malawi. Key 
lessons and success factors drawn include: i) the use of lower- cost monitoring stations and private sector partnerships 
in the Philippines28; ii) the effectiveness of community-based flood early warning systems in Mozambique29; iii) 
strengthening cooperation betwe en NHMS and disaster management agencies in Mozambique30; iv) warnings which 
save the lives of fishers on Lake Victoria31; and v) the critical importance of community-based organizatio ns and 
volunteers for distributing and or ganizing responses to early w arnings in Bangladesh, Philippines, Cambodia and 
Vietnam32,33,34, 35.  
 75. Furthermore, the project focuses on improving the generatio n, packaging and communication of climate-related 
information, which has been shown to be critical for the unders tanding and uptake of flood warnings in Bangladesh
36, 
and agricultural advisories throughout Africa37. Additionally the project emphasizes a participatory approach 
mechanisms to engage farmers in the co-development of warning a nd information products, which is critical for 
uptake37. The use of flood forecasting m odels, improved meteorological forecasts and mobile phones for dissemination, 
as incorporated in this proposal, has been shown to improve the  lead-time of flood warnings by several days and avoid 
significant damages in Bangladesh38,39. The project is also backing su ch advances with critical and t argeted investments 
in the capacity of the NHMS to observe and forecast these hydro -meteorological risks, as demonstrated by PAGASA 
in the Philippines40. 
 
76. Comparable efforts (EWs, c limate information, and community -based DRM) have shown effective impact related 
to saving of lives, assets, and livelihoods. In Nepal, the comm unity based EWS directly benefit over 80,000 people in 
communities around river basin systems41. Advanced EWS systems are estimated to be 100% effective in re ducing 
loss of life by cyclones, 60% effective for floods, and 20% eff ective in case of drought. (Teisberg and Weiher (2009)). 
In Bhutan, EWS project has enhan ced capacities of district and local level authorities and communities in disaster risk 
and climate risk management.42 
 77. The project will directly con tribute to climate-resilient s ustainable development of Malawi. Overall, the project will 
contribute to Fund level impact of increased resilience and enh anced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people affected 
by climate related disasters a nd variability. Please refer to t he Project Logframe and Economic Analysis for the 
assumptions and estimates of the impact potential. Contributing  to the Fund Level impacts: 
																																																													
28 http://weather.com.ph// 
29 http://www.preventionweb.net/files/2919_LosterFloodwarningSyst emIntoAction02Mozambique2007.pdf 
30 http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/dra/documents/CDSCaseStudy_Mozam bique_V2_Withpictures.pdf 
31 http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/cop16/documents/VCP_factshee ts_3_Victoria_EN.pdf 
32 IFRC (2006) Red Cross Red Cresc ent Good Practices in Early War ning. Geneva: IFRC. 
https://www.ifrc.org/Global/Case% 20studies/Disasters/cs-earlywa rning.pdf 	
33 http://lib.icimod.org/record/26938/files/c_attachment_747_5976 .pdf 
34 IFRC (2012) Community early warning systems: guiding principle s. https://www.ifrc.org/PageFiles/103323/1227800-IFRC-CEWS-
Guiding-Principles-EN.pdf 	
35 https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Documents/Lopez-
%20Increasing%20Flood%20Early%20W arning%20and%20Response%20in%2 0San%20Mateo%20Philippines.pdf 
36 http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pdacl719.pdf 
37 https://cgspace.cgiar.org/rest/bitstreams/52685/retrieve 
38 http://www.rimes.int/em/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Quarterly-R eport-April-June-2013.pdf 
39 http://www.rimes.int/em/weaver-i n-sirajganj-bangladesh-receive d-innovative-voice-flood-warni ng-messages-on-his-mobile-phone/ 
40 http://www.preventionweb.net/files/33988_countryassessmentrepo rtphilippines%5B1%5D.pdf 
41 http://practicalaction.org/page/docs/region_nepal/early-warnin g-saving-lives.pdf 
42http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g3722/g2_16676/Final%20T echnical%20Review%20and%20Social%20IMpact%20Assessme
nt%2EGLOF%20FSP%2Epdf


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 65 
 
	E
a.  The project will benefit about 1.4 million people on averag e directly and about 0.7 million indirect 
beneficiaries. This is about 12% of the population of Malawi es timated over 16 million as of 2014 (World 
Bank Data).  
b. The project can potentially  (a)  reduce loss by lives by sav ing an average of 18 lives a year43 and damages 
(excludes valuation of lives) wo rth 5 million USD in 10 years; and (b) result in an annual benefit of 3.8 
million USD to the agricultural sector.  
 78. One of the major economic benefits of the project is the av ailability of accurate weather, climate and water 
information to increase productivity and avoid losses to agricu lture, fisheries, construction, e tc. This is very crucial for 
climate change adaptation – clim ate change poses risks to farme rs related to uncertainties of factors that will help them 
make informed decisions such as  when it will rain, how much rai n they will get, should they invest in irrigation system, 
etc. Hansen et al (2011) in their review of seasonal forecastin g for agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa stated that 
evidence from a combination of understanding of how climatic un certainty impacts agriculture, model based ex-ante 
analyses, subjective expression s of demand or value, and the fe w well-documented evaluations of actual use and 
resulting benefit suggests that seasonal forecasts may have con siderable potential to improve agricultural management 
and rural livelihoods. Using t he 2011 data from Living Standard  Measurement Survey (LSM S), 44% of farmers can be 
reached currently by the govern ment in Malawi. This will be fur ther improved under the project and, following the results 
in Patt et al. (2009), farmers re ached through the early warnin g system can expect an improved yield of 9%.  
 
79. The project outcome will st rengthen the adaptive capacity a nd reduce exposure to climat e risks posed by extreme 
events and variability through the enhanced capacity for early warnings and forecasting, development and 
dissemination of tailored products for improved decision making  of agriculture and fishing communities and 
strengthened community capacities to prepare and respond to cli mate related disasters. The project will enhance 
awareness of climate risks and im pacts through the climate info rmation and products dissemination, community-based 
disaster response and climate risk management measures as well as the knowledge management facilitated by the 
DCICs. The project directly benefits 860,000 males and 860,00 0 females through improved EWS and risk reduction 
measures for agriculture livelihoods.   
 80. The project will result in en hanced capacity of hydromet ne tworks and staff to generate climate-related data and 
forecast extreme weather and climate to support adaptation and reduce exposure to climate risks (Output 1). It 
enhances national coverage of observational networks to 32% (AWS) and 49% (hydrologica l stations) and improves 
the frequency and timeliness of flood warnings to 6 hours or less. 
 
 81. The project will enhance the adaptive capacity and resilien ce of vulnerable populations through development and 
dissemination of tailored climate information/products and deci sion-support platforms for agriculture, fisheries, and flood 
risk management (Output 2). It will directly benefit about 195000 farmers in  reducing adverse climate impacts on crop 
yields; more than 30,000 fishers as well as more than 9000 people, of whom more than half are women
44, engaged in 
small scale fishing, commercial fishing, fish processing and fi sh trade in increasing their resilience to and adaptation to 
weather variability and about 1,400,000 people through disast er risk reduction enabled by expansion of the ODSS 
system.   
 
82. The project strengthens communities’ capacities for use of EWS/CI in preparedness for and response to climate 
related disasters through the community-based early warning sys tems and disaster risk reduction measures (Output 
3). It will benefit about 57,500 number of males and 57,500 number  of females in eight target districts through the 
																																																													
43 The loss of life estimate is an annual estimate using the 2015  PDNA that is based on the severity and probability of the 2015  flooding 
occurring and because the estimate s are available at the distri ct level. Based on the assumption that this is a major event th at occurs once 
every 10 years, the total deaths on average per year as a resul t of a major flooding is estimated to be about 28 per year in t he targeted 
district. If we base this on the 30% effectiveness assumed in t he analysis to prevent loss of life as a result of the EWS syst em, we have 
about 9 lives saved per year in total for the country. This num ber is further reduced to the targeted district for the purpose  of this analysis. 
Lives lost by fishers are also calculated in a similar way with  about 9 lives (based on casualti es data from DoF, Annex XIII) that can be 
saved potentially annually with im proved Mwera winds forecastin g. EMDAT and other sources can potentially be used but typicall y not 
available at the district level 
44 Source: Department of Fisheries


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 65 
 
	E
community-based EWS and about 300 national, district, and communi ty level actors with increased capacity in disaster 
and climate risk management.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below . 
GCF core 
indicators Expected total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries (reduced 
vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of 
beneficiaries relative to total 
population (adaptation only) Total 1.4 million direct beneficiaries and 0.7 
million indirect beneficiaries expected 
Percentage (%) 12 
83. The total number of direct beneficiaries (in targeted distr icts) has been calculated as an aggregate of the estimate 
of the direct beneficiaries from the targeted district populati ons who benefit from the tailo red products and community-
based EWS in Outputs 2 and 3. Thi s is informed by the coverage and effectiveness enhanced by Output 1.  
 The project direct beneficiaries are calculated as the differe nce between the target final number and the 
baseline number of the beneficia ries as indicated in the Logic Framework for the project. 
 Target number of direct beneficiaries of tailored products inc lude the targeted farmers in the 14 districts that 
receive tailored agriculture adv isories (178,000) plus the 16,0 00 lead farmers under NASFAM that additionally 
benefit from the FrontlineSMS and 3-2-1 service. In the 14 dist ricts, the beneficiaries were estimated based on 
the percentage area of the target districts covered by each AWS  (assuming those within a 10km radius can 
realistically be served tailored services). The estimate of 178 ,000 (target district population serviced by each 
AWS) assumes 80% of the households in the serviced area engage in farming and that  2 adults per household 
are direct beneficiaries of the advisories, one male and one fe male. The target estimat e of fishers comes from 
the data of DoF on their targe t population of fi shers (about 30 ,000) in the 4 target districts.  
 The target level estimate of the beneficiaries of the ODSS exp ansion (combined with hydrological sensors in 
upper catchments), which includes the beneficiaries of both flo od forecasting and information provided for wider 
water resource management (dam allocations, flows and water pro vision), is calculated based on the percent 
coverage of hydrological sensors in target districts (estimated  as target percentage for Output 1, See Section 
H) and the assumed effectiveness of EWs (see Economic Analysis – 60% international standard, project uses 
30% for a conservative estimate):  1,400,000 direct beneficiarie s from ODSS (30% effectiveness * percentage 
coverage of hydrological sensors * target district population).  This calculation is assumed to combine the 
specific beneficiaries of flood forecasts with a wider populati on group benefiting from better water resource 
management in the target districts. 
 The estimate of the beneficiaries of the automated, community- based EWS is based on DoDMA’s estimates of 
the number of communities effectively covered by number of sens ors/rain-gauges installed by the project. Each 
sensor combination (rainfall gauge + hydrological water level s ensor) is assumed to cover 10 villages 
downstream, each with an average population of 350. Based on th e districts covered and the installed 
equipment, this method yields an estimate of about 115,000 bene ficiaries. 
 The total final target number of people reached is therefore 1 .6M which yields about 1.4M as direct beneficiaries 
of the project (excluding the 238,000 baseline number of benefi ciaries). 
 
 
84. The project indirect beneficiaries are calculated as the di fference between the target final number and the baseline 
number of the indirect beneficia ries as indicated in the Logic Framework for the project. Indirect beneficiaries for the 
project have been defined as those that the project is not dire ctly targeting through tailored products (for agriculture 
and fisheries: this is also combin ed with direct outreach, i.e.  through extension staff in  DAES and DoF or lead farmers 
of NASFAM; for ODSS: direct beneficiaries are communities benef iting from flood and water resource modeling from 
this tailored decision support system) or community-based EW sy stems in the targeted dist ricts. They include, the 
population, nationally, that benef it from improved EWs and fore casting given the benefit t o the national system of 
increased reliability, frequenc y, and effectiveness of the EWs nationally. A subset of this population would also include


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 65 
 
	E
all those farmers that can recei ve tailored CI through the 3-2- 1 or Esoko services.45 Therefore, the total number of 
indirect beneficiaries nationally  has been calculated based on the national population (e stimated at 16.3 million), 
excluding the number of final target direct beneficiaries, and multiplying the percent age national coverage of 
observational networks (as a result of the project, taking the AWS % estimated as target for Output 1; see Section H) 
by the conservative estimate of 30% effectiveness of the enhanc ed networks for EWs and generation of climate 
information. These estimates are conservative compared to the e stimates of existing efforts nationally and 
internationally as they (i) lim it the direct range of AWS to 10 km to produce data for loca lized impact (WMO uses 30km 
for AWS range in general) and (ii) use a conservative estimate of 30% effectiveness compar ed to 60% effectiveness 
used internationally for flood EWs effectiveness. 
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed acti vity can catalyze impact beyon d a one-off project/pro gramme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale) 
85. The theory of change articulated below illustrates how each  of the three outputs of the proposed project contribute 
to the long-term objective and how the resulting project impact s can be sustained, replic ated and scaled to contribute 
to climate-resilient development  in Malawi. Through integration  of the specific elements described in the Exit Strategy 
into the project design and implementation, conditions are crea ted that lead to sustained impacts and potential for scale 
up of approximately three times the initial impact. The figure below shows that each of the outputs is made up of a 
series of activities responding to the identified barriers. Eac h output leads to intermediary outcomes, the longer-term 
project outcome and ultimately the impact expected from the pro ject. Additionally, the project will promote a climate risk 
management approach in agriculture, water and disaster manageme nt, which will contribute to changing the behavior 
of farmers, fishers, instituti ons and communities beyond the li fetime of the project. 
																																																													
45 Reach of the mobile services, nationally, and its cost-effecti veness, is included as a relevan t indicator for the project. Se e Section 
E.6.5.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 65 
 
	E
 
86. Output 1 encompasses the establishment of the infrastructure needed to g enerate climate-related data and the 
capacity of hydromet staff to analyze it. The installed equipme nt will contribute to increas ed amount of relevant and 
timely data being generated. In addition, hydromet staff at nat ional level will be trained (us ing the training of trainers 
approach) to operate and maintain the equipment as well as anal yze and interpret the data. T his will result in enhanced 
national coverage (32% AWS, 49% h ydrological stations, 100% lig htning sensors, 40% lake-based buoys), increased 
frequency and timeliness of forecasting, and improved formattin g of EWs and CI for use by public and private sector 
actors. With the sustainability assured of these investments th rough leveraging of domestic finance and capacity 
building, the project creates the potential for replication and  scale of these impacts. The hydromet capacities can be 
expanded to reach the entire coun try, which, in aggregate, can lead to about roughly three ti mes the initial impact. 
 
87. Building on these enhanc ed hydromet capacities, Output 2  aims to establish products and platforms for climate-
related information services (including early warning systems) and disseminate them to vulnerable communities to 
enhance resilience of lives and livelihoods.  The first three a ctivities promote tailored clim ate information/products and 
decision-support platforms to be useful for end-users (e.g. far mers, fishermen, water users , etc.).  The project targets 
the expansion of ODSS for flood forecast and water catchment fo r 13 districts, tailored agricultural products for farmers 
in 14 districts, and tailored forecasts for fishers in 4 distri cts. Similarly, the fourth activ ity aims to set up the enabling  
environment for PPPs and market stimulation by addressing polic y and regulatory barriers and undertaking market 
feasibility assessments for the products. Finally, the project aims to strengthen the e ffectiveness of 7 DCICs as 
knowledge hubs to promote learning and knowledge sharing across  national, sub-national, and local stakeholders. 
Overall, this output targets 12% of the priority district popul ations for access to specialized information for agriculture, 
fisheries, and flood risk managem ent. Through capacity developm ent and training of extension support systems, scaling 
up of use of ICT/mobile platforms, stimulation of demand-based models for climate information, and knowledge sharing, 
the proposed project promotes sustainability of these impacts. The reach of the agricultural and fisheries advisories 
and ICT/mobile platforms can be extended to the rest of the pop ulation in these districts alone, potentially reaching 
about 2 million farmers (about ten ti mes the initial impact - t ripling AWS coverage and reaching all districts of the 
country), twice the number of fishers with expansion to communi ties in the South, and twice the beneficiaries of flood 
warnings in ODSS targeted distr icts (with double the coverage o f hydrological sensors, increasing effectiveness).  
 
88. Finally, Output 3  aims to strengthen the capacities of communities to prepare fo r and respond to climate related 
disasters through two key activities. First, it establishes com munity-based early warning sy stems in flood-prone areas, 
benefiting 115,000 people in 8 districts. Second, the project w ill develop the capacity of about 300 national, district, and 
community level actors on disast er and climate risk management.  Through outreach, engagement and capacity building 
of communities and MSEs, knowledge management and learning and policy coordination, these activities establish 
conditions for replication and scale up of the community level DRM systems. With sharing of lessons and best practices, 
promoted by the knowledge hubs, automated CBEWS can be replicat ed to cover twice as many communities within 
the districts for about tw ice the initial impact. 
 
89. Through these output activities, the project establishes pa thways for future replication and scale for climate-resilient 
development of Malawi.  
 The observational systems and capacities allow for future repl ication and scale as they can be easily serviced 
and linked to modern communication systems to provide public in formation, more sophisticated commercial 
weather products and disaster warnings.  
 Demand based model and engagement of private sector actors tha t benefit from the provision or use and 
dissemination of climate informat ion can further incentivize an d advance development and diffusion of this 
information to a broader network, scaling the use of this infor mation among business and public sector 
strengthening adaptive capacities.  
 Empowered communities and institutions will also be able to ta ke timely and urgent prevention actions, 
particularly against events such as flooding and generate best practices and learning that can be replicated 
and scale up across the country  to reduce risks of the populati on to climate related disasters.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 65 
 
	E
90. There is potential to reach more than twice46 the number of direct beneficiaries (10 times the number of far mers, 
twice the number of CBEWS beneficiaries, twice the number of fi shers, improved effectiveness to 60% from twice the 
hydrological sensors/ODSS combined) and six times47 the number of indirect beneficiaries (100% EWs coverage, three  
times the project baseline). Together, this would lead to more than four48 times the initial impact. EWs efforts have 
proven to be replicable and scalable with lessons learned and b est practices facilitating these efforts. In Nepal49 and 
Gambia (http://www.undp-alm.org/resources/communications-produc ts/undp-ews-africa-blog), successful pilots in 
EWS are now being scaled up to i ncorporate latest technologies and lessons learned from earlier efforts.  
 
E.2.2. Contribution to the creat ion of an enabling environment  
91. Enabling effective and sustained participation of private and p ublic sector actors: The proposed 
interventions reduce barriers to investments in enhanced adapti ve capacity of vulnerable populations and create 
enabling conditions to ensure sustained participation of the va rious public and private sector stakeholders in the country. 
By improving the hydro-met observational networks and the forec asting abilities within DCCMS, the proposed project 
enables the capacity of hydromet staff to provide O&M and suppo rt continued generation and use of EWs and CI. 
Reliable, accurate, and relevant data from the observational ne tworks and capacity building of government and public 
sector actors helps develop val ue-added products that stimulate  use and adoption by vulnerable communities as well 
as enables private sector engagement in packaging and dissemina tion of these products. Strengthening dissemination 
and outreach channels, raising aw areness, and capacity building  of end users supports sustained participation of the 
target communities and enable uptake and adoption of the EWs an d CI for enhanced decisi on making an d adaptation.
 
92. Innovation, market development and transformation: The proposed project promote s innovative use of mobile 
phone and ICT technologies for development of and ‘last mile’ d issemination of climate information. In particular, the 
project will be used to enhance the ICT and mobile platforms fo r agricultural advisories. T he project will help scale the 
reach of the 3-2-1, Esoko and FrontlineSMS agricultural advisor y platforms enhanced with weather and climate 
information. The project will engage with Airtel and other tele com networks to fac ilitate cost-effectiv e rates to enable 
outreach to even the remotest areas. These innovations engender  scale-up of the use of climate information for early 
warnings as well as planning for enhanced livelihoods.  
 
																																																													
46 From 200,000 farmers to 2M (the incremental GCF AWS coverage i s 10%, products can be disseminated nationally and with 100% 
AWS coverage, can reach 2M farmers); 30,000 Fishing-reliant pop ulations in South; 100000 to 200,000 automated CBEWS 
beneficiaries within districts ; twice the coverage from about 4 9% to 100% of hydrological stations, improving ODSS effectivene ss to 
60%, can cover twice the population i.e 2.8M. Total about 4.3 M , increasing the % of direct beneficiaries from about 12% of po pulation to 
26% of the population (keeping popul ation constant for simple e stimate) 
47 Indirect beneficiaries would be the total national population benefiting from EWs and climate in formation (excluding the dire ct 
beneficiares already counted) due to 100% coverage of hydromet capacity, 3 times the project ta rget coverage of AWS: scaling f rom 
0.7M to 4.2M, about 25% of the population. 
48 In total, about 8.5M or 52% of the population impacted, more t han 4 times the project target impact.  
49 http://practicalaction.org/page/docs/region_nepal/sewin-project -summary.pdf


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 65 
 
	E
93. The project also fosters synergies between disaster risk re duction and longer-term climate adaptation by 
strengthening the linkages between disaster response and climat e risk management through the EWs and climate 
information and products and enhancing the awareness and capaci ties at national, sub-national, and community levels 
for climate risks and impacts. The project also promotes a pion eering model in the use of DCICs as boundary 
organizations (as knowledge and learning channels) to promote c limate awareness and risk management. the use of 
demonstrating the design of the project as responsive to GFCS c all for greater synergy between producers and users 
of information, including developing demand for weather and cli mate services. Lessons learned and best practices from 
the project can enable creating of enabling environment and inc entives for scaling up EWs and CI in other communities 
across the country and the region. 
 94. A central element for the paradigm shift is the demand-base d model for diffusion of climate and agriculture related 
information and services and enabling private sector engagement  including MSEs. The project is responsive to the 
GFCS call for greater synergy between the producers and users o f the climate informatio n andfacilitates the demand 
for weather and climate services. The project will strengthen t he ecosystem of services and stimulate markets for 
provision and uptake of climate information/services for use in  agriculture, fisheries, water resources management. 
These early gains can be consolidated and expanded on to serve specialized information needs for range of service 
providers and users. Packaging of weather and climate data and information for a range of other service providers, 
including applications related to building and management of in frastructure, land and air transport, and the private sector 
actors in telecommunications, insurance and financial intermedi aries, entails opportunities for commercialization of the 
information for resilience build ing among the end-users. The pr oject will also address legal and regulatory barriers to 
create conditions for public-private partnerships enhancing ope rational and financial viability information and service 
delivery. Other effective practices and examples, such as the p artnership initiated in Burkina Faso between government 
of Burkina Faso and Telecel for dissemination of climate inform ation, will be assess ed to promote PPPs. 
 
95. The project enhances capacity of communities to understand climate and disaster risks and influences behavior 
and adaptation strategies of the vulnerable communities to effe ctively protect their lives and livelihoods for 
transformative impact. The project emphasizes a participatory a pproach, with focus on women and vulnerable groups, 
in all phases of planning and implementation including communit y engagement in vulnerability and risk assessments, 
sensitization on disaster and c limate risks and responses, co-p roduction of climate information and development of 
‘people-centered’ early warning systems, and ‘ToT’ approach for  capacity building for disaster preparedness and 
response and resilient livelihood strategies. Building on this,  knowledge transfer and dissemination through use of 
mobile technologies and community outreach channels enables beh avior change through awareness, trust, and 
capacity for disaster and climate risk management in the target ed communities.  
 
E.2.3. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
96. The proposed project supports the implementation and operat ionalization of key national policies including the 
MGDS, NCCIP, and NDRM policies. T hrough the capacity building a nd engagement of the key stakeholders in the 
hydromet agencies and line ministries and the robust linkages b etween the national, sub-national, and local level efforts, 
the project generates best practices and lessons that will supp ort the monitoring and review of the operationalization 
of these frameworks. The projec t contributes to supplementary e fforts financed through the LDCF funded UNDP EWS 
project in integrating weather and climate information into the  operationalization of national and sector specific policies, 
annual budgets and local development plans, including the Natio nal Disaster Risk Management Policy and district 
development plans. Together, the resources will enhance coordin ation among various agencies and departments on 
weather and climate information dissemination, early warning pr eparedness and response, and climate-responsive 
planning. 
 
97. Further, the community based  disaster preparedness will inf orm the UNDP PS DRR programme that supports 
mainstreaming of DRR efforts into  national policy, planning, an d programming. The data a nd knowledge strengthened 
through the proposed project w ill be shared with the programme (operationalized through the inclusion of the PS DRR 
personnel in the project managemen t structure) to inform decisi on-making and strengthen the frameworks for disaster 
risk management (through the EOCs, District Cluster System, etc .). The demand-based model for CI/products will 
strengthen planning and decision ma king across the DRM, Water, Agriculture, and Fisheries sectors.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 65 
 
	E
98. The project, through the enhan ced coordination and synergie s among the various government agencies, enables 
linkages across disaster risk reduction and climate change adap tation and strengthens po licy and institutional 
frameworks for long-term sustai nability of project activities, outcomes, and impacts towards climate resilient 
development in the country. Furthermore, through the enabling o f the demand-based model for weather and climate 
services and addressing of policy and regulatory barriers for p rivate sector engagement, the project incentivizes and 
advances development up market opportunities at local, national , and international level further strengthening adaptive 
capacities across communities, public sector, and the private s ector. 
 
 
E.2.4. Potential for knowledge and learning 
99. The project will contribute to the creation and strengtheni ng of knowledge and collective learning processes through 
EWs and CI knowledge generation,  sharing, transfer, application , and iterative learning. The project will enhance the 
generation and use of collective knowledge and information amon g hydromet agencies through weather and climate 
data analysis and forecasting . It will also promote coordinatio n and knowledge sharing among hydromet agencies and 
line ministries through the proposed interventions to develop t ailored products for sector-specific use. Through the 
diffusion of the tailored products and community engagement, th e project will provide contin ued awareness and learning 
of climate change risks, impacts , and potential responses as kn owledge and understanding of climate change evolves 
and the needs and priorities of targeted communities change. Fu rthermore, this learning and use of climate information 
will promote and guide climate risk management approaches, prom oting behavioral change in the long term. 
 
100. The proposed project institutionalizes knowledge generatio n and learning through the enhancements to the 
existing District Climate Inform ation Centers (DCIC). Support t o the DCICs will be a catalyti c factor to strengthen them 
as hubs for knowledge management and sharing, becoming the cent ers to connect the ends users of the information 
to the information sources. The DCICs will serve as knowledge r epositories (databases) and provide inter-project 
knowledge and best practice transfer within Malawi. Evaluation50 of existing DCICs has shown that they can serve as 
decision points and coordination centers for disaster and clima te risk management. The DCICs would use means of 
transferring knowledge that is adapted to local culture, using storytelling and knowledge fairs. Existing partnerships with 
local radios will be strengthened and new partnerships will be established for disseminating weather bulletins. The 
DCICs will be linked to rural radios and the DCCMS would also b e linked to Malawi Broadcasting Station (MBC), which 
is the major national media house with wider coverage. The DCIC s will help facilitate information flows in local language 
via different instruments and media (documents, posters, cell p hone, radio, awareness campaigns, Disaster Risk 
Reduction (DRR)/Environmental Sch ool Clubs, etc.) and improve u nderstanding of EWs and CI among end users, and 
help measure the effectiveness of the EWS for continued use. 
 
101. The project will also support sharing of lessons learned and be st practices through t he continuous monitoring 
and evaluation of the project. The M&E plan (Section H.2) will include provision for generation of lessons learned and 
best practices (reports, publications, and other communication and knowledge products for various media) to not only 
support adaptive project managemen t but also to inform learning  across national/sub-nationa l/community levels within 
Malawi as well as EWs and CI efforts in other countries in the region. The project will contribute to the collective learning 
in the climate information and services arena through the effor ts of various governments, development partners, private 
sector, and the civil society.  
 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and ec onomic co-benefits, includin g gender-sensitive development impact 
102. The project will provide broad economic, environmental, an d social co-benefits, including gender impacts, to the 
target countries by providing the means to avoid losses from in creased climate variability and climate extremes due to 
climate change.  
 
																																																													
50 2015; GoM; “Terminal Progress Report: Africa Climate Adaptatio n and Food Security Project (ACA)”


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 65 
 
	E
 
Economic benefits 
103. The proposed project will strengthen national hydro-meteor ological infrastruc ture and forecasti ng abilities of the 
hydromet staff that will improve the accuracy and spatial cover age of available climate information and the use of this 
information in providing tailored, sector-specific information to sectors and societies vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change.  
 104. Strengthening of extension se rvices, dissemination channel s, and communication systems can provide 
economic benefits at the local level: for example, through impr oved crop yields and by reducing losses of agriculture 
produce, improved management strategies for fishing, fish proce ssing and trading, and reduced disruption of 
livelihoods. The shift in paradigm to demand-based and multi-st akeholder ecosystem of climate information and 
services will attract private sector investment generating sust ainable economic and social impact through new business 
models, commercialization, and job creation. Overall, the propo sed project yields a number of economic benefits as 
detailed in the economic analyses: saving an average of 18 live s per year, reducing damage and losses to properties 
and infrastructure worth 5 million USD, and improving agricultu ral productivity for an annual benefit of 3.8 million USD. 
However, secondary benefits can include enhanced incomes from c apacity building and business information 
generation and water resource-reliant sector benefits such as h ydropower generation improvement from water resource 
use modeling.  Social Benefits 
105. The proposed project advances the social benefits of EWs a nd climate information including positive changes 
related to experience and perceptions of safety, security, and personal comfort, trust and confidence, attitudes, 
preferences or behavioural norms , organizational culture or fun ction, and equitable distributio n of benefits. This in-turn 
has flow-on effects on people’s health and well-being, and thus  positively benefits communities and social structures. 
Communities will benefit from the increased safety and security  and reduced disruption to educational activities, family 
and community structures.  As the project will strengthen the o verall framework and infrastructure for climate monitoring 
and tailored products for agriculture and fisheries, the progra mme will benefit women and men engaged in these 
livelihoods through enhanced food security and resilience of in come. Hansen et al (2011) in their review of seasonal 
forecasting for agriculture in S ub-Saharan Africa stated that s easonal forecasts may have considerable potential to 
improve agricultural manag ement and rural livelihoods.
51 
 
106. The strengthened capacities of the communities and linkage s to sub-national systems can empower and 
enhance decision-making among community members. Communication channels established through the proposed 
project can be used for other aspe cts of community life improvi ng quality of life. For instance, ICT/mobile platforms can 
be used for health and market services. Community radios can al so be used for arranging medical evacuations. The 
automated EWS will provide downstream communities with informat ion that may in the past n ot have been forthcoming 
due to district disputes. With this knowledge for example, duri ng an impending flood, the communities can take proactive 
steps to ensuring the protection of their assets through moving  their belongings, animals etc. to higher ground.  This 
therefore has a significant social benefit as it allows communi ties to be aware of the actions they need to take and 
builds resilience within the communities.  Further, it also pro vides a sense of community if individuals are able to help 
others during these events. 
 
Environmental benefits 
107. The project will provide a number of significant environme ntal benefits.  By enab ling better predictive 
management of droughts and floods and risk informed planning fo r agriculture and fisheries, the project will yield 
environmental benefits through strengthened ecosystem resilienc e and improved soil and water quality.  Support to 
water resource use modelling can also enhance sustainable water  resource planning and use including for integrated 
water resource management policies and plans, hydropower planni ng, and water supply and use, yielding positive 
																																																													
51 In a study of smallholder farmer s in four villages in Zimbabwe  (2002/03 and 2003/04 growing seasons, n = 500), of the 75% of farmers 
who reported receiving seasonal f orecast information, 57% repor ted changing time of planting and cultivation as a response (Pa tt et al., 
2005). This was also observed for  farmers that participated in training on the uncertainty that surrounds climate forecasting.  Based on 
elicited crop yields, normalized relative to elicited historic ranges, farmers who reported changing management based on forec ast 
information experienced a 19% yield benefit in 2003/04,


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 65 
 
	E
environmental benefits. The proje ct will provide important data  that farmers and fishers can utilize in their activities.  
Additionally, the strengthening of  extension will also be inval uable to the way both farmers and fishers conduct their 
daily lives. 
 108. Through short and longer term forecasting, farmers gain kn owledge and adapt their practices to be more 
effective, economically and envir onmentally.  Once farmers are more aware of impending events such as droughts and 
floods, they can undertake alter native farming practices that w ill potentially use less water for any irrigated crops.  
Farmers will be able to store wat er so as the environment is no t degraded to get them through drought events.  Further, 
with the additional knowledge, farmers can better plan their ac tivities that will result in a r eduction in sedime nt loss (and 
any nutrients etc that may be used on their crops) into riverin e environment.  This will have environmental benefits to 
those living downstream and also to the water quality of Lake M alawi. The environmental benef its on fishers are also 
important.  With information of incoming Mwera winds, fishers w ill be able to return to shore and/or not commence trips 
reducing the potential for acci dents that could damage the ecos ystem. Further advantages include the identification of 
harmful algal blooms (through temperature and/or satellite meas urements), which poison fish and people – reducing 
time, money and resour ces spent fishing fo r no gain, as well as  avoiding impacts on human health. 
 Gender Benefits 
109. It is estimated that women comprise more than 71% of the t otal full-time farmers in Malawi
52. Of the targeted 
farmers in the 14 districts, t he project aims to benefit more t han 50% of women (about 97,000, see H.1) farmers through 
gender-differentiated vulnerabilit y analysis, focused capacity building through the extension workers and participatory 
design of products, and gender-sensitive adoption strategies. M ore than 5000 women53 in the fishing communities, 
primarily working as fish traders and processors, would benefit  from increased awareness and support on climate 
change risks and how to incorporate the information in their tr ades thereby protecting their livelihoods and enhancing 
adaptive capacities. Therefore, proposed interventions will ens ure that women farmers and fishers/fish traders have 
enhanced access to extension servic es and weather information t hat is necessary for moving them up the agricultural 
and fisheries value-chain and transform them from being mere pr oducers to key players in marketing of products. 
 110. Additionally, the use of ICT/mobile platforms to scale out reach to NASFAM members will benefit women farmers 
as NASFAM has taken deliberate efforts to promote gender integr ation within its structures and within the community 
and families it serves. Each Association has a gender sub-commi ttee (with male and female representation) to promote 
gender considerations within all Association activities. The pr oportion of women in leadership positions has increased 
steadily over the past years, inc luding amongst farmer trainers . Currently, NASFAM has a paid membership of 164,000, 
of which 51% are women. Of the 16,000 who will be direct benefi ciaries of this intervention, a total of 8160 will be 
women farmers. Peopl e-centered CBEWS will also directly address  women’s vulnerabilities and exposure to disaster 
risk as women, often the caretakers and homemakers have limited  access to resources to protect their lives and 
property. During community-sensitization as well as design and implementation of the CBEWS, women beneficiaries 
(about 58,000) will be targeted for their engagement and owners hip of the CBEWS. 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country an d population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of countr y and beneficiary groups (Adaptat ion only) 
111. The projected climate change scenario in Malawi shows an i ncrease in mean temperature of between 2 and 3 
oC by 2050, a decrease in total annual rainfall and water availa bility and increase in erratic rainfall events54. The 
combination of increased temperatures and reduced rainfall is l ikely to result in considerable loss of agricultural output 
and a reduction in the extent of land suitable for rain-fed agr iculture production of the st aple maize crop. Increases in 
temperature and erratic rainfall will result in more frequent a nd intense droughts, floods and severe weather – including 
strong winds and associated storm surges over Lake Malawi. The vulnerability of Malawi’s economy and local 
																																																													
52 NASFAM 
53 Department of Fisheries, GoM 
54CEPA (May, 2012): Draft Position Paper: Towards Development of Climate Change Policy in Malawi. ECRP and DISCOVER 
Consortia.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 65 
 
	E
communities to climate change is as a result of a number of com pounding factors, namely: i) unique and highly 
degraded ecosystems; ii) socio-ec onomic and demographic situati on – including high population growth rates in 
combination with high poverty levels – which reduces capacities  to cope with climate change; iii) limited financial 
capacity to finance adaptation m easures; iv) over dependence on  rain-fed agriculture; v) heavy reliance on natural 
resources, particularly within the agricultural and fisheries s ector; vi) limited knowledge on climate change and variability 
at community level to inform adaptation practices; vii) sub-opt imal agricultural productivity and practices, and limited 
diversification within the household economy both on and off-fa rm; viii) limited access to affordable and sustainable 
clean energy sources; and ix) limited organization at local lev els for policy dialogue around climate change. 
 
112. World Bank (2010) showed t hat between 1970 and 2010, natur al hazards killed about 3.3 million people. 
Malawi’s Average Annual Loss (AAL ) by flooding is estimated to be about 24.11 million USD. The average annual GDP 
loss due to floods is etimated to be about 0.7 percent55. The Probable Maximum Loss (PML) has been estimated at 
110 million USD for flooding. Agricultural output in 2014 was a bout USD868,263,000. Based on the PML estimate, 
about 1/8th of the total agricultural output could be lost due to flooding . Increases in temperatures, droughts, floods and 
severe weather will negatively affect crop growth and many aspe cts of the agricultural value chain including drying, 
storage and transport to market. Both the direct and indirect e ffects of climate change will affect fisheries. The direct 
effects of climate change include changes in the abundance and distribution of exploited fish species. The increased 
frequency and severity of extreme events such as floods and sto rms will increase the hazards faced by fishermen and 
is likely to damage infrastructure such as fishponds. An analys is of drought risk56 demonstrates that the return period 
for drought is low (i.e. the risk is high) particularly in the districts of Chitipa, Karonga,  Rumphi, Mzimba and Nkhata bay 
in the north, and Salima, Mangochi, Balaka, Neno and Mwanza in the south and central r egions. Recognizing that 
drought is not the only determinant of food security, analysis of food insecure households was conducted using data 
collected by the Malawi Vulnerab ility Assessment Committee (MVA C) over a period of 10 y ears (Annex II, Feasibility 
Assessment, Section 1.2). Flood ri sks were also mapped identify ing the high, medium, and lo w flood risk districts.  
 
113. In the implementation report  of HFA 1 (2005-2015) for Mala wi, key gaps identified related to priority areas 2 and 
4: assess and monitor disaster risks and enhance early warning and reduce the underlying risk factors. The report 
noted key areas for improvement including identifying synergies  with climate change adaptation, strengthening 
resilience building in communities with particular emphasis on schools, and scaling up mainstreaming of DRR. The 
2015-2030 framework for Disaster Risk Reduction which was adopt ed on 18th March 2015 for the next 15 years aims 
to achieve substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in  lives, livelihood, health in t he economic, physical, social, 
cultural and environmental asser ts of persons, businesses, comm unities and countries. Taking into account the 
experience gained through the im plementation of the 2005-2015 H FA, there is a need for focused action in Malawi 
within and across sectors by state at local, national, regional  and global levels in the following priority areas: 
understanding disaster risk, str engthening disaster risk govern ance to manage disaster risk, investing in disaster risk 
reduction for resilience; and enhancing, disaster preparedness for effective response, and to build back better in the 
recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, s ocial and institutional needs 
114. Malawi has immense need and gaps in the observational netw orks and the capacity of the hydromet services to 
operate and maintain the infrastructure as well as analyze, int erpret, and package the data for forecasting and relevant 
sectoral planning. A survey of 13 hydromet agencies in Africa ( Jones, 2010) shows that the average annual budget is 
$5.26 million, which is .017% of $399.7 billion total GDP (2008  nominal numbers from IMF). For comparison, the US 
National Weather Service has an annual budget of $959 million, which is .067% of GDP. Managing climate risks and 
related disaster is a key priori ty for the country. The NCCIP i dentifies priority activities under Disaster Risk Management 
Progamme including improving the disaster risk management syste ms for the sectors and enhancing dissemination 
and use. The CBEWS have been proven to be effective in saving l ives and reduce economic losses. During the 2009 
floods in Chikwawa, 6,660 people from 1,332 households and thei r assets were protect ed by the warning system57. 
																																																													
55 World Bank/GFDRR, Ec onomic Vulnerability and Disaster Risk Man agement in Malawi and Mozambi que. Measuring Economic Risks 
of Droughts and Floods. 
56 IFPRI/RMSI (2010) Malawi: Econo mic Vulnerability and Disaster Risk Assessment. Economy-Wide Impacts of Droughts and Floods. 
57 Christian Aid (2009), ‘Communi ty answers to climate chaos: Get ting climate justice from the UNFCCC’


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 65 
 
	E
 
115. Implementation of these various national priorities is con strained due to limited resources (both financial and 
human) among the relevant national, sub-national and local leve l actors. A review of the expenditure for the DRM sector 
during 2006/7 and 2011/12 years revealed that the expenditure i ncurred through the national budget amounted to US$4 
million.58 Development partners funding during the same years amounted to  about US$50 million. The project will 
enable the development of an observation system that national b udgets simply cannot afford and until alternative 
revenue streams are developed at scale to support maintenance a nd grid upgrades.  
 
116. The merit of hydromet services emerges from the improvemen t of decisions by economic stakeholders 
incorporating weather and climate information. Weather services  are particularly relevant for sectors such as 
agriculture, construction, energy, insurance, telecommunication , tourism, transport, logistics and water availability. As 
an adaptive measure, climate information and early warnings is particularly important for the poorer segments of 
society, which do not necessarily benefit from large protective  infrastructure projects59; micro-small and medium 
enterprises in agriculture and fisheries sector; and hydro-mete orological services and other user-agencies with regards 
to long-term planning and extension services. The use of weathe r and seasonal climate information by farmers and 
fishers is currently minimal for a variety of reasons, includin g: the timing, reliability, applicability to local context, and  
the ability to interpret information for use. Additional compli cations arise due to the scientific limitations of forecasting 
and being able to convey these conc epts in ways that are easy t o understand e.g. a probabilistic seasonal forecast.  
 
117. Malawi has significant socio-economic needs as one of the world’s Least Developed Countries, with a gross 
national income per capita of only USD 250 (World Bank, 2007). Of those living in poverty, approximately 40% are 
extremely poor, living on less t han USD 0.33 per day (Malawi We lfare Monitoring Survey, 2008). In Malawi vulnerable 
groups fall in the categories of women, female-headed household s, children, orphans, the elderly, and the disabled. 
According to the contextual analysis done by Voluntary Services  Overseas (VSO) in 2011, women and children are 
among the poorest, most vulnerable and marginalized groups in M alawi. Of a total population of 13.2 million, 6.8 million 
are children (Population Housing Survey, 2008). However, other specific poor and vulnerable groups also include youth, 
child-headed households, people living with HIV, and communitie s living in disaster-prone areas. The recent flooding 
in Malawi, where an estimated 1,101,364 people were affected, 2 30,000 displaced, 106 killed and 172 reported missing, 
affected the vulnerable groups, variably. Some vulnerable group s, mainly children had to be relocated to camps where 
further vulnerabilities got exper ienced (gender-based violence,  no health, education and sanitary services). The total 
economic loss was US$335 million in just one season, and this w ould have been minimized if a reliable early warning 
system and advisories were available in the country. The projec t will focus on targeting the vulnerable populations, both 
through the agriculture and fisheries products as well as throu gh the community-based disaster and climate risk 
management interventions. The vulnerability assessments will pa y special attention to needs and priorities of these 
groups and project activities will be designed to benefit them.  For instance, female farmers and fishing tradeswomen 
will be targeted to enhance livelihoods and adaptive capacity. The needs of the women, children, and the elderly will 
be incorporated in the design of the disaster response measures  and vulnerable community members will be trained in 
a number of interventions to enhance preparednes s and early rec overy related to climat e related disasters. 
 
118. Malawi also faces capacity gaps and institutional issues r elated to hydromet services (DCCMS and DWR) to 
develop reliable and operationally  viable systems for observati on and analysis at the same time strengthening line 
ministries to use the EWS/CL f or climate-responsive planning an d disaster management. The proposed project 
strengthens the implementation capacity of DoDMA through expand ed coverage for the flood modelling and decision 
support system, strengthening of the DCICs to serve as dissemin ation channels and knowledge management systems 
for ‘last mile’ access and outreach to communities, operational izing and training staff on EOCs and DRR strategies and 
implementation. MoAFS (including DoF) will also be capacitated to develop tailored products for agriculture and 
fisheries and strengthen it s extension support system. 
 
 
 
																																																													
58 GoM (2014), Public Expenditure Rev iew Report for Malawi’s Envi ronment and Disaster Risk Management Sectors  
59 World Bank.(2010).Natural haz ards, Unnatural disasters: Effect ive prevention through an econom ic lens. World Bank and United 
Nations.231 pp.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 65 
 
	E
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ie s) ownership of, and capacity to impleme nt, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national c limate strategy and coherence w ith existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs 
and NAPs 
119. By signing and ratifying the UNFCCC, Malawi has, respectiv ely, committed to the adoption and implementation 
of policies and measures to adapt to climate change and to mana ge existing climate risks, including enhancing 
preparedness and response capability to likely disasters. Malaw i is also a signatory to the Hyogo Framework for Action 
(HFA). The proposed project is linked and well-aligned to natio nal priorities and measures identified for implementation 
reflected in the MGDSII (2011-2016), National Disaster Risk and  Management (NDRM) Policy, National Climate 
Change Investment Plan (NCCIP),  and the NAPA. It helps operatio nalize many of these relevant policies and plans 
and contributes to their monitoring and review. 
 120. The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II (MGDS II 201 1-2016) outlines Malawi’s five-year development 
strategy for the period 2011 to 2016 and identifies six themati c areas
60. The proposed project has been developed in 
alignment with sub-theme 3.2 Disaster Risk Management which pro vides a number of strategies for supporting Malawi’s 
preparedness, response and recove ry to the increase in magnitud e, frequency and impact of di sasters as a result of 
climate change, population growth  and environmental degradation . The MGDS II also includes nine Key Priority 
Areas61. The project is consistent with expected outcomes of two of th e Key Priorities, namely: 1) Agriculture and Food 
Security; and 9) Climate Change, N atural Resources and Environm ental Management. 
 121. The Disaster Preparedness and Relief (DPR) Act of 1991 and  MGDS provide strategic direction to disaster risk 
management for the country. Two o ther relevant policy documents  that aim to address vulnerability and poverty are: i) 
National Disaster Risk Management (NDRM) Policy (2015) which in cludes the aim to enhance the disaster risk 
management coordination role of DoDMA; and ii) a draft National  Climate Change Policy which will guide responses to 
commitments under the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol, specifying var ious activities to be undertaken for climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. The National Strategy for Sustainabl e Development (NSSD) complies with the UNFCCC 
objectives: i) to provide effectiv e weather and climate disaste r early warning and enhance awareness, uptake and 
response by the general public; and ii) to provide reliable wea ther and climate information and advisors for use in 
agricultural production, industrial production and water resour ce management.  
 
122. Under the NAPA, the development of EWSs is a priority and is expected to be beneficial to multiple sectors, 
including agriculture, water, health and energy. NAPA project p riority 3: “Improving agricultu ral production under erratic 
rains and changing climatic conditions” features improved EWSs.  NAPA project priority 4: “Improving Malawi’s 
Preparedness to cope with droughts and floods” features the imp lementation of both flood and drought EWSs. The 
project includes priority activities for strengthening the “For ecasting and Early Warning system” including “Capacity 
building (training staff to man  the systems).” Malawi’s NAPA pr oject priority 5: “Improving climate monitoring to enhance 
Malawi’s early warning capability and decision making and susta inable utilization of Lake Ma lawi and lakeshore areas 
resources” features climate monitoring and an EWS on Lake Malaw i and lakeshore areas for pre-disaster preparedness 
to rural fishing and farming communities.  
 123. Malawi has officially launched its NAP process in 2014 und er the leadership of the Ministry of Environment and 
Climate Change Management. A multi-sectoral NAPs team composed of sector experts from ministries reports to the 
National Climate Change Technica l Committee.  Agriculture, Wate r, Health, Transport, and Infr astructure are included 
as priority in the NAP process amongst other sectors. The Minis try of Gender is a notable inclusion. Cross-sectoral 
activities relevant across sect ors have been identified. Each s ector is expected to undertake stock-taking though an 
inventory of relevant initiatives and a gap and need analysis. A key component of this pro cess will be to iterate the 
																																																													
60 These are: Sustainable Economic G rowth; Social Development; So cial Support and Disaster Risk Management; Infrastructure 
Development; Governance; and G ender and Capacity Development. 
61 1) Agriculture and Food Security; 2) Energy, Industrial Develo pment, Mining and Tourism; 3) Tr ansport Infrastructure and Nsan je 
World Inland Port; 4) Education , Science and Technology; 5) Pub lic Health, Sanitation, Malaria and HIV and AIDS Management; 6)  
Integrated Rural Development; 7) Green Belt Irrigation and Wate r Development; 8) Child Development, Youth Development and 
Empowerment; 9) Climate Change, Natural Resources and Environme nt Management.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 65 
 
	E
development of risk and vulnerabilit y assessments and climate a nd socio-economic scenarios, incorporating the latest 
projections and observed changes in climate.  
 
124. Finally The United Nations Development Assistance Framewor k (UNDAF 2012-2016) for Malawi acknowledges 
that – in the context of climate  change – improved disaster man agement enhances the sustainability of economic 
growth, particularly in district s that are prone to natural dis asters. The proposed project is consistent with three specific 
output areas from the UNDAF, namely, 1.3.1) Environment, natura l resources, climate change and disaster risk 
reduction mainstreamed in policies, programmes and plans implem ented in 14 disaster-prone di stricts; 1.3.2) Data and 
knowledge on the impact of climate change, environment and natu ral resources and disaster risk management made 
accessible to decision makers and government, private sector an d civil society; and 1.3.3) coordination mechanisms 
and implementation arrangements for climate change, environment  and natural resources and disaster risk 
management established and used at national level and disaster- prone districts. 
 
125. The proposed project has been designed and developed with full ownership of the GoM through a series of 
consultations, at community, district and national levels. The feasibility assessment for the project required an extensive 
consultative process that was undertaken by GoM, led by DoDMA, DCCMS, and DWR and supported by DAES and 
DoF (with technical support provided by UNDP). It involved cons ultations with diverse stakeholders including 
government ministries and departme nts, NGOs, Civil Society, pri vate sector and development partners. Multi-
stakeholder consultations were a lso conducted for concept and p roposal development culminating in a GCF concept 
validation workshop held by DoDMA  on June 2015 to obtain input and feedback into the devel opment of the proposal. 
The list of stakeholders and key outcomes of the meeting are su mmarized in Annex II, Feas ibility Assessment, Appendix 
A. All key partners were consulted individually as well as coll ectively to gain and in-depth understanding of the needs 
and also solicit ideas on how the needs could be addressed thro ugh the proposal. The National Designated Authority 
(NDA) was involved in the entire process. Women representation was emphasized through the participation of the 
various NGOs and CSOs and by including female staff members of the key agencies. Further details on stakeholder 
engagement are provided in Section E.5.3. 
 126. A series of consultations with the NDA in the Environmenta l Affairs Department (EAD) were conducted to gather 
feedback and obtain a buy-in on t he proposal. Active participat ion by the NDA also facilitat ed the consultation process 
and in coordination with the NDA, a preliminary Local Project A ppraisal Committee (LPAC) meeting was held on July 
9, 2015 where all the key executing agencies and relevant stake holders, especially women’s  groups and civil society, 
were represented and the proposal  was reviewed and endorsed wit h a few amendments.  Noting that the design of the 
proposal has taken into consider ation the national priorities a nd relevant strategies highlighted above, the NDA has 
issued a ‘no objection’ letter for the submission of the propos al to the GCF. As an expr ession of commitment and 
ownership, the execut ing agencies also pr ovided co-financing fo r the project.  
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entit ies and executing entities t o deliver 
127. The proposed project is aligned with UNDP’s comparative ad vantage in the areas of capacity building, providing 
technical and policy support, reducing barriers and creating en abling conditions for adaptation planning and 
investments. Specifically, the proposed project will build upon  UNDP’s comparative advantage stemming from 
experience in working with gover nments and communities in Malaw i and globally on: i) esta blishing and strengthening 
institutional, policy and legislat ive mechanisms; ii) building capacity; iii) undertaking risk assessments; iv) 
mainstreaming climate change adaptation, disaster risk reductio n and early warning systems into development 
planning; and v) harnessing best practices and community-based approaches across different thematic areas for 
climate change adaptation and disa ster risk reduction. This inc ludes experience with initiatives focused on transferring 
knowledge and technology via South-South cooperation.  
 
128. The UNDP Country Office (CO) in Malawi is well placed to o versee the implementation of the proposed project. 
This is because it has built close connections with DoDMA throu gh its support to the implementation of many disaster 
management and early warning projects in the country including with financing from the LDCF and the PS DRM 
programme (See Annex XIII for summary of UNDP’s support to clim ate change in Malawi). UNDP has played a pivotal


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 65 
 
	E
role among the UN agencies and other development partners in su pporting the government of Malawi, through DoDMA, 
in mainstreaming DRR and early warning system aspects into nati onal and local level development planning processes. 
This has also included institutional and policy support which h as among others resulted in the development of the 
National Disaster Risk Management Policy for Malawi. The propos ed project has been designed to integrate with 
UNDP’s Programme Support on DRM. This allows the activities und er the proposed project to be streamlined with other 
donor projects in the areas of DRM, as well as climate change, natural resources and sustainable energy. A DRM 
advisor is also placed in DoDMA  to support this structure and t he underlying programmes.  
 
129. UNDP can provide a vital co-ordination role for catalyzing  enhanced capacity to adapt to climate change risks 
and impacts across sectors in Malawi. To ensure that the necess ary capacities and institutional mechanisms are 
achieved at both the national and district levels, UNDP will ma intain its upstream focus. Furthermore, UNDP will 
facilitate and ensure transforma tional impacts at the community  level. UNDP also has considerable experience in 
managing GEF financed projects in the region – in particular th ose relating to disaster management, early warning and 
climate change adaptation. UNDP has been using an approach base d on the principle of optimizing resources and 
capacities through multi-sectoral  and multi-stakeholder driven partnerships in Malawi. The country office in Malawi is 
supported by Regional Technical Advisors at the UNDP offices in  Addis Ababa, as well as by policy, adaptation, 
economics and climate modeling experts in New York, Cape Town a nd Bangkok. The project will be implemented by 
DoDMA using UNDP’s National Implementation Modality, which is d esigned to ensure domestic systems are used for 
accountability. The interventions  through this programme will b e compliant with the Fund’s ESS and compliant with 
stakeholder consultations.  
E.5.3. Engagement with civil societ y organizations and other re levant stakeholders 
130. The proposed project builds on several rounds of discussio ns with stakeholders at the national level on the topic 
of climate information and early warning systems, including ong oing support provided by UNDP with financing from the 
LDCF and bilateral sources such as Government of Japan, Germany  and Canada. The programme is part of the over-
arching DRM support to Malawi, as described in the DRM Project Support Document, which was developed in 2011-
2012 following extensive consultations with stakeholders. To de velop a project that refle cts the needs of national 
stakeholders and builds on/scales up ongoing EWS and CI efforts , the proposed project has incorporated the 
information received from three stakeholder consultations condu cted from September 2012 to March 2015.   
 
131. Multi-stakeholder consultations including government agenc i e s ,  N G O s ,  C S O s ,  a n d  p r i v a t e  s e c t o r  w e r e  
conducted during June 2015 culminating in a GCF concept validat ion workshop held on June 2015 to obtain input and 
feedback into the development of the proposal. The validation w orkshop was held by DoDMA on June 11, 2015 with 
participation from various agencies, NGOs, non-state actors, an d the private sector. Representation of women was 
ensured through the participatio n of representing NGOs and comm unity-level organizations as well as by including 
female staff members of the relevant executing agencies. The li st of stakeholders and key outcomes of the meeting 
are summarized in Annex II, Feasibility Assessment, Appendix A.  Furthermore, the Feas ibility Assessment was 
developed as a result of extensiv e stakeholder engagement and d etails the current status of EWS/CI, gaps and needs 
(technical and capacity), and recommended investments and appro aches for the proposed project. The analysis reflects 
the learning, knowledge, and experience from the ongoing effort s and priorities and needs of the various stakeholders. 
 
132. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) play a crucial role in climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction 
programmes and activities in Malawi. Several of these NGOs impl ement community based early  warning activities, 
focusing on vulnerable groups such as women and children, (as s ummarized in Annex II, F easibility Assessment, 
Section 4) and conduct capacity building of Civil Protection Co mmittees (including women community members) to 
enhance their effectiveness in c arrying out disaster related ac tivities in their communities. Several NGO/CBO 
representatives were consulted in the design of the project, in cluding CISONET, Christian Aid, and Concern Universal. 
Finally, the proposal incorporat es the feedback from GCF review  and consultations, both on the initial concept and the 
first submission of this p roposal (See Annex XIV). 
 
133. All consultations were led by DoDMA and facilitated by UND P. The implementing partners played a central role 
in determining the activities for the proposed project and were  involved in most of the consultations undertaken above. 
The implementation strategy for the project is dependent on com prehensive stakeholder participation. The project will 
engage various stakeholders (government agencies, NGOs, CSOs, p rivate sector, and communities) extensively during


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 65 
 
	E
implementation to establish the si tes for hydromet infrastructu re, design and deliver tailored products, and undertake 
community sensitization and disaster preparedness and response.  The detailed stakeholder management plan is 
provided in Annex XIII.  
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fi nancial soundness of the projec t/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Adequacy of financing structure 
134. The grant resources will help remove the barriers to suppo rt investments that, due to the public good nature of 
the project, do not entail revenue generation or cost recovery during the project duration and hence, hinder private 
investments. The financial and te chnical barriers that prevent installation of a reliable climate information and EWS 
system in Malawi can only be removed by public investment finan ced by grant resources from  international development 
institutions. Given that Malawi’s private sector is comprised m ainly of MSEs, it is difficult to  envisage co-financing from 
them for this project, since such a system doesn’t have any dir ect and immediate revenue generation potential. 
However, the project does plan to engage the private sector by stimulating demand for climate information-based value 
added products and services, by engaging with ICT/telecom indus try, MSEs with a particular focus on agri-businesses 
and insurance industry that mi ght generate revenues and co-fina ncing from them in the medium- to long-term, thereby 
supporting the project’s financial sustainability beyond its pr oposed duration. Nonetheless,  such revenues from the 
private sector and/or  end-users are not guar anteed at this poin t and hence, in accordance with the UNDP’s Guidelines 
for Financial and Economic Analysis of Projects, a financial an alysis of this project isn’t deemed pertinent. While 
households will be willing to pay f or such information, the str ategic nature of such information and the government’s 
responsibilities towards the most vulnera ble communities in the  country makes a case for public investment. However, 
these investments, while public in nature, generate significant  economic benefits making the project economically viable 
(Refer to Section F.1 and Annex XII), with an economic internal  rate of return (EIRR) of 31%. There is also potential for 
secondary benefits that can crowd-in public and private sector financing and create conditions for replication and scale.
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
135. The proposed project activities will build on existing net works, achievements and planned actions by DCCMS, 
DWR, DoDMA, DAES, DoF, and NASFAM. This will allow institutiona l capacity to be built cost-effectively, ultimately 
assisting in planning and implem enting the early warning system  and climate information products and services. This 
approach of complementing existing, related projects is more co st-effective than the impl ementation of a separate 
initiative, as it will allow the proposed project to be managed  within the existing institutional and management 
frameworks. Additionally this approach builds local capacity an d maximizes the baseline EWS on which future 
investments can build. The prop osed project will also work clos ely with co-financing institutions to co-produce outputs. 
This will promote cost-sharing, reducing overheads and enhancin g cost-effectiveness. 
 
136. Synergies between the proposed GCF financing and LDCF fina nced UNDP EWS project will be used to enhance 
the cost-effective hiring of specialized technical staff, coord ination of data and information, training (operations & 
maintenance of equipment; forecasting techniques; tailored advi sories and warnings), and effective use of 
communications and standard operating procedures. The technolog ies and coverage have been selected to allow 
minimum numbers of observing/monitoring equipment, whilst being  able to provide adequate information to develop 
informative and specific service s. Stakeholders within the DWR and DCCMS were consulted extensively on the likely 
extent of training that would be required for personnel to oper ate various equipment types in order to ensure that training 
as well as procurement is included in cost-effectiveness consid erations. For tailored product s, the proposed project will 
integrate weather and climate information services into existin g 3-2-1 and Esoko channels, leveraging established 
infrastructure. In addition, the scale up of these services can  help negotiate bundled costs of service ensuring cost-
effective reach. Engaging private sector and promoting co-inves tments for demand-based products will also create 
conditions for cost-effective delivery of information and servi ces. Finally, training communities in O&M as well as 
monitoring of community-based EWS  enables ownership as well as cost-effective approach to sustained impact.
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveragi ng and mobilized lo ng-term investm ents (mitigation only) 
Not Applicable


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 65 
 
	E
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Expected economic rate of return   
137. The public goods nature of this project’s outputs doesn’t entail revenue generation or cost recovery from the 
project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries during the project duration. Hence, a financial analysis of this project isn’t 
deemed pertinent. The expected economic internal rate of return  is 31% for this project, which exceeds 10%, the 
economic opportunity cost of capital. Under all test cases incl uding a “worst case” scenario with 20% increase in 
investments costs or a 20% redu ction in total benefits, EIRR re mains above the minimum threshold. 
 
Financial viability in the long r un beyond the Fund interventio n 
138. GoM through the various departments engaged in service del ivery and use of EWs and climate information, is 
providing co-financing support (USD2,170,000) to the proposed p roject through their budget allocations. The hydromet 
agencies (DCCMS and DWR) are providing project support through co-financing of O&M (bey ond the service contracts 
for maintenance included with installation, typically 3 years) for the project established infrastructure, human resources 
including staff for O&M and data analysis/forecasting, logistic s and facilities. The draft O&M budget (including GCF, 
domestic and UNDP TRAC resources) is presented in the Feasibili ty Assessment (Annex II) and described in section 
D.2 above. The scaling up of dom estic support throughout the pr oject, combined with contingencies for spare parts and 
training through GCF, is expected to ensure that O&M can contin ue throughout the lifetime of the project (10 years). 
DCCMS and DWR are also committed to replacing community-based E WS related equipment and establishing SOPs 
with communities. As the executing entity, DoDMA is not only co mmitted to provide project management support, it will 
co-invest in coordinating the DRM  activities with all relevant stakeholders through its hum an resources support, O&M 
(jointly with DWR and DCCMS on C BEWS), communication and knowle dge management, and fa cilities support.  
 
139. DAES and DoF are co-financing the development and dissemin ation of tailored products for agriculture and 
fisheries-reliant populations respectively. DAES is committed t o provide extension services  support, co-production of 
communication materials and tailored advisories, engagement of communities, and use of the Agricultural Resource 
Centers. DoF is co-financing the dissemination of tailored warn ings through its community outreach and extension 
support staff, creation of web pl atforms and communication mate rials, and support for safety measures. Beyond 
leveraging financing for project proposed measures, the impacts  assured through capacity building, knowledge sharing 
and learning, private sector engagement and operationalization and contribution to relevant policies, strengthen the 
mandates for these agencies for securing financing though natio nal budgets. The agencies indicated that annually the 
project costs would be included in the estimated budgets submit ted to the Ministry of Finance. Some activities become 
embedded in department activities.  The proposed project could h elp these agencies apply for public sector investments 
programmes to further supplement existing budgets. These commit ments and mandates promote financial viability of 
the project in the long-term. 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
140. The project has been designed by first identifying the tar get users of weather/climate information and the services 
they require (Output 2), as well as ensuring that there are cur rently mechanisms in place in Malawi to deliver the 
required services. This incorporates lessons learned from the U NDP implemented EWS project, recognizing that 
identified services direct the choice of equipment and training /analyses of data and forecasting techniques. As climate-
services is a relatively nascent field in Malawi, many of these  services offer the potential  to be developed further. Best 
practices, as identified through the DIPECHO, GFCS, Malawi Red Cross, IFRMP, ECRP projects and the MVAC and 
FEWSNET regional/natio nal programmes (see Annex II, Feasibility  Assessment, Section 4), are applied to many of the 
products that will be developed, inc luding: sensitization of co mmunities, extension officers  and other extension agents 
to derived products; co-production  of advisories with extension  officers and communities; strengthening dissemination 
centres within the community; using a variety of dissemination channels including mobile devices, print and radio; 
translating materials into local languages; using advanced oper ational decision support systems. 
 141. The observational equipment  that will provide data which w ill feed into these services has been chosen, based 
on a number of criteria identified as being important through U NDP (EWS project in Malawi and similar projects across 
Africa and Asia), including: c ost and ability for government to  replace/service this equipmen t; capability of current staff 
to operate and maintain the equipment; compatibility with exist ing observing systems (including data transmission, 
archiving, databases, quality c ontrol/quality assurance). Lower  cost alternatives have been chosen where available and


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 65 
 
	E
applicable e.g. lightning detecti on systems instead of weather radars (which are recognized internationally as resource 
and financially intensive to install, operate and maintain) and  satellite data to supplement ground observations (which 
is successfully being used in Ethiopia and Tanzania as part of the GFCS and other projects). Additionally an 
assessment of the current technica l capacity of each institutio n (see Annex II, Feasibility Assessment, Section 3) 
identified some international bes t practices (in weather and se asonal climate forecasting) which can be applied with 
appropriate training and capacity building, and do not require large infrastructure and/or h ardware e.g. application of 
Model Output Statistics to foreca sts, as commonly used by the U S national weather service and elsewhere.  
 
142. Output 3 focuses on setting up community based EWS systems  for floods, which have proved effective at 
warning as demonstrated through the Christian Aid work through the DIPECHO and ECRP projects which make use 
of river level gauges in upstream villages. Warnings are dissem inated to downstream village civil protection committees 
(CPCs) using mobile phones, megaphones, whistles and community flags (see Feasibility Assessment, Annex II, 
sections 4.2 and 4.3). The use of low-cost measuring systems wi ll ensure that DCCMS and DWR can replace and 
service the equipment (see discussion on choice of equipment ab ove). Involving the community in servicing, 
maintaining and using the equipmen t/information, as well as cho osing lead responders/observers and contact people, 
will further enhance the chances that the equipment will remain  working and not be vandalized, as learnt through 
DIPECHO, ECRP and UNDP EWS experie nces (see Feasibility Assessm ent, Annex II, sections 4.2 and 4.3). The 
automatic alert system employed in this proposal will ensure th at communities are warned in the least amount of time, 
and the development of SOPs with communities will ensure that r esponses are better coordinated in the future. Training 
village committees and working through ACPCs/VCPCs will ensure that established structur es and procedures are 
followed, which is a clear lesson from experiences during the 2 015 floods. Best practices from experiences on using 
manual CBEWS (from discussions with Red Cross and Christian Aid ) have also been incorporated into the project 
design to ensure effective and sustained impact. 
 143. The proposed project also adopts best practices in capacit y building and community engagements. A ToT 
approach will be used to improve capacities across national, su b-national, and community lev els, as nationally trained 
staff will be used for training of district and community level  actors. As informed by consultations with Christian Aid, 
World Food Programme and Malawi Red Cross for community engagem ent, credible and established channels (such 
as women’s groups, religious institutions, schools, and librari es) will be used for outreac h, knowledge s haring, and 
collective learning. Where feasible, climate field schools will  be formed to target farming and fishing communities for 
co-production and diffusion of tailored products (as recommende d by GFCS partners, Malawi Red Cross and 
NASFAM). Based on international best practices, DCCMS and DWR s taff will engage users of warnings/advisories 
(farmers, fishers, and flood prone communities) and intermediar y/boundary organizations (NASAM, DAES, DoF and 
CSOs) to design products that are both informative and based on  scientifically feasible forecasts and available 
information. 
 
144. In addition to using and promoting the best practices iden tified above, this project will also complement and 
harmonize with these projects  through the following actions: 
i. UNDP EWS project: through the use of low cost alternative te chnologies for monitoring and observing weather 
and climate in locations not already covered; by tailoring clim ate products for agriculture and flood forecasting 
that can be used in areas covered through the UNDP EWS project;  by providing extra stimulus and products 
which can be marketed fo r the private sector; 
ii. PS-DRM project: by engaging co mmunities and socially active  groups to enhance communication and use of 
climate risk information in areas which are not using or aware of this information; by conducting simulation 
exercises (particularly including schools) to test and adapt re sponse procedures; by supporting district councils 
as the key implementation agents in all aspects of the DRM cycl e; by using non-state actors and their on-the-
ground networks to disseminate and respond to warnings; 
iii. The IFRMP project: through the addition of targeted hydrol ogical and meteorological observations in northern 
and central areas; by extending t he current integrated decision  support system to north ern and central regions 
to support issuing of timely flood warnings, hydrological monit oring and modelling for water resource 
management; 
iv. The ECRP project: by using automatic community-based hydrol ogical measurements whic h will ensure timely 
flood warnings including through the night when observers are n ot present; by sensitizing communities on the 
need for hydrometeorological equi pment and the benefits of warn ings, which will ensure community buy in and


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 65 
 
	E
reduce the chance of vandalism/t heft; through using radios, meg aphones and flags to ensure all community 
members receive warnings in ar eas not already covered by the EC RP project; 
v. The GFCS project: through expanding the coverage of tailored  agricultural products in 14 additional target 
districts; through enabling co-pro duction of advisories based o n information requirements of farmers and 
agricultural workers; through training of extension services to  interpret and disseminate advisories; through 
developing area, crop and cultur ally specific types of informat ion which integrate climate information with local 
and indigenous knowledge; by delivering information through vil lage meetings in local languages; by ensuring 
timely forecasts from DCCMS are used to generate products more frequently; by incorporating localised data 
from AWS into forecast and monitoring procedures; by using and training more extension agents and 
developing programmes for radio wh ich incorporate weather/clima te information; by expanding existing and 
developing  new methods for distr ibuting SMS-based advisories, which incorporate weather/climate information, 
to more farmers. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF core 
indicators Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment  cost / expected lifetime emiss ion reductions 
(mitigation only) 
Not Applicable 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed proj ect/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by  public and private sources ( mitigation only) 
Not Applicable 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost 
per co-benefit generat ed as a result of the 
project/programme) The beneficiaries of the tailored agricultural products for the  project, 
as included in the logic framework, are estimated based on the 
population targeted in the projec t districts with tailored prod ucts 
through extension and direct outreach support (by DAES, DoF, an d 
NASFAM). These numbers do not specifically highlight the reach of 
the mobile platforms in dissemi nating the tailored products. 
 Therefore, the indicator below a llows us to estimate the reach of the 
tailored produc ts and CI through mobile s ervices, nationally.  
 
 Estimated cost of EWs/CI diss emination per farmer benefiting 
through mobile services: (Invest ment cost in tailored products 
for Esoko, 3-2-1, FrontlineSMS ) / (Number of beneficiaries 
reached)  
 
- Cost of development of th e tailored products for 
dissemination through the mobile platforms is USD554,000. 
- SMS costs are currently about USD13,000 for Frontline and 
USD6000 for Esoko. For 3-2-1, upto 4 calls are free for a month.  
- The reach of the platform s is estimated at 647,000 (3-
21:500,000 farmers; Esoko : 120,000; NASFAM: 27,000 
farmers). 
- The target for this indicato r (without accounting for potenti al 
opportunity for lowered costs in partnership with telecom operators) is: USD0.88 per farm er annually (for 2-4 calls 
per month)


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 65 
 
	F
 
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
145. Economic analyses of the projects were carried out in acco rdance with the Guidelines for the Economic Analysis 
of Projects of United Nations De velopment Program (UNDP 2015). The feasibility of the investments was determined 
by computing the economic internal rates of return (EIRR) and e conomic net present value and comparing the EIRR 
with the assumed 10% economic rat e of return. The period of ana lysis covers 10 years. 
 
146. The use of 10% discount rate is based on the consideration  of the cost of capital in Malawi (a developing country) 
and the nature of the benefits from the project (environmental values and lives saved). Normally for environmental 
goods we will like to argue for discount rate lower than the co nventional 10% but considering the cost of capital in the 
country we cannot justify using a lower rate. While many EWS pr ojects in developing countri es assume 5 years useful 
life on average because of lack of O&M funds and trained person nel (Rogers and Tsirkuov, 2013), we assume a 10-
year useful life of the EWS syst em given the training and O&M p rovision in this project. 
 
147. The economic benefits that a re valued in the economic anal ysis of the project is based on flooding and marine 
wind forecast (asset loss and damage reduction), and improvemen t in the agriculture sector due to tailored climate 
information and improved extens ion services that provides advic e for a wide variety of cro ps. Economic analysis was 
prepared for this base case.62 Other benefits such as capacit y building, potential for busine ss information generation, 
and hydropower generation improve ment are not easily quantifiab le and confidence in the values are lower. We also 
do not include other benefits o f improving the EWS system such as drought forecast, impro ved flight safety, and 
storm forecast to mention a few.  
148. Assuming a 10-year useful lif e of the EWS system and a 10 percent discount rate will give us a discounted net 
present value of about 13.5 milli on USD. The economic internal rate of return is 31%, which exceeds 10%, the economic 
opportunity cost of capital. 
 
149. All proposed investments ar e economically feasible, with p ositive NPVs and EIRRs exceeding the minimum 
threshold of 10%. Under all tes t cases including a “worst case”  scenario combining 20% i ncrease in investments 
costs with a 20% redu ction in total benefits, the EIRR remains above the minimum threshold. Based on the above 
analysis and the public good natur e of the investment, a grant as a source of financ ing for the project is justified. The 
benefits of the project to the peopl e of Malawi are higher than  the assumed cost of capital of 10% even with 
conservative estimates of the benefits of the project.  
F.2.  Technical Evaluation   
150. This project has been designed by first identifying gaps i n currently available weather/climate related services in 
Malawi, with a focus on sectors critical for enhancing and prot ecting livelihoods and reducing the impacts of 
weather/climate related disast ers: agriculture (including both the growing of crops and fishing), flood and water resource 
forecasting, community-based early warnings for floods. The tec hnological approaches to deliver these services have 
been specifically designed, and t he associated observing/monito ring equipment adapted to fit the service requirements. 
Additionally, the costs of operating & maintaining equipment, p roviding human resources and the necessary burden 
this imposes on the GoM, ensured an approach that minimizes the  numbers of observing/monitoring equipment and 
their costs, whilst being able  to provide adequate information to develop informative and specific services. 
 
151. The technologies required to deliver these services were i dentified as the following: use of medium-cost weather 
stations to provide observed weather/climate for developing agr icultural services in 14 districts, medium-cost 
hydrological sensors to provide water-level data to be used for  flood forecast and water resource modeling, low-cost 
raingauges and water level sensors to provide alerts directly t o vulnerable communities, expanding the lightning 
																																																													
62 Though it is standard practice i nclude benefit from loss of li ves saved using Value of Statist ical life, we exclude this in t he cost benefit 
analysis based on guidance from the GCF secretariat. The implic ation of this is an undervaluation of the benefits of this proj ect 
especially in light of the investments on Buoy boys largely to help reduce loss of lives of fis hers while at sea. The lives lo st currently by 
fishers because of lack of warning is estimated at about 9 per year. The lives that can be potentially saved for fishers alone  is valued at 
more than 1.5 million USD per year.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 65 
 
	F
detection network to provide severe weather warnings (for flood s and fishers) as a low-cost alternative to weather radar, 
and installing two lake-buoys to provide information on weather  and waves on lake Malawi as a basis for developing 
warnings for fishers. All these technologies provide essential ground observations that enhance the ability to monitor 
long-term climate change as well as develop services and serve as the basis for developing s atellite-based products 
which can enhance the applicat ion of these observations.  
 
152. A second area of technological applications is in the use of mobile phone technology to distribute and receive 
communications, warnings and advisories. This is a low cost tec hnology that enhances the reach of these services and 
is available to a large number of farmers, fishers and those vu lnerable to floods. However, it is recognized that costs 
can become significant if a large number of users are engaged a nd hence the project targets lead farmers as 
intermediaries, as well as using alternative traditional means of engagement through radio, TV and community centres. 
In an effort to reduce communication costs (including data tele metry costs for observing st ations), telecommunication 
companies will be approached to te st the feasibility of public- private partnerships. 
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Consideratio ns 
153. This project has completed  the UNDP social and environment al screening procedure (see SESP attached as 
Annex VI). This screening was und ertaken to ensure this project  complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental 
Standards. UNDP’s Social and Envir onmental Standards were revie wed by the GCF accred itation panel and deemed 
sufficient to accredit UNDP to subm it low and medium risk proje cts. The overall social  and environmental risk 
category for this project is: Low. Specific project risks are lis ted in Section G below, togethe r with appropriate 
mitigation measures.  
154. With respect to environment al impacts, the only real impac ts that will occur will be ve ry short term spatially 
limited impacts during the constr uction and installation of the  EWS.  For example, this may  include the disturbance of 
sediment when installing equipm ent on land and or in the riveri ne environment.  It is antici pated that any impacts will 
be remediated during installati on.  There will be very little w aste generated as all equipment will be purpose built prior 
to installation.  Further, the syst ems placed within riverine e nvironments will not result in any changes in hydrological 
conditions due to their size.  Lik ewise, the installation of bu oys in Lake Malawi with hav e very limited spatial and 
temporal impacts.  The impacts ass ociated with the buoys will b e during installation.  D epending on the depth and 
location of the buoys (which will be assessed during project im plementation with an engineering study), either 
anchors will be drilled into the substrate and/or concrete bloc ks will be used to moor the buoys and ensure they 
cannot be moved and/or do not mov e in an event.  This infrastru cture actually provides h abitat for aquatic organisms 
and as such, it is beneficial, a s it will attract fishes that c an potentially be caught by fishers. 
 
155. Social impacts will be limited to the installation and mai ntenance of the EWS. Prior to i nstallation, stakeholder 
consultation will be undertaken with potential landholders to e nsure the location of any inf rastructure does not impact 
detrimentally on their livelih oods.  Further, it will be import ant to not place the EWS in a location that might be 
culturally important to communi ties and relevant information wi ll be obtained from stakehol ders.  When available, 
infrastructure should be placed on government land which will a llow unlimited access duri ng maintenance.  Where 
this is not available, the EWS should be placed in a location t hat does not require GoM  staff to traverse across 
additional people’s land to under take maintenance.  Where avail able, local people will be employed to undertake 
maintenance, thereby providing a social benefit to the communit y. No peoples or their property will be displaced as a 
result of the project.   
 156. The project will have focus on gender sensitive planning a nd implementation to ensure  the highest gains in the 
fight for gender equity.  Since wom en are responsible for plant ing and weeding while farming, household chores such 
as collection of water, firewo od, fetching and preparing food, caring for children, the el derly and sick members, 
women and female children are mo re exposed to cli mate risks suc
h as late rains and flooding. They are also more 
vulnerable as they have limit ed access to land, education, and have lower incomes63. However, due to the close link 
between their roles and natural r esources, women can be empower ed to adapt to climate ch ange. A recent study in 
Malawi suggested that more wome n than men are likely to be link ed to adaptation strategies  such as conservation 
agriculture, winter cropping, crop diversification and engaging  in small business. The pr oject, therefore, focuses on 
																																																													
63 In Malawi, female headed households reported lower monthly inc omes ($30.94) than male headed households ($42.26) (UNDP 
Gender and Climate Change Report, Malawi, 2014)


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 65 
 
	F
gender-differentiated outreach and engagement. Many of the proj ect beneficiaries will be women, especially within 
the agriculture and fisheries se ctor where they often make up t he majority of smallholder farmers and fishing 
communities, yet are most vulner able to climate shocks and vari ability.  In the food insecure and disaster prone 
communities, women often bear t he brunt of the vagaries of the weather, low productivity, and disrupted livelihoods. 
By focusing on tailored products  that include gender-sensitive adoption strategies, the proj ect will ensure that women 
are empowered to benefit from t he information and can cope with  climate change impacts. 
 157. Gender-sensitive methods, including gender-sensitive vulne rability analysis and surv eys will ensure that 
women are targeted by CI/EW syste ms established. Women would al so need to be able to access climate 
information as easily as men – even if it is through differing mediums – otherwise there is  the risk of the information 
either not being used at all o r not being fully understood by w omen. Therefore, the communication channels and 
capacity building efforts will be developed with special attent ion to the needs of women in relation to the uptake and 
adoption of EWs and climate information. The project will have significant gender benefits . (See  Section E.3.1) 
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement  
158. The financial management and procurement of this project w ill be guided by UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here: https://info.undp.org/global/docum ents/frm/Financial-Rules-and- Regulations_E.pdf . Further guidance is 
outlined in the financial resources management section of the U NDP Programme and Operations Policies and 
Procedures available at https://info.undp.org/global/popp/fr m/Pages/introduction.aspx . UNDP has comprehensive 
procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and  Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outlin e formal procurement standards and guidelines across 
each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all pr ocurements in UNDP. See here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ cap/Pages/Intr oduction.aspx .  
 
159. The project will be implemented following the National Imp lementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/docum ents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx? sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Imp
lementation%20by%20the%20Governm ent%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx &action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1 . 
UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the implementing  partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity 
following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Part ners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfers - HACT ). All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial ru les and regulations noted above and 
applicable audit guidelines and policies.   
 
160. The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies an d procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) which are availab le 
here: https://info.undp.org/global /popp/Pages/default.aspx.  Th e NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and 
adopted by UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procuremen t and financial management rules and regulations. 
 161. The national executing entity DoDMA - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP 
terminology - is required to implement the project in complianc e with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, thi s is ensured through the nati onal Government’s signature 
of the UNDP Standard Basic Assist ance Agreement (SBAA), togethe r with a UNDP project document which will be 
signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the fun ds.  Both of these documents require compliance.  Prior 
to signature of the project document, all national Implementing  Partners like DoDMA need to have undergone a 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP to assess capacities to implement the 
project.  During implementation , UNDP will provide oversight an d quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to 
be agreed with the GCF.  This may include, but is not limited t o, monitoring missions, spot 
checks, facilitation and participat ion in project board meeting s, quarterly progress and annual  implementation reviews, 
and audits at project level or a t Implementing partner level on  the resources received from UNDP.
 
 
162. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disb ursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews (spot che cks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 65 
 
	F
special audits. During micro-assessment, there can weaknesses i dentified for which actions are required to addresses 
the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not address ed it will mean that the level of assurance activities 
will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that  implementing partner will have to be reviewed if 
necessary.  All details are available here: https://undg.org/wp-content/upload s/2015/02/2014-UNDG-HACT-Fram ework-
English-FINAL.pdf . 
 
163. The project will be audited in  accordance with UNDP polici es and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA currently bein g negotiated with the GCF. According to the current 
audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP s cheduled audits are performed during the programme 
cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the im plementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. 
A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transf erred to the implementing partner were used for the 
appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A sch eduled audit can consist of a financial audit or an 
internal control audit.  
 
164. All GCF resources will be provided to the implementing par tner, less any agreed cost recovery amount.  Under 
UNDP’s national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash fun ds on a quarterly basis to the implementing partner 
(executing entity) for the implementation of agreed and approve d programme activities, i n accordance with UNDP 
standard policies and the NIM Guidelines. The implementing part ner reports back expenditure via a financial report on 
quarterly basis to UNDP.  Any additional requirements will be a s in accordance with the AMA as and when it is agreed.
 
165. A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document signature) 
is provided in Annex XIII.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 65 
 
	G
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
166. Risk factors associated wit h the project implementation in clude mainly technical, operational, and 
institutional aspects, as equipm ent installation does not cause s major social and environmental impacts from the 
project (please refer to section F.3). The risks may affect inf ormation generation due to delays in procurement 
and installation of equipment, vandalism, or lack of maintenanc e. Other risks may affect the delivery of 
information to end users including the risks that local ICT/tel ecom infrastructure rest ricts the delivery of 
information or delays timely di ssemination of information to en d users. Risk related to  lack of commitment of 
communities or lack of capacity may affect the proper use of in formation and products disseminated. 
Technological failure might lead to a risk in alert information  not being generated or lack of coordination can 
hinder reach of that information to communities. There are also  risks that private sector will resist in engaging 
with public sector activities related to weather/climate data. A key risk arising from Activity 4 is related to the 
identification of viable business models, given weak private se ctor capacity in the country, that can support the 
demand for weather and climate services. The environmental and social risks are detailed in Section F.3 as well 
as added in the table below. 
 
167. The proposed project includes s everal mitigation measures to address these risks. Effective administration 
and planning can mitigate the risk of delays in establishment o f infrastructure. Appropriate and proven 
technologies have been chosen to mitigate the risk of technical  failure or constrained delivery due to local 
conditions and infrastructure (such as telecom). Community awar eness, participation, and training will help 
mitigate the risk of vandalism or low commitment and uptake of the disseminated early warnings and CI. Training 
based on the most up to date sci entific and technical advances in the fields of hydrology and meteorology will mitigate 
the risk that relevant alerts/fo recasts are not generated. Data  sharing mechanisms and protocols will be established to 
promote information flow and coordination among agencies and co mmunication channels will be strengthened to 
ensure last-mile reach. To address the risks related to enablin g demand-based model, the feasibility studies will also 
include willingness-to-pay and a broader scope of business acto rs including MSMEs, larger private sector actors, public 
sector institutions to identify market for weather and climate information, in particular for project supported, value-added 
products. Studies will also identify incentives and partnership s to enable private and public sectors to engage in climate 
information services. Private sector actors, such as telecom, w ill also be supported to collaborate directly with DCCMS 
independent of regulatory constraints.  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Procurement and installation of hydro-
meteorological and telemetry equipment, including 
hardware and software, is delayed because of 
complications with the release of funds and/or 
national procurement procedures. Technical 
and 
operational High (>20% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
An effective administrative planning will be implemented, with support from UNDP CO, which will include procuring 
equipment at an early stage in t he project implementation phase . The mitigation measures will lower the probability of 
this risk occurring to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Local information technology and 
telecommunications infras tructure restricts the 
transfer of data from installed equipment to necessary recipients, and restricts communication 
amongst key players and end-users. Technical 
and operational High (>20% of 
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 65 
 
	G
The project has been designed in accordance with local conditio ns, taking into account, where applicable, the latest 
available international technology into account. Furthermore, s imilar hydromet infrastructure has been put in place 
through ongoing efforts and is r eporting consistently where mob ile network coverage is sufficient. 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Installed hydro-meteorological and telemetry 
equipment fails because it is vandalized or not 
properly maintained. Technical 
and 
operational High (>20% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Awareness raising activities w ill be undertaken in target commu nities to highlight the importance of the installed 
equipment. Community-based observers and technicians responsibl e for servicing equipment will be identified and will 
be involved in communicating the purpose of the equipment, as w ell as engaging in co-production of information 
products based on the data. In addition, the equipment will be housed within a secure fence. Project finances include 
budgets for spare parts (which w ill be ordered with equipment t o ensure they are available) as well as funding for O&M 
activities (travel and vehicle maintenance) and training course s. A draft O&M plan for post -project sustainability has 
been developed in partnership with DCCMS, DoDMA and DWR, which will be refined during the project (developed in 
part using UNDP allocated finances) . The mitigation measures sh ould lower the risk to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Lack of commitment from communities where 
EWS are established undermines the 
effectiveness of the project. Other Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Awareness and local community training and capacity building wi ll encourage participation in project activities. 
Additionally target communities will be identified based on loc al consultations and a demonst rated willingness/history 
of engagement in similar activities. The mitigation measures sh ould keep the risk level as low. 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Alerts and warnings required by communities are 
not feasible to produce due to scientific or technological failure. Technical 
and operational Medium (5.1-
20% of project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The proposed project will ensure that the training provided is based on the most up to date scientific and technical 
advances in the fields of hydrology and meteorology. A regional  team of experts will be available on a full-time basis to 
provide support to work towards ensuring use of state-of-the-ar t technology and scientific methodology suitable to the 
local context. Engagement and co-production of information prod ucts with the local communities will establish the 
required level of acceptable skill levels. A significant amount  of development will involve using monitoring data (with 
less uncertainty and requirements on forecast skill) to improve  the information content. The mitigation measures should 
lower the risk to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
There is a risk that data sharing is hindered by lack 
of coordination / willingness of agencies to share 
data or by technical constraints (e.g., bandwidth 
issues or local mobile telecommunication networks). Other Medium (5.1 – 
20% of project 
value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 65 
 
	G
Data sharing mechanisms, protoco ls and agreements will ensure t hat all eventualities are covered, including technical 
failures, with appropriate backup and access mechanisms for all  relevant stakeholders.  Cos t recovery measures may 
also be applied to ensure costs of databases and tailored produ ct operationalizing are covered. The mitigation 
measures should lower the risk level to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
There is a risk that demand-based models remain 
weak and the private sector will resist dialogue and 
changes in the regulatory environment governing their access to weather/climate data. Other Medium (5.1 – 
20% of project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Broad set of public and private sector actors will be scoped in cluding MSMEs and corporations to identify needs for 
weather and climate services. T he project will support feasibil ity studies that will incl ude willingnes s-to-pay 
assessments and identification of i ncentives, partnerships, and  business models for generation and use of EWs and 
CI, in particular for the value-added, tailored products. Furth ermore, DCCMS and other institutions can engage the 
private sector and develop their own cost recovery strategy wit hout the integration into N ational Budget Frameworks. 
Market development efforts can in centivize private sector witho ut changes in regulatory frameworks. The mitigation 
measures should lower the risk level to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Delays in communication lead to ineffective 
monitoring and timely dissemination of alerts to affected communities. Other Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Communications systems are put in place that relay information in relevant terms and in a timely manner to local 
communities and end us ers (farmers, fishermen). The mitigation measures should lower the risk level to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Loss of credibility for early warning system due to 
failure to warn of a disaster on time (due to 
technical or operational issues), or providing too many false alarms.  Technical 
and 
operational Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
As stated for risk 5, the propo sed project will ensure that the  best and most up to date training is provided as well as 
the use of state-of-the-art technology and scientific methodolo gies suitable to the local context, as well as engaging 
with communities to understand the information needs and co-pro duce the desired information. Further to these 
activities it will be necessary to ensure that populations and communities are aware of any limitations and that forecast 
concepts, such as probability, are clearly understood. The work  with DCICs and EOCs will also need to clearly explain 
the benefits of responding to EW s, even if they turn out to be false alarms, as well as clear ly explaining why any failures 
to predict disasters occurred. A transparent process (not hidin g scientific limitations) will be followed in each case. The 
mitigation measures should lower the risk to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 10  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Installing equipment on land and or in the riverine 
environment can lead to disturbance of sediment. Social and 
environmental L o w     ( < 5 %  o f  
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 65 
 
	G
When undertaking the installation of weather stations, erosion and sediment control will be established to ensure runoff 
does not flow into riverine system s. The mitigation measures sh ould lower the risk level to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 11  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Lake-based buoys installed break mooring during 
installation and implementation.  Social and 
environmental L o w     ( < 5 %  o f  
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Full engineering assessment of the proposed anchoring method wi ll be undertaken prior to implementation. The 
mitigation measures should keep the risk level as low. 
Selected Risk Factor 12  
Description  Risk category  Level of risk  Probability of r isk occurring  
Location of infrastructur e leads to detrimental 
social and cultural effects. Social and 
environmental Low  (<5% of 
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Stakeholder consultations will be undertaken prior to the selec tion of infrastructure sites to ensure no adverse impacts. 
The mitigation measures should keep the risk level as low. 
Selected Risk Factor 13  
Description Risk category Level of risk Probability of r isk occurring 
Staff turnover impedes capacity building and 
retention of skills and knowledge in the relevant institutions Technical and 
operational Low  (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project capacity building activities will be undertaken wit h inclusion and ownership of staff at all levels and across 
agencies using a ‘training of trainers’ approach to ensure that  the skills and knowledge are replicated and sustained 
across the relevant institutions . Community members will also b e capacitated for use of the products as well as engaged 
in the development of climate products and measures to ensure o wnership. The mitigation measures should keep the 
risk level as low.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 65 
 
	H
H.1.  Logic Framework 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level64 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased 
climate-resilient 
sustainable 
development  The proposed project contributes  to climate-resilient developme nt pathways in Malawi through the 
sustained impact of project meas ures that have high potential f or replicability and scale. Overall, 
these impacts can be scaled to reach 100% of national coverage for observational networks 
benefiting about 2 million of the country’s farmers (about 10 t imes initial reach) and twice as many 
flood-prone communities with automated CBEWS. The project stimu lates a demand-based model 
for climate information and use of ICT/mobile platforms to enab le public and private sector 
participation, innovation, and market development. It contribut es to key policies in the country and 
supports co-financed efforts to mainstream climate information into development plans. It 
institutionalizes knowledge gener ation and learning through the  enhancements to the DCICs and 
strengthens country capacities  to sustain project impacts. 
Expected 
Result Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target 
Assumptions Mid-term  
(if 
applicable)  Final  
Fund-level impacts  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable 
people, communities, 
and regions,  Total number of 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (% of whom is female) 
 
 Gender-sensitive 
field surveys 
undertaken within the priority districts 
and targeted 
communities, Review of climate 
monitoring 
database to estimate coverage 
of EWS 
infrastructure Total 
(912,6,00) 
of which 30% female) 
 
238,000
67 
(direct) 
 
675,00065 
(indirect) Total 
(1,500,000 of 
which 40% female) 
 
500,000 (direct) 
 
1,000,000 (indirect) Total 
(3,000,000 of 
which 50% female) 
 
1,600,000
70 
(direct) 
 
1,400,00066 
(indirect) There is continued 
commitment and 
uptake of the information by 
targeted communities 
in the project 
Percentage of 
beneficiaries relative 
to total population in 
Malawi   
 
  
 
  
  6% 9% 18%  
																																																													
64 Information on the Fund’s expec ted results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measur ement Frameworks available at  the 
following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operation s/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf 
65 Indirect beneficiaries are assumed to be the effective nationa l population that benefits from t he total national coverage of 
infrastructure, capacity of forecasting, and effectiveness of u se of EWs and climate information. Therefore, as a proxy, and 
conservatively, the total AWS coverage is used. A subset of thi s population would also be thos e benefiting from mobile service s. The 
estimate excluded the direct beneficiaries already counted. Mal awi’s population is estimated at 16.3 million. For baseline est imate: with 
% national coverage of hydromet assumed at 21% (21% AWS from Ou tput 1.1 baseline) and effectiveness assumed at 20% (given 
lower access/dissemination); indi rect beneficiaries baseline is  (16.3M minus the direct benefic iaries baseline, 238,000) * 21%  * 20% 
(about 675,000). For target, assumed national coverage is 32% ( AWS coverage, conservative estim ate), assumed effectiveness is 30%, 
indirect beneficiaries is (16.3 M – target direct beneficiaries  (1.6M) * .32 * .3) – about 1.4M (note target final level includes  baseline 
number)


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 65 
 
	H
																																																													
66 Area Malawi 94,276 km2, assumed 10km radius = 300 AWS needed to cover country. Curren tly 53 functioning AWS + 11 through 
LDCF financed UNDP EWS project ( baseline – 21%); Target (34 thr ough GCF so total national cover age includes baseline + GCF 
investments: 98 AWS – 32%)  
67 176 hydrological stations needed for 100% coverage. Baseline – 50; target includes base line plus 37 through GCF  H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Prog ramme level 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term (if 
applicable)  Final  
Project/programme 
outcomes Outcomes that c ontribute to Fund-level impacts 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks Number of males 
and females 
reached by 
climate-related 
early warning 
systems and 
other risk 
reduction 
measures 
established/ 
strengthened . Gender-sensitive 
field surveys in 
priority districts, 
Review of climate 
monitoring database 238,00069 
(of which 
30% 
female) 500,000 (of 
which 40% 
female) 1,600,00070 
(of which 
50% 
female) There is continued 
commitment and 
uptake of the 
information by targeted 
communities in the 
project 
Project/programme 
outputs Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1.   Capacity of hydromet 
networks and staff 
enhanced to generate 
climate-related data and 
forecast extreme weather 
and climate change 1.1. Percentage of 
national coverage 
of climate 
monitoring network 
(fully operational) 
 
   
 
    
 
1.2. Number of 
trained personnel 
that are proficient 
with generation of 
EWs/CI and 
related activities Field inspection of 
AWS sites; review 
of climate 
monitoring 
database 
 
   
 
    
 
Surveys/tests of 
proficiency at the 
beginning and end 
of training AWS– 21%66 
national 
coverage 
Hydrological 
stations– 
28%67 
national 
coverage 
Number of 
lightening 
detection 
sensors (5) - 
71% 
Number of 
lake based 
buoys - 0% 
 
 
 
0 AWS– 32% 
national 
coverage 
Hydrological 
stations– 
49% national 
coverage 
Number of 
lightning 
detection 
sensors (7) - 
100% 
Number of 
lake based 
buoys(2) - 
40% 
 
 
 
 
25 AWS– 32% 
national 
coverage 
Hydrologica
l stations– 
49%  
national 
coverage 
Number of 
lightening 
detection 
sensors (7) 
- 100% 
Number of 
lake based 
buoys(2) - 
40% 
 
 
 
50 Baseline projects are 
implemented according 
to the timeline 
identified and achieve 
the desired outcomes 
and objective. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government identify 
suitable candidates for 
training and are 
prepared to employ 
new staff when 
required.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 65 
 
	H
																																																													
68 Whilst generic information is ava ilable, no tailored products a re currently distributed. It is a ssumed that 30% of fishers cur rently 
receive warnings (30% of 30,289),  no agriculture products are c urrently received and current e ffectiveness of flood warnings i n areas 
covered where ODSS will be applied is 20% is 228,772 (20% effec tiveness * percentage coverage of hydrological sensors at basel ine). 
Total about 238,000; Total population in all 21 target district s = 13,381,091, about 2%  
69 For target: agriculture products localized within 10km of insta lled AWS (so only count increment al AWS coverage from baseline)  – 
this yields194,615 direct agr icultural beneficiaries; 30,289 di rect fisher beneficiaries;  1, 402,280 direct beneficiaries from  ODSS (ODSS 
increases effectiveness to 30%) so 30% * percentage coverage of  hydrological sensors at targe t level * target district populat ion); Total 
about 1.6M; Total district population ~ 13M, about 12%. (Note t he target final % population includes  baseline %)  
70 Sensors will be placed in areas not already covered by CBEWS. C urrently no automatic relaying of CBEWS – only manual systems 
71 Each sensor combination (rainfall gauge + hydrological water le vel sensor) is assumed to cover  10 villages downstream, each wi th an 
average population of 350; 115,500 (rounded down to 115,000)  2.  Tailored climate 
information/products and 
decision-support 
platforms developed and 
disseminated for agriculture, fisheries, and 
flood risk management 2.1 Percentage of 
population with 
access to tailored 
climate information 
and early warnings for agriculture, 
fisheries and flood 
risk management 
in the 21 target 
districts 
(disaggregated by 
gender) 
 2.2 Percentage of 
population in 
targeted districts 
that are satisfied 
by level and quality 
of services 
provided by DCICs 
and other district level information 
sources 
 
2.3 Assessments 
of private sector 
engagement and 
market feasibility 
for tailored 
products 
developed  Reports from 
NASFAM / DAES; 
Field surveys; 
DWR reports on 
ODSS 
  
 
  Reports from 
Agricultural 
resource, 
community 
lakeshore and 
district climate 
information 
centres; Field surveys. 
 Reports on market 
feasibility studies 
and associated 
dialogues 2%68 (of 
which 30% 
women)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 6% (of which 
40% women) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 12%69 (of 
which 50% 
women) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Functional ICT/telecom 
exist, are best suited to 
the local context and 
do not restrict the 
transfer of information 
to communities 
 
 
 
 
Population has easy 
access to resources 
and is motivated to use 
resource centres. 
 
 
 
 
That there are 2 
sectors/businesses that 
are able and willing to 
pay for climate/weather 
related services. 
3. Communities capacities strengthened for use of 
EWS/CI in preparedness 
for and response to 
climate related disasters 3.1.  Number of 
males and females 
reached by 
community-based 
automated early 
warning systems and other risk 
reduction 
measures 
established 
 
3.2 Number of 
district and community level Gender-sensitive 
field surveys 
undertaken within 
the target districts, 
representative of 
the local population 
  
 
 070 
 
 
 
 
 
0 75,000(of 
which 50% 
are women) 
 
 
 
 115,00071 
(of which 
50% 
women) 
 
 
 
300 (of 
which 50% 
are women) Awareness raising 
activities, and the 
training will ensure the 
continued commitment 
of the communities in 
the project in use and 
O&M of CBEWS 
 
 
 
Active participation and 
learning of the district


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 65 
 
	H
actors in targeted 
communities that 
show increased 
knowledge and use 
of EWS/DRM Surveys of level 
and quality of 
knowledge of 
actors trained 100 (of which 
30% are 
women) and community level in 
the training sessions. 
 
Activities Description Inputs Description 
1.1. Expanding coverage 
of Meteorological and hydrological infrastructure  Increase the area coverage by hydro-
meteorological instruments and equipment  1.1.1.Installation of 33 AWS 
1.1.2.Installation of 
hydrological stations 
1.1.3.Installation of 2 lightning 
sensors 
1.1.4Installation of 2 lake-
based buoys Installation of hydromet infrastructure  
1.2. Capacity-building of 
hydro-met staff on O&M, 
data modeling, and forecasting. Capacity building activities to enhance the 
technical capacity of hydro-met staff 1.2.1.Training for DCCMS on 
data rescue of non-digitized 
data (4 sessions), debiased 
satellite product, forecasting, 
O&M (LS) (1 session each 
year) 
1.2.2 Training for DCCMS, 
DWR, MDF on O&M of lake-
based buoys (DCCMS: 4 
sessions and a session with 
communities based on 
location, every 2 years; DWR: 
3 a year) 
1.2.3 Training for DCCMS, 
DWR on O&M of AWS/HS 
(DCCMS: factory training, 
and refresher session every 2 
years; DWR: 1 field 
management training and 1 
workhop annually) 
1.2.4 Training for DWR in use 
of ODSS (3 sessions per 
year)  Training activities (using ToT 
approach) on operating and 
maintaining technical equipment and 
instruments (AWS, Lightening sensors 
(LS), Hydrological sensors (HS), as 
well as modeling and seasonal 
weather forecasting; Data rescue of 
non-digitized data and development of 
a debiased satellite rainfall database 
2.1 Develop tailored 
weather/climate based 
agricultural advisories for 
14 food insecure districts 
and disseminate through 
ICT/mobile, print, and 
radio channels 
 Development of agriculture advisories 
through community participation and co-
development and dissemination through 
various channels such as 
print/radio/ICT/mobile networks in 
partnership with DAES and NASFAM 2.1.1 Carry out Community 
Based Participatory initiatives 
for sensitization and co-
production of products 
(number of communities 
covered need to be 
determined as of yet through 
a consultation process; a 
preliminary estimate is that 
project would target about 
280 communities) 
2.1.2 Map agricultural areas, 
farming systems, and crop 
types in target districts 
(estimated 248,000ha 
covered) 
2.1.3 Train extension workers 
for co-production and 
interpretation of product (400 
staff trained) 
2.1.4 Design and produce 
advisories for range of media 
(print, TV, radio) Through community participation, co-
design and develop tailored 
agricultural advisor ies incorporating 
weather/climate information; carry out 
training, awareness, and outreach 
activities to support diffusion.


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 65 
 
	H
2.1.5 Design and produce 
advisories for 3-2-1,Esoko, 
and FrontlineSMS services 
2.1.6 Carry out dissemination 
and communication/outreach 
2.2  Develop and 
disseminate tailored 
warnings and advisories 
for fishing communities of 
Mangochi, Salima, Nkhata 
Bay and Nkhotakhota 
around Lake Malawi Development of tailored warnings for 
fisheries and dissemination through CoU 
and BVCs. 2.2.1. Training and courses 
for extension workers on 
approaches and skills for 
dissemination of 
warnings/info (28 trainings 
over 6 years) 
2.2.2 Design and produce 
tailored messages on 
extreme weather, safety at 
sea, preparedness and 
response 
2.2.3 Build CoU and BVCs 
capacity (facilities and skills) 
for community outreach and 
dissemination including 
production of information 
materials for various media 
2.2.4 Awareness raising and 
training for end users on use 
of information 
2.2.5 Establish search and 
rescue for sea safety 
2.2.6 Review workshops for 
DCCMS/DoF/stakeholders 
(24 workshops over 6 years; 
4 quarterly per year) Participatory design and development 
of tailored warnings and advisories for 
fishing communities; Capacity building 
for department staff, extension 
support, end users to support diffusion 
of information 
2.3  Develop and deploy 
the flood and water 
resource modelling and decision support system 
to enhance coverage for 
disaster risk and water 
resource management 
 Calibrate and apply the ODSS decision 
platform for water catchments in central 
and northern Malawi for improved water resource and flood modeling 2.3.1 Develop Integrated 
Visualization and Analysis 
platform 
2.3.2 Improve hydro-
meteorological forecasting 
2.3.3 Deploy ODSS for 
northern and central 
catchments 
2.3.4 Establish dissemination 
systems and communication 
channels 
2.3.5 Assess performance 
and report on weaknesses 
and potential improvements 
(A report produced) 
2.3.6 Train DCCMS and 
DWR staff on use of system 
(200 DCCMS, 100 DWR 
staff) Develop and extend the ODSS 
platform carrying out analysis and 
modeling; deploy the system and build 
capacity for use and assessment. 
2.4. Enable a demand-
based model for climate 
information and services stimulating private sector 
engagement Generate value-added products, 
stimulating demand for CI information and 
services, and enable market development for CI/services 2.4.1. Review and report on 
existing policy and 
institutional arrangements for 
PPPs (1 Report developed) 
2.4.2 Technical support to 
formulate PPPs 
2.4.3 Review and report on 
agriculture, fisheries, water 
sector for provision of 
information to private 
sector/MSEs (1 report with 
sector-specific analysis) Analyze the market for and evaluate 
the costs and benefits of accurate, 
timely and accessible weather and 
climate forecasts in agriculture, water 
and fishing sectors; produce 
feasibilities and provide technical 
support for public private partnerships 
reviewing policy and institutional 
arrangements.


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 65 
 
	H
 
  2.4.4 Market feasibility for 
tailored products (1 report 
covering all sectors) 
2.5. Knowledge sharing 
and management for 
development, 
dissemination, and use of 
EWs and CI to enhance 
resilience Strengthening of District Climate 
Information Centres (DCIC)  as hubs for 
knowledge management and sharing 2.5.1. Upgrade of facilities, 
software and hardware, and 
and connection of new DCICs 
to nearby Met Stations 
including radio links 
2.5.2 Communication 
materials including translation 
services 
2.5.3 Workshops for capacity 
building and collective 
learning across the entire 
information sharing chain (2 
workshops per district in year 
1 and 1 per district for 4 more 
years; and on average a 100 
participants) Set up links to rural radios; Installation 
of software and hardware; translation 
of materials to local languages; 
Capacity building of DCIC personnel; 
training of end users on how to use 
information and engage in knowledge 
sharing 
3.1.  Scale-up community-
based EWS in flood-disaster prone areas of 
Karonga, Salima, Dedza, 
Nkhotakota, Nkhata Bay, 
Rumphi, Phalombe and 
Zomba  
 Scale up best practices and ongoing 
efforts to enhance community readiness 3.1.1. Awareness raising 
workshops to sensitize 
communities (3 per district 
per CBEWS; 99 workshops in 
total. Average number of 
participants per workshop 50; 
5 from each of the 10 villages 
covered per CBEWS) 
3.1.2 Installation of 33 
automated rainfall and 
hydrological monitoring and 
telemetry systems 
3.1.3 Training of community 
members on O&M and 
effective use (50 DCPC 
members + 150 community 
members; 200 per district) 
3.1.4 Implement simulation 
training, EW testing, 
emergency response 
3.1.5  Set up communication 
channels and train on use Awareness raising to sensitize 
communities prior to installation of 
equipment  in flood-prone districts; 
training on O&M and use and 
implementation of DRR measures 
including communication systems.  
3.2.  Capacity 
development of national, 
district and community 
level actors on disaster 
and climate risk 
management 
 Address capacity barriers at national and 
local level and empower districts and 
communities to ensure ‘last mile’ disaster 
preparedness and response 3.2.1 Upgrade EoCs with 
satellite phones, GPS, 
computers, emergency lights, 
GIS system, internet 
3.2.2 Develop operational 
guidelines for EoCs 
3.2.3 Training and learning 
tours for EOC staff (10 staff) 
3.2.4 Short courses for 
national and district staff of 
DoDMA (10 national and 28 
district level staff) 
3.2.5 Training for at least 50 
DCPC members and 200 
community members 
(ACPCs/VCPCs) Strengthening the Emergency 
Operation Centers (EOCs) and  
capacity building at national, district 
and community levels on DRM/climate 
EWS/and climate risk management


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 65 
 
	H
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
168. Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken  in compliance with the UNDP POPP  and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy . The primary responsibility fo r day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project 
Manager. The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. 
The Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during 
implementation, including the implementation of the Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate support 
and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager wil l also ensure that all project staff maintain a high 
level of transparency , responsibility and accountability in mon itoring and reporting project results.   
 
169. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager a s needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP . Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and trouble shooting support will be provided 
by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project t arget groups and stakeholders including the NDA 
Focal Point will be involved as muc h as possible in project-lev el M&E.   
 
170. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP p roject document has been signed by all relevant 
parties to: a) re-orient project stakeholders to the project st rategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that 
influence project implementati on; b) discuss the roles and resp onsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) revi ew the results framework, re-assess baselines as 
needed, and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review 
financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) 
plan and schedule Project Board meetings and finalize the first  year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare 
the inception report no later than one month after the inceptio n workshop. The final inceptio n report will be cleared by 
the UNDP Country Offi ce and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser , and will be approved by the Project Board.    
 
171. A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager, 
the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviso r will provide objective input to the annual PIR. The 
Project Manager will ensure that t he indicators included in the  project results framework are monitored annually well in 
advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively rep ort progress in the Development Objective tab of the 
PIR. The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Board and o ther stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will 
coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakehold ers to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s 
PIR will be used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The  final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation 
report and corresponding management response, will serve as the  final project report package.  
 
172. An independent mid-term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for  enhanced implementation during the final half of 
the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review proc ess and the final MTR report will follow the standard 
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final MTR report will be cleared by 
the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser , and will be approved by the Project Board. The 
final MTR report will be available in English. An independent t erminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three 
months prior to operational closure of the project. The terms o f reference, the review process and the final TE report 
will follow the standard template s and guidance available on th e UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final TE report 
will be cleared by the UNDP Count ry Office and the UNDP Regiona l Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the 
Project Board. The TE report will be available in English. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project 
terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan,  and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in 
English and the management response to the public UNDP Evaluati on Resource Centre (ERC) ( www.erc.undp.org ). 
The MTR and TE will be carried out by an independent evaluator.  The evaluation report prepared by the independent 
evaluator is then quality assess ed and rated by the UNDP Indepe ndent Evalution Office. 
 
173. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for th is project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex- post evaluations. A detailed M&E  budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the UNDP project document.


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 65 
 
	H
 
 
  
 174. Implementation of the project will follow a schedule that will install all the monitoring equipment in the first 3 years 
by the time of the midterm evaluation. The phased approach to p roduct development (elaborated in Section C.7) will 
ensure that the effect iveness of early war nings will improve fr om the project outset and there will be improvements in 
flood warnings (through the ODSS and CBEWS) and weather forecas ting by the time of the mid-term assessments 
enabling early impacts from the project. A key tool for MRV for  the project is the field and impact surveys that will be 
conducted throughout the project (6 impact survey periods) to m onitor progress of implementation and progress towards 
the expected outputs and outcomes.  To monitor and verify the ex pansion of hydromet coverage and capacity, field 
inspection of infrastructure s ites will be conducted. Installat ions are captured in the climate-monitoring database that 
will be reviewed during the mid-term and final evaluations to r eport on progress. The development and diffusion of 
tailored products will be monitored through gender-sensitive fi eld surveys (for community  groups, lead farmers in 
NASFAM, fishers, etc.), reports  from NASFAM and DAES extension workers, Agricultural resource centers, DoF 
extension support (in particular the COU), and reports from DWR  on ODSS expansion. Communities would also be 
surveyed through the VCPC and end- user surveys. All reporting w ill follow the above stated arrangements.  
 
175. UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the Reporting Period, including semi-annual reporting, 
in accordance with the AMA and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA).  UNDP has country presence and capacity to 
perform such functions.  In the event of any additional post-im plementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP 
will discuss and agree these with the GCF Secretariat in in the  final year of the project and will prepare a post-
implementation monitoring plan and budget for app roval by the G CF Board as necessary.


---
*Page 66*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 65 
 
	I
SECTION I  
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered comple te only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL 	
☐ NDA No-objection Letter Annex I 
☐ Feasibility Study Annex II 
☐ Integrated Financial Model that p rovides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format) Annex III  
Not Applicable. The public goods nature of this project’s outputs does not entail revenue generation or cost recovery 
from the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries during the pr oject duration. Hence, a financial analysis of this project 
is deemed to be no pertinent.  
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing c ommitment Annex IV  
☐ Term Sheet/Confirmation (as per AMA) Annex V (a)  
☐ Term Sheet/Confirmation (as per AMA) Annex V (b)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) Annex VI  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations Annex VII  
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project Annex VIII  
Not Applicable. While the project builds on ongoing efforts, it is not an extension or subsequent phase of a completed 
project. Evaluations for the ongoing efforts are not yet available.  
☐ Map indicating the location of the project/programme Annex IX  
☐ Timetable of project/programme implementation Annex X  
☐ Project/programme confirmation Annex XI 
 
Additional Information 
☐ Economic Analysis Annex XII (a) 
☐ Economic Analysis Annex XII (b) 
☐ Additional Background Details Annex XIII 
☐ Responses to GCF comments on Concept Note Annex XIV (a) 
☐ Responses to GCF ITAP Comments  Annex XIV (b) 
☐ Letter of Endorsement for the proposed project by UNDP Senior M anagement Annex XV


---
*Page 67*
---

 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.02  
  
 
No-objection letter issued by t he national designated authority  
 
________