=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20240930192342+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.3.20112
/ModDate: D:20240930192342+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.3.20112
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
21 – 24 October 2024  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 10  GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
30 September  2024  
Consideration of funding proposals –  
Addendum  IX 
Funding proposal package f or FP 247  
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following s ix parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility Plus (LoCAL+) – 
West Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali and Niger) "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.40/02 /Add.09  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Content  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  58 
Secretariat’s assessment  75 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   91 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  104  
Gender documentation  106


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility Plus (LoCAL +) – West 
Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali and Niger)  
Country(ies):  Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger  
Accredited Entity:  BOAD  
Date of first submission:  [2020/04/24]  
Date of current submission  [2024 /09/08]  
Version number  [V.008 ]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill o ut information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Energy generation and access Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Low -emission transport  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Forestry and land use  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  30 % 30 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  30 % 30 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment  20 % 20 % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  20 % 20 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  N/A A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  4.02 million  (direct and indirect)  
524,000 
(260,000 women; 
264,000 men)  3.49 million  (1.74 
million women; 1.75 million men)
 
1% of total 
population in the four countries  4% of total 
population in the 
four countries
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  52 819 497  Euros   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  44 383 307 Euros  
 
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 2 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant  Enter number   
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  5 years ( 2026 – 2030)  
 A.12. Total lifespan  Benefit stream: 20 years    
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
 
23 Sept 2024  A.14. ESS category  C 
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☐    No ☒ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  WAEMU Council of Local Communities (UEMOA CCT), Intervention Fund for the 
Environment (FIE -Burkina Faso), Directorate General of Decentralization and Local 
Development (DGDDL- Ivory Coast), National Agency for Local Governments’ 
Investment (ANICT -Mali), National Agency for the Financing of Local Governments 
(ANFICT -Niger).  
A.21. Executive summary  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 3 
 Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali, and Niger have high vulnerability to climate change and limited readiness to address 
these challenges, according to the Notre Dame University Global Adaptation Initiative (ND -GAIN) ranking. These 
countries heavily depend on agriculture, making up significant portions of their GDP (38% in Niger, 35% in Mali, 21%  
in Burkina Faso, and 17% in Ivory Coast). Their populations are particularly vulnerable due to reliance on natural 
resources, impacting food security and infrastructure.  The IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report highlights that West Africa 
and the Sahel have seen significant temperature increases over the last 50 years, with more warm days and nights 
and fewer cold ones. Projections for the end of the 21st century predict temperature increases of 3°C to 6°C, with the Sahel being a hotspot for climate change. R ainfall patterns have also changed, with a reduction over the 20th century 
followed by some recovery. Future projections suggest more extreme rainfall events.  
In response, this  program aims to promote climate -resilient communities and economies in these countries by 
enhancing access to adaptation finance, knowledge, and investment capabilities. The  initiative seeks to align with the 
Paris Agreement, national targets, and specific Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The enhanced institutional, 
technical and financial capacity of local govern ments  and stakeholders will increase the share of climate- compatible 
investments in the key sectors of intervention, especially in climate resilient and diversified livelihoods options (ARA 
1.0), health and wellbeing, water and food security (ARA 2.0), infrastructure and built environment (ARA 3.0), 
ecosystems and eco- system services (ARA 4.0).  
To deliver its objectives, the programme builds on the combined experience of the UNCDF -designed Local Climate 
Adaptive Living Facility (LoCAL), implemented in 1 8 countries, and BOAD’s expertise in climate- focused blended 
financing instruments in West Africa. LoCAL is a standard mechanism that channels climate finance to local governments in LDCs and in developing countries. Its operates through a performance- based climate resilience grant 
system (PBCRG), which consists of financial top- ups to cover the addit ional costs of making investments climate 
resilient and/or of new  investments for adaptation, while ensuring programming and verification of local adaptation 
expenditures. The implementation of the PBCRGs is mandated to local governments, which will leverage on communal structures and deconcentrated state services to perform their functions and will be empowered to act as adaptation champions for the communities they serve. The LoCAL mechanism will be deployed in conjunction with dedicated Blended Finance F acilities in each country that will strengthen existing institutions/structures dealing with private sector 
financing to design and deploy dedicated adaptation revolving windows to the benefit of a wider range of local private 
sector actors. The programme aims at testing and proving the concept for integrated approaches and financing 
instruments to subnational adaptation finance, leveraging both on public and private sector key actors at the local level 
to enable systemic responses to climate change threats . 
The programme responds to the multisectoral relevance of expected climate change risks in Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso 
and Ivory Coast as well as to the principle of devolution of adaptation decision -making to local governments and their 
communities based on locally identified adaptation priorities and needs. As highlighted above, the unique bioclimatic 
characteristics of the Sahel, Inland Forests, and Coastal subregions give rise to varied risks in overlapping, yet distinct 
ways. In this view, the programme w ill support adaptation investments across seven key interventions areas – identified 
as key drivers for local climate resilience building in the four West African countries and aligned to GCF’s Results Areas.  
• Climate change- adapted agriculture  
• Climate change- adapted forestry and adaptation based on ecosystem conservation 
• Agroforestry  
• Water and Heath  
• Energy efficiencies and renewable energies  
• Climate -resilient  Infrastructure  
• Coastal areas (Ivory Coast)  
The programme will reach the population of up to 85  local governments in the four countries, with potential to increase 
the resilience to climate change of some 3.49 million people, through a combination of:  
1) Dedicated technical assistance and capacity building (Component 1) , that will support the enabling conditions 
for enhancing the capacities of local governments, local actors and communities to identify, plan, finance and 
implement catalytic adaptation investments based on science- based evidence of localized climate risks.  
2) Performance- based climate resilience grants (Component 2.1) , that will cover the additional costs of public, 
locally -led climate -resilient  investments emerging from risk -informed, participatory and gender -sensitive  local 
planning processes of target local governments.  
3) Blended finance instruments (Component 2.2) , that will address access to adaptation finance constraints of a 
wider range of local private sector actors, such as local SMEs  and local  producers’ organisations  and generate 
a pipeline of private sector -sponsored investments aligned with adaptation priorities of target communities.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 4 
 The programme will deliver approx. EUR 2 8 million (through GCF prodeed s and expected co -financing) as subnational 
adaptation finance for adaptation investments  in the four target countries . Furthermore, t he integration of the financing 
mechanisms within inter -governmental transfer systems (PBCRG  Facilities ) and existing priv ate sector financing 
institutions/structures (Blended Finance Facilities) will allow to continue the deployment in other local governments at 
the end of the 5 years of the programme. Working in 4 countries within the sub- region will provide economies of scal e, 
and help generate and test tools with greater replication potential, particularly in UEMOA countries, to mobilize financing 
as well as to contribute to the formalization of financing models to channel and deploy climate finance at the local level.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
  
3 https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/West_Africa_CRP_Final.pdf  
4 https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment -report/ar6/   
5 https://interactive -atlas.ipcc.ch/   
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages ) 
Regional outlook for West Africa  
West Africa is one of the world’s most vulnerable regions to climate variability and change3. Increasing temperatures 
and shifting rainfall patterns are already affecting livelihoods, food security, and economic and governance stability. 
Extreme climate variability in the target countries since the 1970s has resulted in agricultural losses, recur rent food 
crises, both water scarcity and extreme flooding, and environmental degradation. Warming across the region is greater 
than the global average, a trend expected to continue, with the greatest warming in the Sahel region. Along the 
coastline, the r isk of sea level rise and severe coastal erosion is projected to increase with significant impacts to the 
coastal population, urban centres and ports, coastal aquifers, and the agriculture and fisheries sectors (Hartley, 2016) ; 
(Niang, 2014) ; (USAID, 2013b) ; (Bank, World, 2017b) ; (World Bank , 2018) . The countries targeted in this programme 
have all a high level of vulnerability that particularly affects the most fragile communities. These trends that are expected  
to continue to increase and has resulted in both localized and national conflicts.  
IPCC released its sixth assessment (AR6)4 after the climate risk analysis performed for this FP. These more recent 
findings confirm the validity of all of the information in this section. The IPCC Interactive Atlas Regional Synthesis for 
Western Africa5 confirms a high confidence of  temperature increase and also temperature extremes, as well as high 
confidence of increases in heavy precipitation and fluvial flooding for the region. Marine climate hazards (sea level rise, coastal flooding and coastal erosion) relevant to Cote d’Ivoire are also confirmed.  
 
MALI  
Mali is among the world's poorest nations, with over 40% of its population living in poverty. It has approximately 19.6 
million people (2019) and relies heavily on agriculture, which accounts for 50% of GDP and employs a significant portion 
of the workforce. However, only 14% of Mali's land is suitable for agriculture, making sustainable land management 
crucial.  
Mali's geography is divided between the arid Sahara and Sahel in the north and the wetter, more economically active 
southern regions. The country experiences two distinct seasons: a long dry season and a shorter wet season. Rainfall 
varies significantly, with the south receiving up to 1,000 mm annually and the north less than 100 mm. Climate patterns  
are influenced by global phenomena like El Niño and La Niña.  
Climate change projections indicate a general increase in mean daily temperatures by +2.0°C to +3.0°C, affecting 
agriculture, livestock, fishing, water resources, public health, infrastructure, and energy.  Infrastructure, particularly road 
transport, is v ulnerable to extreme weather, and hydroelectricity production could decrease by up to 22% by 2025. 
Livestock and fishing will be impacted by reduced grasslands and shrinking water bodies. Water resources are 
expected to decline, exacerbating scarcity and pollution.  Agriculture, concentrated along the Niger River, faces reduced 
yields and increased crop failures due to droughts and altered rainfall patterns. Public health will be threatened by 
increased malnutrition and water -related diseases.  
BURKINA FASO  
Equally, Burkina Faso  faces significant challenges due to its limited natural resources and highly variable climate. With 
46% of its population living below the poverty line, the country struggles with food security and economic opportunities.  
Burkina Faso is diversifying its economy, focusing on biomass, hydroelectric, and solar energy, yet only 17% of the population has access to electricity.  But its economy is heavily dependent on agriculture, with 80% of employment 
linked to subsistence farming, though much of the land is degraded. Climate -related issues such as drought, dust 
storms, and temperature spikes severely impact food yields, and the country is also prone to flash floods, windstorms, 
and disease outbreaks. While local efforts to improve water retention and cultivation resilience exist, they remain small -
scale, and broader measures are needed to enhance agricultural productivity, including technical capacity, financial 
support, water storage, crop diversification, and soil restoration.    
Burkina Faso has a dry tropical climate with significant seasonal and annual variations influenced by the Inter -Tropical 
Convergence Zone. The rainy season varies from two months in the north to six months in the south. The dry season


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 sees almost no rainfall and is dominated by hot harmattan winds. The country is divided into three eco -climatic zones: 
the Sahelian zone in the north, the Sudano- Sahelian region in the center, and the Sudanian zone in the south. Annual 
temperatures range f rom 27°C to 30°C, with high evapotranspiration rates.  
Climate change projections (RCP 4.5 scenario) for 2030- 2060 indicate a temperature increase of +1.0°C to +1.5°C 
across most of the country, with higher increases during the hot season. Agriculture, employing over 80% of the 
workforce, will face challenges due to higher temperatures, less rainfall, and increased variability. Water resources are 
expected to decline, impacting agriculture, livestock, and biodiversity. Urban areas like Ouagadougou face increased 
flooding and overburdened services. Public health will be affected by temperature extremes, vector -borne diseases, 
and malnutrition.  
NIGER  
The Republic of Niger spans 1,267,000 km², with three- quarters of its terrain being desert. In 2019, Niger's population 
was approximately 22.3 million, with 50.1% women and 70% under the age of 25. The population is predominantly rural 
(83.7%), concentrate d mainly in the southern regions. The economy is undiversified and heavily dependent on 
agriculture, contributing to 40% of GDP. Despite significant progress in reducing poverty, extreme poverty remains high 
at 41.4%, affecting over 9.5 million people.  
Niger's climate is semi -arid tropical with a dry season from October to May (18.1°C to 33.1°C) and a rainy season from 
June to September (28.1°C to 31.7°C). Annual rainfall ranges from 0 mm in the north to 800 mm in the south, peaking 
in August. Climate ch ange projections indicate a mean annual temperature rise of 1.5°C to 2.2°C by 2040 -2059, with 
maximum warming during summer. Rainfall projections are uncertain, with increased variability expected.  
Climate change impacts Niger significantly. The agriculture sector, heavily reliant on rain- fed practices, faces water and 
heat stress, pest outbreaks, and ecosystem deterioration, leading to reduced yields and food insecurity. Water supply is highly climate -dependent, with significant reductions in river flow due to droughts, exacerbating resource competition 
and conflicts. T he energy sector, dependent on hydropower, is vulnerable to climate variability, affecting supply and 
demand. Human health risks increase with extreme events like heatwaves, floods, and droughts, impacting water, food, 
and air quality, and linking rising t emperatures to aggression and violence.  
CÔTE D’IVOIRE  
Unlike the 3 other countries mentioned above, Côte d'Ivoire, is located along the Gulf of Guinea and features diverse 
landscapes with forests in the south and savannah in the north. High rainfall in the south supports agriculture, including 
cocoa, cashews, and coffee, key to the economy. Around half of the workforce is employed in agriculture, critical despite its susceptibility to price fluctuations. While nearly half of the population lives in urban areas, many rural inhabitants 
rely on cash and subsistenc e farming.  
The economy is diversifying, with growth in telecommunications, finance, transport, energy, and trade, making Côte 
d'Ivoire one of Africa's fastest -growing economies. However, socio- economic disparities remain, with 29% of the 
population living below the poverty line and 38.1% without electricity. Heavy reliance on agriculture and environmental degradation increases vulnerability to climate change.  
Côte d'Ivoire's climate transitions from a humid equatorial climate in the south to a dry tropical climate in the north. The 
rainy season lasts from June to October, with annual temperatures ranging from 24°C to 28°C.  The energy sector, 
heavily reliant on hydropower, faces reduc ed electricity production due to droughts and high temperatures, posing 
economic and environmental risks . Climate change impacts include disrupted rainfall cycles, reduced crop suitability, 
and declines in agricultural production. Water resources are threa tened by rising temperatures and reduced runoff, 
increasing water stress and poverty. Coastal areas face salinization, flooding, and erosion, causing significant 
economic damage. Health impacts include higher rates of malaria, respiratory infections, and diarrheal diseases.  
Locally led adaptation action for climate resilient livelihoods  
The programme addresses climate change risks in Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, and Ivory Coast by empowering local 
governments to make adaptation decisions based on local priorities. It supports locally -led investments in seven key 
areas: climate -adapted agric ulture, forestry and ecosystem conservation, agroforestry, water and health, energy 
efficiencies and renewables, climate- resilient infrastructure, and coastal areas (Ivory Coast). Each country has 
developed tailored adaptation investments through consultat ions, considering specific socio -economic and


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 environmental conditions. These investments will inform local adaptation decisions and ensure effective GCF funding 
deployment.  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
Rural communities in the target countries are particularly vulnerable to climate change because of their high 
dependence on the availability of natural resources and climate cycles for their income, with a very low capacity to 
adapt to stress and shocks. F aced with these challenges, local actors and local governments can understand and 
address the diversity and complexity of local systems and the realities of their communities: if properly equipped, they 
are able to identify climate risks in terms of local specificities and develop solutions, mobilizing stakeholders for locally - 
appropriate interventions. The implementation of measures to combat climate change thus becomes more effective 
when local actors become agents of change and partici pate in it - in consultation with the communities  -, the climate 
issue already being part of the local prerogatives related to the provision of resilient basic services and infrastructure 
to the population.   
IF response capacities to and awareness of climate change impacts are increased at the local level and country -based 
mechanisms for financing local adaptation investments are piloted, progressively institutionalized and scaled up in the 
four West African cou ntries, THEN  the climate resilience of local communities and economies will be increased, 
contributing to achievements of Paris Agreement objectives, national sectoral targets, and specific SDG targets, 
BECAUSE  the enhanced institutional, technical and fin ancial capacity of local governments and local actors will 
increase the share of climate compatible, public and public -private investments in the key sectors, especially in climate 
resilient and diversified livelihoods options (ARA 1.0), health and wellbei ng, water and food security (ARA 2.0), 
infrastructure and built environment (ARA 3.0), ecosystems and eco- system services (ARA 4.0), while paving the way 
for the systemic integration of climate resilience considerations into ‘business as usual’ development  actions at the 
local level.  
The Theory of Change ( IoC) below illustrates the transformational role of the  programme in the four target Western 
African countries. The ToC is also annexed to this proposal as Annex 23 . 
  
 
The main barriers to sub -national climate action are multi -faceted: institutional, technical and financial. Indeed, although 
the central role of local governments is recognized directly or indirectly through their mandates for a range of sectors 
sensitive to climate change, such as water management or land use planning, they too often lack institutional, technical 
and financial capacities to play their role as champions for locally -led adaptation. Similarly, despite the call for the


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 private sector to add up to climate action commitments, key local stakeholders such as local SMEs  or local producers’ 
organisations hardly have access to adaptation finance and assistance to contribute to the resilience building efforts of 
their community. This situation is observed in the four countries targeted by the programme. The main problems to be 
addressed concern: (i) lack of technical capacities, particularly in terms of access and use of localized cl imate 
information, to drive a climate risk -informed development planning; (ii) inability of local governments and local 
communities to account for and absorb the additional costs of climate change adaptation; (iii) overall lack of capabilities, encompassing both technical and financing constraints, to implement both public and private local investments that respond to communities’ adaptation needs, beyond ‘business as usual’ development pathways. The security context in the region is exacerbated as impacts of climate change on natural ecosystems lead to inter-
communal and 
transboundary conflicts over the use/management of (scarce ) natural resources. Weak accountability systems on the 
programming and verification of local (climate) expenditures often push back decentralization and de- concentration 
agendas, contributing to further marginalize rural areas instead of promoting subsidiarity of decisions and actions. Local 
governments and their populations are affected, particularly young people, who are subject to migration or at risk of 
radicalization, as well as women.  
To help strengthen the climate resilience of communities and local economies at large scale (Paradigm Shift Potential ), 
which reflects  in a) more resilient and diversified livelihoods for the most vulnerable people (ARA1) b) increased health, 
well-being, water and food security (ARA2) ; c) increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment (ARA3); 
and d) protected ecosystem s and ecosystems services (ARA4) , the programme contributes to the enhancement and 
strengthening of the role of local gove rnments and local stakeholders in adaptation decision -making  and the systemic 
integration of measures to address local climate risks in local development processes  (Outcome 1), while increasing 
the access to climate finance available at the local and the share of  resilience building investments in priority sectors  
(Outcome 2 ). 
The programme will lead to the implementation of both public and private adaptation investments of different type 
through a multi - and cross -sectoral approach that will each provide a wide range of development co-benefits . Economic 
and environm ental co -benefits  include boosting more dynamic and green local economies, improving local conditions 
for business development, creating direct and indirect employment opportunities for communities and / or local SMEs , 
while increasing awareness on climate change and maximizing mitigation co -benefits toward a net zero carbon 
development . Social co -benefits  include improving local governance on climate change issues and in general, such as 
incentivizing the participation of local communities in the planning, implementation, monitoring and management of local investments, while increasing accountability and t ransparency of public servants on local (adaptation) action and 
access to resilient social basic services. 
 
The programme aims to reach the population of up to 85  local governments in the four countries, with potential to 
increase the resilience to climate change of some 3.49 million people, through a combination of:  
1) Dedicated technical assistance and capacity building that will support the enabling conditions for enhancing 
the capacities of local governments, local actors and communities to identify, finance and implement catalytic adaptation investments based on science -based evidence of localized climate risks  (Component 1)  
2) Performance- based climate resilience grants that will cover the additional costs of public, locally led climate 
resilient investments emerging from risk -informed, participatory and gender sensitive local planning processes 
of target local governments  (Component 2.1)  
3) Blended finance instruments that will address access to adaptation finance constraints of a wider range of local private sector actors, such as local SMEs  and, local producers’ organisations and generate a pipeline of private 
sector -sponsored investments aligned with adaptation priorities of target communities  (Component 2.2)  
 
The performance -based climate resilience grant system (PBCRG) provides a country -based mechanism to channel 
funds  to cover the additional costs of making public investments climate resilient and/or of new investments for 
adaptation, while ensuring programming and verification of local adaptation expenditures. The implementation of the 
PBCRGs is mandated to local gove rnments, which will leverage on communal structures and deconcentrated state 
services to perform their functions and will be empowered to act as adaptation champions for the communities they 
serve. The mechanism provides an incentive system that ensures the active participation of local communities in the 
planning, implementation, monitoring and management of adaptation measures. The deployment of Blended Finance 
Facilities in each country will strengthen existing institutions/structures dealing with privat e sector financing to design 
and deploy dedicated adaptation windows to the benefit of a wider range of local private sector actors, thus addressing 
access to adaptation finance barriers for the private sector to actively participate in local climate action.


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 The integration of the financing mechanisms within inter -governmental transfer systems (PBCRG  Facilities ) and 
existing private sector financing institutions/structures (Blended Finance Facilities) will allow to continue the deployment 
in other local governments at the end of the 5 years of the programme. Working in 4 countries within the sub- region 
will prov ide economies of scale, help generate and test tools with greater replication potential, particularly in UEMOA 
countries, to mobilize financing as well as to contribute to the formalization of financing models to channel and deploy 
climate finance at the local level.  
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1 - 
Local climate 
governance is 
strengthened 
and enables the 
systemic 
integration of 
appropriate 
local adaptation 
responses into 
local 
development 
processes  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ 
Outcome 2 - 
Access to 
climate finance 
at the local is 
enhanced and 
increases  the 
share of 
resilience 
building 
investments in 
priority sectors  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ 
Final Outcome 
1 - Improved 
adoption of 
diversified, 
climate -resilient 
livelihood 
options  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Final outcome 2 
- Improved food 
security, health 
and access to 
clean and 
reliable water 
supply   ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Final Outcome 
3 - Enhanced 
environmental 
conservation 
and 
ecosystems 
restoration  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Final Outcome 
4 - Reduced in 
damages/losse
s of physical ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 and economic 
assets and 
infrastructure  
 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
More dynamic 
and green local 
economies are 
promoted (job 
creation, poverty 
alleviation, etc.)  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Inclusiveness of 
local development 
processes and 
social cohesion 
are promoted  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
The programme will promote climate -resilient communities and local economies by empowering local governments and 
stakeholders with increased access to adaptation finance, awareness, and climate risk management skills. This will 
support adaptation investments ensuring resilient local livelihoods and systems, aligning with Paris Agreement 
objectives, na tional targets, and SDG targets. Enhanced institutional, technical, and financial capacities of local 
governments will boost climate- compatible investments in key sectors: climate -resilient livelihoods (ARA 1.0), health 
and wellbeing, water and food securi ty (ARA 2.0), infrastructure (ARA 3.0), and ecosystems (ARA 4.0), integrating 
climate resilience into standard development practices  
Component 1:  The awareness and response capacities of local governments, local actors and communities 
are strengthened and promote local adaptation responses  
Output 1: Awareness of climate change risks and impacts is enhanced at the local level  
Activity 1.1.   Activity 1.1: Assessments will determine local stakeholders' needs for awareness -raising and capacity 
building, including climate data use, risk -informed planning, participatory decision- making, and resilience initiatives. 
Target audiences include local governments, state services, SMEs, cooperatives, community organizations, and civil 
society. Consultations will design tailored technical assistance to empower them in climate adaptation.  Local ethnic 
communities  and minorities  in Burkina Faso, Niger, and M ali will be  key stakeholders essential for tailored climate 
adaptation and resilience efforts.  
Responsibilities:  UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 1.2.   Based on identified needs, sensitization activi santies such as events and workshops will be organized for 
local stakeholders and communities. Campaigns will raise awareness about climate change risks and adaptation 
strategies, involving local governments and community leaders for full support and adoption.  Involving community 
leaders from different ethnic groups will help  cultural sensitivity and local buy -in for effective climate adaptation 
campaigns.  
Responsibilities:   UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 1.3.   A local outreach and communication strategy will be developed and implemented. Communication 
materials will be disseminated through channels like local radio and newspapers, led by local governments and 
partners, including disaster management agencies and community organizations.  
Responsibilities:   UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Output 2: Climate data availability and access are improved for risk informed local decision making  
Activity 2.1.   Localized analyses of climatic risks, including hazards, exposure, and vulnerabilities  will be conducted. 
This includes climate downscaling and risk analysis for past and future projections to identify climate stressors and


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 vulnerabilities for priority sectors  as well as Cost Based Analysis of adaptation options . These studies will guide local 
development planning by mapping risk hotspots and prioritizing adaptation actions. Consultations and workshops with 
local stakeholders -  including representatives of ethnic groups – will help refine the analysis and create actionable 
knowledge for local climate action.  
Responsibilities:  UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 2.2.  Local Information Systems for Adaptation (LISA) will be established in target local governments to 
complement early warning systems. LISA will provide tools for early action based on forecasts and risk analysis. It will 
include a web- based application for daily data collection on climate, weather, socioeconomic, and environmental 
information, with facilities for data storage, analysis, and dissemination of early warnings. Consultations with local 
authorities and community representatives will assess access and usage gaps to identify needed services and 
products.  
Responsibilities:  UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Output 3: Capacities of local governments to plan, budget, implement and monitor for effective locally -led 
adaptation are enhanced  
Activity 3.1   Strengthen local authorities' capacity in participatory and gender -sensitive adaptation planning through 
tailored training, outreach, and workshops, incorporating vulnerable groups in decision -making.  
Responsibilities: UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 3.2.   Develop and integrate Annual Investment Plans (AIPs) for adaptation into local development plans. Provide 
capacity building for estimating adaptation costs, selecting priority measures, conducting feasibility studies, and 
ensuring technical compliance. AIPs specify GCF -financed investments via PBCRG . 
Responsibilities: UNCDF (TA ) and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) .   
Activity 3.3.   Reinforce local governments' ability to manage adaptation investments, focusing on community -based 
contracting, especially for women's groups. Provide technical assistance, draft guidelines, train officials, establish 
community management bodies, and implement cash -for-work schemes.  Responsibilities: UNCDF (TA) and National 
Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 3.4.   Establish Local Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems using the Assessing Climate Change Adaptation 
Framework (ACCAF). Provide technical assistance and training to institutionalize the M&E system (see Annexes 2). 
Responsibilities:  UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 3.5.   Sensitize and train local governments on the LoCAL standard and Performance -Based Climate Resilience 
Grants (PBCRG) features. Conduct training workshops to ensure understanding of the PBCRG system, eligible 
investments, performance measures, and complianc e with LoCAL design standards, coordinated with national 
authorities and state services. Operational manuals are detailed in Annexes 2. 
Responsibilities: UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Output 4: Local actors are supported to access blended financing instruments and to prepare bankable 
adaptation investments proposals in each target country.  
Activity 4.1 . Sensitization of local stakeholders on accessing the Blended Finance Facilities  (Sub Component 2.2) , 
targeting local SMEs and producers’ organizations. Activities include developing communication materials, awareness 
raising, and stakeholder consultations in each target local government.  
Responsibilities:  BOAD (AE)  and CCT UEMOA (EE) . 
Activity 4.2 .  Tailored capacity building for stakeholders in climate- smart production and processing. This aims to build 
a client base that meets adaptation- related eligibility criteria. Beneficiaries include producers’ associations, agro-
processing SMEs, and SMEs in c limate -sensitive or green economy sectors. Training topics include climate- smart 
agriculture, sustainable value addition, and cash flow management, implemented with state services and local 
government departments.


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 Responsibilities:  BOAD (AE)  and CCT UEMOA (EE) . 
Activity 4.3.  Technical assistance (TA) for eligible local actors to develop compliant, bankable investment proposals. 
TA will help private sector actors prepare proposals meeting Facilities’ criteria, including business plans, feasibility 
studies, financial models, and climate adaptation benefits.  
Responsibilities:  BOAD (AE)  and CCT UEMOA (EE)  
Component 2:  Country -based financing mechanisms to access and channel climate finance at the local level 
are established and enable locally led climate resilience building investments in priority sectors.  
Sub-component 2.1: The LoCAL’s Performance -Based Climate Resilience Grant (PBCRG) system is 
institutionalized and rolled out on a larger scale in the four target countries.  
The performance based -financing mechanism deployed in the framework of the programme to finance locally led 
adaptation investments is endorsed by the Least Developed Countries Expert Group to the UNFCCC and the 
publication ‘ Financing Local Adaptation to Climate Change: Experience with Performance- Based Climate Resilience 
Grants ’ is listed as supplementary material to the National Adaptation Plan Technical Guidelines .  In 2022, ISO 
14093:22 “ Mechanism for financing local adaptation to climate change - Performance based climate resilience 
grants -Requirements and guidelines ”, was developed using the methodology and experiences of the UN CDF and 
countries implementing LoCAL . 
The financing mechanism operates through PBCRGs, which provide financial top -ups to cover costs for climate- resilient 
investments and adaptation. These grants target local governments, utilizing communal structures and state services. 
Local councils, in consultation with community representatives, are responsible for planning, budgeting, and managing 
local investments. PBCRGs complement regular central allocations to local governments and can channel additional 
funding for disaster risk reduction, preparedness, humanitarian aid, and emergency response. Their technical features 
include a set of minimum conditions , performance measures  and a menu of eligible investments.  
Performance is assessed annually following a full cycle of PBCRGs. The Annual Performance Assessments (APAs), conducted independently, measure performance against predetermined criteria and influence future allocations for local 
governments. Specific designs for PBCRG deployment are detailed in Annexes  2. 
Target local governments will be selected during programme inception in consultation with the LoCAL Technical 
Committee, which oversees the PBCRG mechanism. The PBCRG will be deployed in phases to integrate learning into 
implementation. Aligned with each c ountry's inter -governmental transfer systems and decentralization, the mechanism 
is scalable and can be progressively institutionalized.  
PBCRG allocation formula per country  
Country  Initial  allocation criteria  Performance measures  
 
Burkina Faso  60% calculated based on  an equal 
share (20%), the population of the 
commune (20%) and the incidence of 
poverty in the region (20%)   40% based on performance  
 
Niger  70% based on population and surface 
area (split as follows: 50% population 
and 50% surface area)  30% for performance weighted as 
follows: indicators of integration of the Climate Change dimension into local 
planning: 20%;  and indicators of good 
governance 80%.  
 
 
Mali 70% granted following seven (07) 
equally weighted criteria (Population, 
poverty, Remoteness, Holding of 
sessions, transmission of session 
minutes, transmission of administrative 
account, rate of collection of local and 
regional development tax).  30% of grants awarded based on  
climate and good governance criteria. 
Ivory Coast  PBCRG average of USD 
35,000/year/commune with an equalization system based on 
population (80% of the total amount).  30% taken into account from 2nd year of 
implementation based on climate and 
good governance criteria.


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 In the l onger term, the program can help to  mobilize additional concessional financing by strengthening capacities, as 
demonstrated in Cambodia, Bhutan, and Benin, where the LoCAL mechanism has enhanced local climate governance 
and facilitated access to international climate finance, including a si gnificant approval from the Green Climate Fund for 
Benin in 2023.  
Output 5: The PBCRG are deployed, allocations are transferred to local governments, and investments are 
implemented according to a pre -determined menu of eligible adaptation investments.  
Activity 5.1.  PBCRG allocations are transferred to target local governments to implement eligible adaptation 
investments  (through Cash for Work, competitive bidding for local MSMEs, and direct government staff involvement) . 
Over 5 years, the programme will deliver approximately 11,100 million EUR to up to 85  local governments in 4 countries. 
The LoCAL Technical Committee will assess compliance, communicate allocations, and validate AIPs. For menus of 
eligible investments, refer to Annexes  2. All proposed investments will undergo ESS screening (for category C) before 
final funding selection.  
Responsibilities: UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 5.2.   Annual Performance Assessments (APAs) are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of 
PBCRG use and adaptation investments. These assessments ensure compliance with LoCAL standards and identify 
capacity gaps for future support. APAs involve central and decentralized auditing authorities, local governments, and 
communities.  
Responsibilities:  UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
 
Output 6: The PBCRG system is progressively institutionalised and attracts additional finance for the further 
scale up of the Mechanism  
 
Activity 6.1.  This activity supports adopting the PBCRG mechanism through capacity building, institutional 
strengthening grants, and technical assistance to the institutions involved in implementing LoCAL at the national level 
(please refer to designs in annexes 2) . Grants will help establish frameworks for the PBCRG system, ensure compliance 
via a LoCAL Technical Committee, and organize monitoring missions for PBCRG -funded investments. Support will also 
be provided to decentralized state services assisting local go vernments, aiming to institutionalize the LoCAL 
mechanism and channel other resilience -building funds. For more details, see Annexes 2. 
Responsibilities: UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
Activity 6.2 . Relevant i nstitutional actors  in charge of mobilizing climate finance in the framework of the LoCAL technical 
committees at national level (see designs in annexes 2)  will receive support to mobilize complementary financing and 
access international climate finance. Technical assistance will aid anchor institutions with accreditation and funding 
proposal development. Peer learning and experience sharing will be promoted through national and international 
forums, recognizing subnational performance- based grants for adaptation financing.   
Responsibilities:  BOAD (AE), UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs) . 
 
Sub-Component 2.2: Blended Finance Facilities are established in the target countries to catalyse adaptation 
finance for revenue generating investments at the local level  
 
This sub -component aims to provide sustainable and innovative financing for local private sector -led projects that 
address adaptation priorities identified by local governments. Blended Finance Facilities, complementing the PBCRG 
system, will leverage GCF funds and local financial sector products to support SMEs and producer organizations in 
climate resilience efforts.


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 These facilities will offer technical assistance and repayable/non -repayable grants, ensuring funds are accessible 
through cooperation with local MFIs and maintaining traceability and coherence. Managed by CCT -UEMOA, with CIF 
coordinating financial operati ons, these facilities will operate on a revolving basis, aiming for a 70% repayment rate.  
Partner financial organizations can offer additional financing instruments, such as preferential loans, to enhance local 
access to finance. The program expects CIF and partners to provide up to USD 100 million in parallel financing and 
seek additional dono rs to replicate the mechanism.  
Output 7: Blended Finance Facilities are established and revenue generating adaptation investments are 
financed in line with the menu of eligible investments in each target country.  
 
Activity 7.1 .  Establish Blended Finance Facilities, including governance bodies like project selection and investment 
committees, ensuring subnational and private sector actor inclusion. Technical assistance will support setup, aligning 
with AE procedures and GCF stand ards, defining operational modalities, investment criteria, environmental and social 
standards, and local adaptation priorities based on local planning processes.  
Responsibilities : BOAD (AE) and CCT UEMOA (EE)   
Activity 7.2.   Award and implement private sector -led adaptation projects in target areas through reimbursable from 
partner financial organizations. Investment proposals will be accepted via calls for applications or regular submissions. 
Facilities may also finance reve nue-generating public projects if national laws allow local government borrowing. 
Eligible investments will align with PBCRG priority areas and undergo mandatory environmental and social screening  
(Cat. C) . A dual key approach will ensure evi dence- based decisions accounting for climate risks and opportunities.  
Responsibilities : BOAD (AE) and CCT UEMOA (EE)  
Based on the scoping and design studies of the LoCAL mechanism conducted in each country (see Annexes 2), this approach addresses the needs and gaps in subnational adaptation financing. It enhances local governments and stakeholders' capacities through awareness creation, mainstreaming support, finance channeling, and implementation. GCF -financed investments will strengthen community resilience through climate vulner
ability and risk analysis, 
adaptation mainstreaming, annual performance assessments, and institutionalization of PBCRG Facilities, ensuring sustainability and scalability. The program also tests innovative de -risking and lending instruments, setting up Blended 
Finance Facilities within existing institutions.  
The following tools will be provided to local governments  (PBCRG Facilities)  and project selection and investment 
committees ( Blended Finance Facilities) to guide on sub- project eligibility and selection criteria.   
• Climate Data and Risk Indexes: Local governments will receive downscaled projections of climate variables to build 
indexes of future climate hazards, exposures, and vulnerabilities. These tailored indexes will inform local climate risk analysis and adaptat
ion planning. Risk analyses will be complemented by Local Information Systems for 
Adaptation (LISA) to support effective risk -informed decision- making.  
• Menu of Eligible Investments: Developed through consultations with stakeholders, this menu defines appropriate areas for increased resilience without specifying individual projects. Local governments and private sector actors will select and design project s participatively and gender -
sensitively, ensuring local ownership of adaptation 
decisions.  
• ACCAF M&E Framework: This tool will be provided to target local governments to track GCF -financed investments 
and adaptation benefits at the community level. It helps evaluate investment decisions and integrates learning into 
future planning cycles.  
• Annual Performance Assessments (APAs): APAs analyze local governments' compliance with minimum conditions 
to access PBCRGs and their performance against predetermined measures. Conducted annually, APA scores impact the PBCRG amount for the following year and identify capacity -building needs.  
• Dual-Key Approach for Private Sector Projects: Private sector -led projects under the Blended Finance Facilities 
will be assessed for financial sustainability and climate resilience impact. This ensures evidence- based decisions 
that account for climate risks and opportunities, detailing each project’s climate rationale and expected benefits . 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 .The West African Development Bank (BOAD) will be the Accredited Entity (AE) responsible for the implementation of 
the programme in close collaboration with the Executing Entities (EE), CCT UEMOA and national institutions as 
highlighted below.  UNCDF will play the role of Implementing Partner, providing key support and expertise and 
ensuring the effective implementation of the LoCAL standard – in coordination with the AE and EEs .  
Legal and agreements between the  GCF, AE and E Es: 
BOAD and GCF : As the Accredited Entity of the programme, BOAD will sign a Funded Activity Agreement (Trust 
Agreement) with GCF.  
 
BOAD and E Es: Similarly, BOAD will sign a Subsidiary Agree ment with the E Es to on- grant GCF resources for the 
implementation of specific activities of the programme in accordance with the Funded Activity Agreement.  
BOAD as part of its AE role will among others carry out the following:   
• overall oversight of the framework implementation and will report to GCF as per the terms to be agreed under the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA)  and the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA).   
• ensure that the project is implemented in line with its environmental and social safeguards (environmental impact 
classification, i.e. only up to category C).  
• supervision, monitoring- evaluation of the programme, disbursement of funds, and report to GCF on project 
management. BOAD is accredited to GCF for grant awards.  
• monitor political shifts and maintain communication with national entities, using the Regional Programme Board to 
address issues and potentially adjusting designs as needed, in agreement with GCF . 
 
Institutional arrangements and governance structure of the PBCRG Facilities (Component 2.1)  
Executing Entities:   
On-granting agreements will be signed between the AE and the national institutions  (EEs)  that will manage and channel 
the PBCRG – in line with the feasibility studies  : ANFICT, ANICT, FIE and DGDDL (see Annexes 2) . All in country EEs  
have on- granting experience as leading institutions in channeling resources to local governments (either through 
national inter -governmental transfer systems or through ad hoc donors’ funding) –  and directly in deploying the LoCAL 
mechanism in the case of ANFICT , ANICT , and FIE.  
 
Implement ing partner:  
In 2013, BOAD and UNCDF signed a Memorandum of Understanding accor ding to which “the parties commit to work 
for the reinforcement of the capacities and competencies of local actors for the setting- up of projects of adaptation, to 
elaborate jointly and implement adaptation projects in UEMOA countries, drawing on the Lo CAL initiativ e”. 
To consolidate LoCAL in the targeted countrie s and capitalise on already existing experience, thus  further attracting 
domestic and international climate finance, BOAD  will sign  a Financing Agreement  with UNCDF,  where UNCDF will  
provide technical assistance for a set of defined goals and activities per  the approved programme’s proposal.  Thus 
serving as a n Implementing Partner , UNCDF will notably provid e expertise and support quality assurance for the 
design, implementation and monitoring and evaluation of the PBCRG Facilities. In doing so UNCDF will report directly 
to BOAD and will inform and provide recommendations to each national technical committee.   
LoCAL Technical Committees  
In each country, a LoCAL Technical Committee will provide day -to-day guidance and support to local governments and 
subnational stakeholders on the implementation and monitoring of programme activities, in line with the LoCAL 
standard. These committees are co-chaired by the national institutions in charge of local authorities, climate change 
and/or NDAs . BOAD ensures compliance with the FAA and AMA through oversight, training, clear communication, and 
independent reviews, maintaining transparency and accountability in all decisions.   
Local Governments  
Target local governments benefiting from the PBCRGs are the ultimate decision- makers for local adaptation 
investments, under the oversight of the LoCAL Technical Committee. They sign an engagement charter with national 
entities responsible for channeling th e PBCRG, adapted to each country's procedures between central and local 
governments. Local governments, using communal structures and decentralized state services, are mandated to 
implement the PBCRG. Local councils are responsible for planning, budgeting , and managing local investments, in


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 consultation with community representatives, including CSOs, the private sector, minority groups, and community 
leaders . 
 
The program recognizes the political sensitivity of PBCRG decisions and investments, addressing risks like land use 
tensions and unfair distribution of benefits. By enhancing local governance, promoting community participation, and 
ensuring transparency and accountabi lity, LoCAL aims to engage stakeholders effectively and include vulnerable 
groups in decision -making.  
Since LoCAL’s inception, local authorities and communities have been actively consulted to shape the program’s 
design. Regular field missions, including recent ones in 2023 and 2024, gather feedback to avoid negative impacts on 
vulnerable groups and ensure positive outcomes. An M&E framework ensures transparency, while expert officers aid 
local governments in culturally sensitive ways, boosting community involvement and resilience.  PBCRGs ensure local 
decision- making involves beneficiaries inclusively and in a culturally sensitive  way, maximizing participation from 
vulnerable groups and enhancing community -driven investment and management.  
Institutional arrangements and governance structure of the Blended Finance Facilities (Component 2.2)  
Executing Entity:   BOAD will sign a project implementation agreement with EUMOA CCT. This Council will act as the 
regional EE of the components relating to the implementation of the Blended Finance Facilities for financing bankable 
public and private adaptation projects in the communities. As EE and oversight body, the Council will set up a regional 
team within its Permanent Administrative Secretariat. This team will be responsible for the implementation of technical assistance to local private sector actors and designated i nstitutions/structures hosting the Blended Finance Facilities 
deploying non-repayable and repayable grants. The selection of projects to be financed from the Facilities will follow a


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 transparent process and the selection and financing decisions will be made by committees made up of representative 
of local governments and local actors. An EE responsible for hosting the Blended Finance Facilities will be designated 
in each of the 4 count ries concerned. Some programmes implemented by the CCT can jointly strengthen institutional 
support and players’ capacities. UNCDF will also provide strategic support ensuring consistency and synergies 
between the two financing facilities .  
Selection and Investment Committees  
These  committees are responsible for selecting, approving, and monitoring proposals and funding instruments. Their 
main objective is to allocate funding to project beneficiaries according to BOAD and GCF investment criteria. Co- chaired 
by the NDA, the committees will include representatives from local governments and members with expertise in 
environmental finance, climate change, CBNRM, social sciences, biodiversity conservation, and sustainable 
development. Members will come from national and local govern ment institutions, the private sector, beneficiary 
representatives, civil society organizations, and academic institutions, with a focus on gender equality in all project structures. A specialized risk committee will support them, managing financial risks according to BOAD and GCF frameworks. A risk management manual will be developed through the program's technical assistance. The committees 
will report to the Regional Steering Committee.
 
 
Institutional arrangements and governance structure of the Regional Programme  
Regional Programme Board (Regional Steering Committee)  
A Regional Programme Board will be established to provide strategic and programmatic guidance as well as to provide 
a platform for peer learning and share experiences. It will be made up of E Es as well as local governments, CSO, 
private sector’s representatives  and key partners , chaired by BOAD .  
Regional PMU  
The PMU  will be staffed with the essential personal to ensure regional oversight functions for the effective and efficient 
execution of the programme and use of funds, in line with GCF standards. The PMU will provide day -to-day assistance 
to countries’ implementing entities and ad- hoc programmatic support, as needed.


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
  
 
BOAD (West African Development Bank) is the key financial institution for the West African Monetary Union States, 
promoting balanced development and economic integration. Accredited by the Green Climate Fund (GCF) in 2016, 
BOAD uses various financing tools, including short, medium, and long -term loans, equity investments, and bond 
guarantees. Its 2021 -2025 Strategic Plan, "DJOLIBA," focuses on regional integration, value creation and job support, 
and climate change resilience.    
UNCDF through the LoCAL mechanism has been intervening in sub- national adaptation since 2011, with a deployment 
started in Africa in 2014. The national E Es managing the PBCRG Facilities, are the national institutions in each country 
in charge of channelling and administering inter -governmental fiscal transfers to local governments, hence with the 
adequate structures and mechanisms in place to ensure the man age GCF funds. Details of such structures and 
mechanisms are highlighted in the Feasibility Studies in Annexes 2.  
UEMOA CCT, an advisory body established in 2011, aims to enhance local and regional authorities' involvement in 
regional integration, promote multi -level governance, and address local development concerns. It supports UEMOA’s 
objectives, fosters regional i ntegration, aids the UEMOA Commission, and strengthens social, economic, and territorial 
cohesion through collaborative actions. The Council, comprising representatives from local and regional authorities, issues opinions to guide regional policies. This pr ogramme is in lin e with the BOAD ’s Environment and Climate Strategy 
for 2015 -2019 and its new Strategic Plan for 2021- 2025 (“DJOLIBA”), and will be’ efit from BOAD ’s experience, which 
provides direct or indirect support to– member states – including targ –ted countries – for the implementation of financing 
that meets the needs of States in alignmen’  with the Bank ’s strategy. The BOAD will leverage on UNCDF’s and 
UEMOA’s experience in the development and execution of local adaptation and decentralization programmes.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 The importance of the sub -national level in climate adaptation is recognized in the Paris Agreement (Articles 7 and 11). 
However, local governments and communities in Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and other developing nations 
often lack the resources, financial and technical knowledge, and skills to effectively build resilience. Local actors such as SMEs, NGOs, producers’ associations, and cooperatives also face cons traints in accessing the resources needed 
to contribute to resilience -building efforts. This program aims to foster a paradigm shift in the target West African 
countries by providing both conceptual guidance and financing to accelerate climate- resilient sustainable development, 
addressing chronic underfunding in local adaptation investments.  
Despite an increase in global climate finance flows to an average of USD 775 billion annually in 2017 -2018, adaptation 
finance remains between 20- 25% of committed concessional finance and has shown little movement. Less than a 
quarter of global climate fin ance flows reach LDCs and Small Island Developing States (SIDS), and adaptation finance 
is increasing at a lower rate than adaptation costs, widening the adaptation finance gap. Annual adaptation costs in 
developing countries are estimated to reach USD 140 –300 billion by 2030 and USD 280– 500 billion by 2050.  
The four West African countries involved —Burkina Faso, Niger, Mali, and Côte d’Ivoire—have small economies heavily 
reliant on narrow resource bases and high public debt. Their public debt levels have doubled over the last decade, and 
while none are current ly at risk of debt distress, the COVID -19 pandemic has exacerbated economic challenges. In 
2018, developed countries mobilized USD 78.9 billion for climate action, but only USD 12.3 billion was in grants, and 
lower -income countries spend significantly more on debt payments than on climate change.  
National adaptation investments in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, and Niger are significantly underfunded. These 
countries list billions of dollars needed for adaptation investments, yet face increasing vulnerabilities and 
macroeconomic challenges that impede their ability to meet these needs. The question arises w hether LDCs can 
sustain the burden of borrowing for adaptation, where investments do not typically generate returns for debt servicing but rather provide resilient public goods and services.  
In this context, funds earmarked for subnational adaptation risk further decrease, and viable mechanisms to channel 
climate finance to the local level are limited. National funds exist but are often not dedicated to adaptation financing for 
subnational act ors. The creation of dedicated climate funds in Côte d’Ivoire and the existing funds in Mali, Niger, and 
Burkina Faso show some progress but need scaling up and better alignment with subnational adaptation needs.  
Given the low level of resources available to local governments, they are not in a position to finance climate- specific 
investments or provide complementary funding for climate- proofing local investments. The PBCRGs (Performance-
Based Climate Resilience Gr ants) aim to cover additional costs for making investments climate resilient, addressing 
the financing gap for local resilience- building priorities.  
The banking and microfinance sectors in the WAEMU region have shown improvements in financial inclusion, but 
adaptation investments are still perceived as too risky for underdeveloped domestic financial sectors. The program 
aims to deploy a blended financi ng model to mobilize the domestic financial sector through technical assistance and 
repayable or non- repayable grants for private sector -sponsored projects. Partner financial organizations can propose 
additional financing instruments to increase access to financial services at the local level.  
The GCF contribution will help materialize priority climate change actions identified in national and sectoral plans but 
currently hindered by capacity barriers, especially at the subnational level. The program will support a wide range of local actors, pr oviding a comprehensive response to climate change threats and addressing community needs. It will 
also contribute to GCF’s Adaptation Investment Criteria and promote the integration of national climate strategies in 
the target countries.  
GCF grant funding is necessary to structure and implement a multi -instrument approach, supporting both the enabling 
environment and the mobilization of additional resources for scaling up the program. In the long term, the program will 
facilitate concessional financing as transparent mechanisms and strengthened capacities of national and subnational 
actors are put in place. For instance, in Cambodia, the PBCRG system was used to channel additional funding from 
other donors after the LoCAL mechanism was roll ed out.  
Feedback on adaptation financing through PBCRGs has demonstrated their relevance and feasibility, motivating 
governments to scale up the approach nationally. BOAD aims to implement a long- term regional program, leveraging 
the Blended Finance Facilities to de-risk financing and crowd in private sector investments. These facilities will serve 
as first -loss capital or provide seed capital to unlock commercial capital or provide demonstration effects.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 Relevant ministries in the four countries have endorsed the LoCAL approach and BOAD’s blended finance instrument, 
ready to begin work with the GCF and involved entities. Proposed investments in rural and semi -urban areas are 
unlikely to be financed without  additional grants and technical assistance. This justifies the use of non- repayable and 
repayable grants through Blended Finance Facilities to de- risk private sector projects and finance public climate- proof 
investments.  
The cost -benefit analysis (see Annex 3) underscores the financial non- viability of some locally prioritized adaptation 
interventions, which, however, bring significant social, economic, and environmental benefits. This justifies the need 
for grant -based fi nancing. The local communities will ultimately benefit from the knowledge generated, enhanced local 
climate governance, and climate- resilient investments realized through GCF funding.   
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
To ensure the long -term sustainability of the financing mechanisms and facilities in the target countries, the programme 
builds on existing structures like inter -governmental fiscal transfers and private sector finance vehicles, and processes 
such as decentralization and climate change governance. It strengthens these elements to achieve adaptation 
objectives, ensuring national stakeholder ownership through a gradual deployment of instruments. By using grants for 
capacity building, technical assistance (TA), and institutionalized financing mechanisms, the programme adopts an 
integrated approach to climate finance deployment at the sub- national level.  
The different institutions involved in implementing of the LoCAL mechanism in each country will be notably supported 
for the systematic adoption and operationalization of specific gender -sensitive features into national systems for 
subnational climate finance (see annex 8A – GAP) , in coordination with Women mini stries /  relevant  organisations in 
charge of implementation of gender policies  – notably through involvement in LoCAL Technical Committees . The 
programme will monitor evidence of the institutionaliza tion of the PBCRG system - taking into account gender -sensitivity 
in participating countries through policy, regulatory or institutional reforms, thus ensuring proper national appropriation.  
The programme aims to mainstream gender sensitive climate change adaptation into regular development funding at 
the sub- national level, expanding the pool of funds tagged as climate finance and contributing to local climate resilience. 
This will be achieved through capacity building and TA for local actors to integrate climate change adaptation into 
planning, budgeting, and executing locally led investments, along with proof of concept through the deployment of PBCRG and Blended Finance Facilities. The gradual institutionalization and national ownership of the PBCRG system will ensure the scaling up and continuation of climate- resilient funding beyond the programme's end. The Blended 
Finance Facil ities will address market and non -market barriers to private finance mobilization for climate action.   
The programme follows a phased approach of the LoCAL mechanism:  
• Phase I: Test. The aim is to test the mechanism in a small number of local governments for 1- 2 investment 
cycles. It has been successfully conducted in Mali and Niger; it is being set up in Burkina ’aso and Côte d’Ivoire.  
• Phase II: Consolidate. This phase integrates the lessons of the first phase. It is deployed to at least 5- 10 local 
governments, in different regions and/or ecosystems.  
• Phase III: Systematize. This phase consists of progressively covering all vulnerable local governments and ultimately the entire national territory.  
Examples from Bhutan and Cambodia illustrate the sustainability of this approach. In Bhutan, the PBCRG initially 
covered two gewogs and expanded to 100 gewogs as part of a national roll -out, with investments focusing on 
infrastructure projects in water and sanitation, transport, storage, and agriculture sectors. In Cambodia, LoCAL has 
been deployed in up to 50 provinces and districts, channeling climate finance for local adaptation investments through 
partnerships with various donors.  
The Blended Finance Facilities will provide grants on a revolving basis, expected to remain operational for 10 years 
and become self -sufficient after the initial capital injection. Re -capitalization through new capital shares and loan 
guarantees will ensur e sustainability. Administrative and management practices, financial mechanisms, and cash flow 
monitoring will be implemented to maintain self -sufficiency.  
Partner financial organizations can propose additional financing instruments, such as preferential loans or guarantees, 
to increase local access to financial services. GCF funding will accelerate the deployment of PBCRG and Blended 
Finance Facilities, ensu ring their long -term sustainability beyond the initial subsidized phases. Institutional processes,


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
  
 strengthened capacities of local governments and private sector actors, better consideration of climate risks, and 
capacity building will enhance the attractiveness of local adaptation projects, likely attracting more funding.  
Throughout the programme's implementation, emphasis will be placed on mobilizing international and domestic 
resources and securing ownership of processes by central and local governments, local private sector actors, and 
communities. The programme will support advocacy initiatives by the LoCAL Global Board and member countries, 
promoti ng good practices and contributing to the establishment of internationally recognized standard mechanisms for 
subnational adaptation finance.


---
*Page 26*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 22 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(D) (a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + 
vi + vii) Total amount  Currency  
44 383 307  million euro (€)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter a mount    Enter  % equity 
return  
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  44 383 307      
(vii) Results -based 
payments  Enter a mount      
(b) Co -financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
8 436 190 million euro (€)  
Name of institution  Finan
cial 
instru
ment  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniori
ty 
CCT UEMOA   Rev
olvi
ng 
Gra
nts 2 688 000,00  million euro 
(€)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
CCT UEMOA  Gra
nt 4 480 000,00  million euro 
(€)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
Countries  In 
kind 1 268 190,00  million euro 
(€)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) TIl financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
 52 819 49 7 million euro (€)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 
250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
page)  Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of 
guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee). Please also explain other 
contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions and contributions of 
assets. Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer 
to the co-financing policy).   
*Co-finaning includes both committed and expected co- financing. Expected co -
financing refers to Financing Agreements with partners at an advanced stage of 
negotiations but that have not been signed yet at the moment of submission of this 
proposal.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate 
by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the 
summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.


---
*Page 27*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 23 
   
  
Component  Indicative cost  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Executing 
Entities  Amount  Amount  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Financial 
Instrument  Institution  
EUR EUR EUR 
Component 1:  The awareness and response capacities of local governments, local actors and communities are strengthened and p romote local 
adaptation responses   
Output 1: 
Awareness of 
climate change 
risks and 
impacts is 
enhanced at 
the local level  FIE, ANFICT, 
ANICT, DGDDL, 
UNCDF  3 265 492   2 758 21 6 Grants  507, 276 Grants & 
In-kind6 Countries  
and 
UNCDF  
Output 2: 
Climate data availability and 
access are 
improved for risk informed 
local decision 
making  FIE, ANFICT, 
ANICT, DGDDL, 
UNCDF  3 479 114  3 479 11 4 Grants  / In-kind   
Output 3: 
Capacities of 
local 
governments to plan, 
budget, 
implement and 
monitor for 
effective locally led adaptation 
are enhanced  FIE, ANFICT, 
ANICT, DGDDL, 
UNCDF  3 181 569  2 801 112  Grants  380 457 In-kind  Countries  
and 
UNCDF  
Output 4: Local 
actors are 
supported to 
access blended financing 
instruments 
and to prepare 
bankable 
adaptation 
investments 
proposals each 
target country.  UEMOA CCT  5 905 756  1 425 756  Grants  4 480  000  Grants  CCT 
Component 2:  Country -based financing mechanisms to access and channel climate finance at the local level are established and enable locally 
led climate resilience building investments in priority sectors   
Sub-component 2.1: The LoCAL Performance -Based Climate Resilience Grant (PBCRG) system is institutionalized and rolled out on a larger scale 
in the four target countries.   
Output 5: The 
PBCRG are 
deployed, allocations are 
transferred to 
local 
governments, 
and 
investments 
are 
implemented 
according to a 
pre-
determined menu of 
eligible FIE, ANFICT, 
ANICT, DGDDL, 
UNCDF  13 109 817   13 109 817  Grants  / Grants & 
In-kind   
 
 
6 In kind: staff time


---
*Page 28*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 24 
   
 adaptation 
investments  
Output 6: The 
PBCRG system 
is integrated 
into 
subnational 
transfers systems, operationalized 
at the local 
level and 
progressively 
scaled up in 
each target 
country  FIE, ANFICT, 
ANICT, DGDDL, 
UNCDF  4 674 382   4 293 925  Grants  380 457 Grants & 
In-kind  Countries 
and 
UNCDF   
Sub-Component 2.2: Blended Finance Facilities are established in the target four target countries to catalyze adaptation finance for revenue 
generating investments at the local level   
Output 7: 
Blended 
Finance 
Facilities are established 
and revenue 
generating adaptation 
investments 
are financed in 
line with the 
menu of eligible 
investments in 
each target 
country  UEMOA CCT  17 138 688  14 450 688  Grants  2 688  000  Grants  UEMOA 
CCT  
Project 
Management 
Costs    2 064 678  2 064 678  Grants  /      
Indicative total 
cost (EUR)    52 819 496 44 383 30 7  Grants  8 486  190   Grants & 
In-kind UEMOA 
CCT, 
Countries 
and 
UNCDF    
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☐    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
The programme includes sensitization and capacity building at the sub -national and national levels and 
throughout the operationalization and institutionalization of the financing mechanisms, which will ultimately 
empower a wide range of local actors with t he knowledge, know -how, tools and agency to act as adaptation 
champions in their communities.  
The programme mainstreams a ‘learning by doing’ approach, as the whole deployment of the financing 
instruments is implemented through and accompanied by TA and capacity building support at all levels, but 
especially the local one. Subsidiary agreements will be signed between the AE and country level EEs to 
strengthen relevant central government entities, national and subnational institutions in their capacities to 
support sub- national planning, budgeting and execution and monitoring processes . Local governm ents and 
decentralized state services will also benefit from international technical assistance and regional and 
international training and exchange through UNCDF and the LoCAL global network. Local communities are in 
turn sensitized through local support teams and their awareness and agency enhanced. The programme 
leverages on a ‘learning chain’, which starts with central level authorities and is ‘downscaled’ or ‘channell ed’ 
toward local governments and actors – assuring sustainability of capacity building processes and outcomes.


---
*Page 29*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 25 
   
 Technology transfer is assured through the menus of eligible investments (see Annex es 2). The menus align 
to national climate change policies and frameworks (NDCs, NAPs, etc.) and feed from climate risks analysis to 
localize the extent of identified hazards and vulnerabilities. The menus build on reviews of existing evidence of innovations  
and best practices tested in each country and in the region for climate sensitive sectors and will 
guide local governments in identifying innovative adaptation responses.  
The programme, t hrough TA support, also contributes to the sharing and use of climate data and information 
innovative tools, e.g. through its climate risk analysis methodology and the LISA. Similarly, community and 
local contracting schemes promoted under the approach for the realization of adaptation investments leverage 
and test digital solutions for payments (e.g. mobile money), contributing, on the one side, to improve 
transparency and traceability of transfers executed under local governments’ contract s, and, on the other side, 
to boost the financial inclusion of local communities.


---
*Page 30*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 26 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The programme aims to enhance the climate resilience of communities and environments across four countries, 
impacting livelihoods through gradual deployment of financing mechanisms. Targeting 85  communes with an estimated 
population of 3.49 million, the programme expects 15% (approximately 524,000 people) to directly benefit from GCF -
funded investments by its completion, while all residents will indirectly benefit from capacity building and speci alized 
technical assistance.  
The PBCRGs will support approximately 530 local government -led investments in priority climate -sensitive sectors, 
providing EUR 11,155,200 in direct financing to local governments. Additionally, the Blended Finance Facilities will offer 
EUR  17,138,688 to de- risk and blend private sector -sponsored local adaptation investments, addressing community 
needs through participatory and gender -sensitive planning processes.  All outputs described in this programme will 
serve the direct beneficiaries , through : 
 
• Involvement in planning and governance processes  
• Access to resilient infrastructure and services  
• Technical assistance to local governments  
• Participation in adaptation measures and infrastructure management  
• Access to financial products for private sector adaptation investments  
 
More broadly, the following will accrue to indirect beneficiaries:   
• Local economic development generated by investments and,  
• Infrastructure and services delivery improvements  
• Improved sub -national planning and PFM at the local level.  
 
PBCRG -financed investments will include feasibility studies, environmental and social assessments, and the 
construction of small -scale climate -resilient infrastructure. Vulnerable communities and groups will participate in 
decision- making and implementatio n processes, ensuring investments meet their needs and generate economic 
activities and revenue. The Blended Finance Facilities will provide financial instruments to local SMEs and producers’ 
organizations, enhancing the adaptive capacity of target communi ties. 
The programme will contribute to GCF’s Adaptation Results Areas through investments in seven priority sectors, 
equipping communities with infrastructure, products, and services to cope with climate change impacts. Examples 
include:   
• Vulnerable people and communities – climate resilient and diversified livelihoods (ARA 1.0)  
• Health and well -being, food security and water resources (ARA 2.0)    
• Climate resilient infrastructure and built environment (ARA 3.0)  
• Protection of ecosystems and ecosystem services (ARA 4.0)  
 
Adaptation benefits and impacts will be evaluated using the ACCAF M&E framework through local governments. This 
will involve collecting baseline data on hazards, vulnerabilities, and climatic risks to track investments and monitor 
progress in community and local economic resilience. Mid -term and final evaluations will assess progress toward 
GCF and programme outcomes, providing insights to strengthen subnational adaptation finance and action.  
Overall, the programme will mobilize international and domestic resources, ensuring the ownership and sustainability 
of processes by central and local governments, private sector actors, and communities. It will reinforce advocacy by 
the LoCAL Global Board and member countries, promoting good practices and establishing internationally recognized 
standards for subnational adaptation finance.  
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 31*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 27 
   
 Potential for scaling up and replication  
The programme aims specifically to continue rolling out LoCAL in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger and to introduce the 
approach in Ivory Coast (Component 2.1), while testing and deploying an additional financing model as the Blended 
Finance Facilities in each country to bridge the gap of private sector participation in local adaptation through a 
blended finance approach (Component 2.2). Integrating financing mechanisms within inter -governmental transfer 
systems and existing private sector financing institutions  will enable continued deployment in other local governments 
after the programme. These mechanisms are designed to be flexible, scalable, and self -sufficient as they gain proof 
of concept and government ownership, facilitating the mobilization of domestic and international climate finance. 
Operating in four countries will provide economies of scale, generate and test tools with high replication potential, 
particularly in UEMOA countries, and formalize financing models for local climate finance deployment.  
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
A Regional Programme Board will be established to enable the four target countries to share experiences, lessons 
learned, and best practices. These countries will join the LoCAL network through the LoCAL Global Board. The LoCAL 
Global Board acts as a South- South platform for LDCs and developing countries to discuss subnational climate finance 
and locally led adaptation. The regional PMU will coordinate with countries to ensure effective outreach and knowledge 
sharing both regionally and globally. This will help promote the international recognition of mechanisms like LoCAL and 
the Blended Finance Facilities as sustainable models for subnational climate finance. The programme benefits from a 
large experience in designing, piloting, consolidating, and scaling up the LoCAL mechanism in 18 countries. This 
continuous learning process is supported by knowledge sharing and South- South cooperation. The programme will 
continue to benefit from these insights, as documented in the LoCAL mid- term evaluation and publicati ons, recognized 
by the international community.  
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
The programme will establish an institutionalized mechanism for channeling climate finance to local governments 
(Component 2.1) and strengthen existing institutions to create dedicated adaptation funding for local private sector 
actors, such as SMEs and pr oducers’ organizations (Component 2.2). It will enhance the capacities of local 
governments to understand climate risks, integrate adaptation into planning, budgeting, implementation, and monitoring 
processes, and improve community response capacities thro ugh sensitization and awareness (Component 1). This 
initiative will improve local climate governance by developing policies, processes, and mechanisms to address climate 
risks and reinforce multi -level governance for climate adaptation. Additionally, by demonstrating the effectiveness of 
the financing mechanisms, the programme aims to attract further domestic and international funding, thereby increasing 
the overall climate finance available for local climate action.  
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies   
 
Integrating climate change adaptation into national and local government processes will institutionalize and mainstream 
adaptation within decentralization systems in each country, ensuring medium and long -term sustainability of the 
programme objectives. The design aim to strengthen policy and regulatory capacities by fostering collaboration among 
central and local government s and other stakeholders . In the long term, the programme supports the enhancement of 
national fiscal transfer systems to local governments and public finance processes for climate adaptation. This includes 
climate budget tagging, developing or revising guidelines and manuals, integrating adaptation into local planning 
guidelines, and incorporating adaptation into tendering and contracting processes. Additionally, the programme will 
strengthen institutions that handle private sector financing to create dedicated adaptation windows, benefiting a broader 
range of local private sector actors.  
 
Overall contribution to climate -resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation strategies and plans  
  
The programme facilitates the translation of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) adaptation priorities into local 
actions. Eligible adaptation investment menus are aligned with NDCs and National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) while 
considering the mandates and capacities of local governments. It empowers local governments and actors to become 
autonomous in adaptation efforts by involving them in the entire process, from risk -informed planning to the selection, 
implementation, and monitoring of investments.  Drawing from past experiences, local interventions often expand from


---
*Page 32*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 28 
   
 immediate needs (such as agricultural practices and water resource protection) to broader issues like education, 
training, and disaster risk reduction, thereby enhancing local resilience. The programme also encourages private sector 
participation in achiev ing NDC and NAP targets).  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
This programme presents an integrated approach which contribute s to the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and align actions in an environmentally, socially and economically sustainable manner.  
 
The programme will lead to the implementation of both public and private adaptation investments of different type 
through a multi - and cross -sectoral approach.  A series of co -benefits are expected:  
• Economic co -benefits include  boosting  more dynamic and green local economies, improving local conditions for 
business development , while  creating direct and indirect employment opportunities for communities and / or local 
SMEs. The increased resilience of economic infrastructure and services will have spin-off effects over different 
economic activities . For instance, more resilient road and transport infrastructure offsets the risk of supply chain 
disruptions during rainy seasons and overall improve mobility of people and goods in the area. Similarly, Climate 
proofed water infrastructure provides rural communities with a key input to sustai n agricultural activities, making 
agricultual income s less vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Through local contracting and / or community 
contracting, GCF -funded investments will create direct and indirect job opportunities, that will in turn contribute to 
generate new income prospects  for local communities .   
 
• Social co -benefits include improving local governance on climate change  issue s and in general, such as 
incentivizing  the participation of local communities in the planning, implementation, monitoring and management 
of local investments, while increasing accountability and transparency of public servants on local (adaptation) 
action. Specific attention will be given in ensuring the inclusiveness of decision- making processes to reflect needs 
and voices of most vulnerable groups, such as women, youth and minorities. GCF -funded investments support 
sustainable development additionality, which means that the intervention s has direct development impact and 
alignment with the SDGs, with the goal of being inclusive, sustainable and leaving no one behind. Key areas of 
interventions concern water and sanitation, resilient social infrastructure that will deliver, in addition to adaptation 
benefits, development benefits in particularly deprived areas, mostly through access to improved social basic 
services and  insfrastructure. Development additionality also entails incorporating social equity considerations into 
project design and exec ution, including pricing products and services with public good features at affordable levels.   
 
• Environmental co- benefits  include increasing awareness on climate change and maximizing mitigation co -
benefits toward a net zero carbon development. The menu of eligible investments encourages the realization of  
ecosystems -based adaptation measures (e.g. land restoration and sustainable management, integrated water 
resources management, reforestation), of environmentally sound agricultural practices and use of renewable


---
*Page 33*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 29 
   
 energy sources when applicable, and seeks  co-benefits in terms of  sustainable  land use and greenhouse gases 
sequestration (e.g. reafforestation and/or wetlands conservation). The overall sensitization efforts with communities 
will contribute to create awareness of anthropogenic climate change, contributing to induce behavioural chnages 
which are more conscious of human impacts on the natural ecosystems.  
 
Gender mainstreaming translates into taking into account the specific vulnerabilities of women in climate risk 
analysis, the active participation of women in decision- making processes as well as in the implementation and 
management of investments. Gender issues and development impact will be described in the gender -
disaggregated targets in projects’ targets . Most of the indicators (especially impact level) are disaggregated by 
gender. Others specifically account for social inclusion dimensions (participatory and gender sensiti ve planning, 
community -based oversight mechanisms for project implementation, etc.) that implicitly account for women’s 
role/participation within the programme and more broadly in the civic space. Key dimensions by which t he 
programme ensures gender responsiveness  in its design and implementation are detailed in Annex 8). 
•  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
As part of the preparation and implementation of the NDCs, the key areas of vulnerability to climate change and the 
priorities for intervention have been defined. This programme aligns with the four countries’ targets as expressed in 
their respective NDCs, and in the ensuing domestic sectoral measures to be localized to address specific vulnerabilities 
faced by target c ommunities.  
All four countries are disproportionately affected by the negative effects of climate change, and their vulnerabilities to 
climate change is further exacerbated by unstable macro- economic contexts.  
Key obstacles observed in the target countries in sub -national effective climate responses pertain to both 
governance and enabling environment, and operational risks and barriers at project level:  
In the 4 target countries, the main barriers to sub -national climate action are multi -faceted: institutional, technical, and 
financial. Thus, although the central role of local governments is recognized directly or indirectly through their mandates 
for a range of sectors sensitive t o climate change, such as water management or land use planning, they often lack 
institutional, technical and financial capacities to play their role as champions for locally led adaptation.  
The main problems to be addressed concern:  
- Lack of appropriate budgetary allocations from the national level  for climate - sensitive sectors;  
- Main sources of climate finance are often only available and accessed through application to national programmes 
that have specific, earmarked arrangements and which fall outside of established decision - making processes and 
the public expenditure management cycle ;  
- Constraints and lack in terms of access to adaptation finance for private sector -led investments;  
- Lack of technical capacities, particularly in terms of access and use of localized climate information, to drive a 
climate risk -informed development planning;   
- Inability of local governments and local communities to account for and absorb the additional costs of climate 
change adaptation;  
- Overall lack of capabilities, encompassing both technical and financing constraints, to implement both public and 
private local investments that respond to communities’ adaptation needs, beyond ‘business as usual’ development 
pathways.  
NDC funding requirements assessed for adaptation  are: 
• Burkina Faso:  NDC anticipates a total of approx 2 .8 billion USD  to meet the country's adaptation priority needs  
(conditionnal + unconditionnal scenario) .7 
• Ivory Coast: overall cost of implementation of adaptation objectives is estimated at 12 billion USD .8 
• Mali:  The total cost of adaptation measures  for the period 2020 -20230  is estimated at  8 billion  USD .9  
• Niger: The total cost of adaptation measures  for the period 2021 -2025 is estimated at 2.72 billion USD. Meanwhile, 
total costs for adaptation for the period 2026 -2030 is estimated at 4.023 billion USD (total of 6.743  billion USD) . 10 
 
7 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -06/Rapport%20CDN_BKFA.pdf   
8 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -06/CDN_CIV_2022.pdf   
9 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -06/MALI%20First%20NDC%20update.pdf   
10 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -06/CDN_Niger_R%C3%A9vis%C3%A9e_2021.pdf


---
*Page 34*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 30 
   
 The key issues specifically targeted by the program me for these 4 countries are as follows:  
Priority issues for countries  Areas of interventions  
Climate change is particularly impacting in a context where 
communities are dependent on access to natural resources and on 
climatic conditions. Realization of localized and spatialised analysis aiming to characterize 
the hazards, vulnerabilities, and climatic risks. Definition of a menu of 
investments adapted to these risks -  and to the mandates of the local 
governments  for investments that will lead to accrued resilience and an 
ecosystem -compatible development. 
Mandates of local governments include the realization of 
interventions in sectors sensitive to climate change, while they lack 
resources and capacities to put in place relevant solutions  Support  for local governments throughout the planning cycle for 
identification of appropriate adaptation measures , including helping 
local stakeholders to better anticipate, plan, budget, implement and 
monitor actions. Annual performance assessments provide year -by-
year information on capacity building activities of local governments. 
The mobilization of resources at the level of local governments and 
local private sector actors is one of the critical aspects for 
investments related to adaptation.  Through the institutionalization of the financing mechanisms and the 
strengthening of capacities at the local level, the programme contributes 
to secure the financing conditions for local investments and to increase 
their attractiveness for funders. The pr ogramme thus uses the 
demonstrative effect to attract additional financing for local adaptation in 
the form of national transfers and blended financing instruments. 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The four countries have provided their non -objection letters, which are attached to this proposal. The programme is 
endorsed by the NDAs of the four countries. Furthermore, the programme responds to national frameworks on climate 
change and decentralizatio n and is aligned with NDCs. The design studies of the national mechanisms in each country 
make it possible to anchor the mechanism in its specific context -  political framework, institutional framework, 
complementarities with initiatives in place or in preparation.  
In Burkina Faso, local governments follow the Yamoussoukro Declaration (2015) , 11 emphasizing the need for 
enhanced local resilience and environmental security. The Nationally Determined Contribution (2021)  calls for 
increased mobiliz ation of  municipalities for climate actions, aligning with the National Adaptation Plan's goal of 
enhancing climate adaptation and finance. Meanwhile , the  study  "Vision prospective de la décentralisation à 
l'horizon 2040 " highlights insufficient local resources and capacities despite efforts to strengthen decentralization ( see 
adoption of PNDES II –  2021- 2025). LoCAL + supports inclusive and resilient local development, thus aligning with 
these strategies as well as the Action Plan  for Stabilisation and Development (2023) , the National Sustainable 
Development Policy (2013) , and the Low-carbon Development Vision 2050 (2022) . 
In Ivory Coast , decentralization institutions and strategies are being strengthened. The country has a robust 
institutional framework for national climate governance, including the National Climate Change Programme, created in 
2012, which coordinates climate- related projects and initiatives. A Directorate for the Fight against Climate Change 
was established in 2016 following the Paris Agreement. Ivory Coast's revised NDC (2022)  promotes integrating climate 
objectives into local development plans and strategies. The frame work supports dialogue and action on climate issues, 
including the feasibility study for a climate agency and the drafting of a climate change bill  funded by the EU through 
the GCCA+.  
In Mali, LoCAL aligns with the National Policy on Climate Change (PNCC, 2011) which emphasizes integrating 
climate change into national and local development planning.12  LoCAL also supports the Framework Document for 
National Decentralization Policy (DCPND, 2015- 2024)  and the Strategic Framework for Economic Recovery and 
Sustainable Development (CREDD 2019- 2023) . CREDD aims for a well -governed, peaceful, and inclusive Mali, 
focusing on poverty reduction, environmental respect, and enhancing human capital, especially for youth and women. 
It is structured around five strategic axes: governance reforms, inclusive gr owth, human capital development, climate 
change, and international cooperation. LoCAL also aligns with Mali’s revised NDC (2021), which promotes local 
authorities’ involvement in planning through their Social, Economic, and Cultural Development Plans (PDE SC). 
 
 
11 https://base.afrique- gouvernance.net/docs/yamoussokro- climat ---declaration---final.pdf   
12 Note that a National Adaptation Plan is in preparation in Mali, which will enhance the role of local authorities. LoCAL follows closely these 
developments and seeks alignment.


---
*Page 35*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 31 
   
 In Niger , the National Climate Change Policy (NCCP, 2012)  seeks to integrate climate change into local planning. 
Meanwhile, t he Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES 2017- 2021)  focuses on eradicating poverty and 
inequality, prioritizing decentralization. Since July 2023, the National Council for the Safeguard of the Homeland has 
begun replacing the PDES with the Resilience Program for the Safeguarding of the Homeland (PRSP) ,13 developed 
around five strategic axes: human capital, governance -peace -security, sources of growth, rural development and food 
security, and citizen participation. LoCAL+ aligns with the "3N" initiative for food security and sustainable 
agriculture,  emphasizing local actors’ roles in poverty reduction and sustainable resource management , while t he 
National Adaptation Plan  (2022)  reinforces adaptation integration in government planning. 14 
This programme has ensured an early and strategic engagement with national authorities and other government 
stakeholders to support national ownership. Annex es 7 detail  past and forthcoming activities.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed programme for climate finance emphasizes the use of non -repayable grants due to the geographic 
location and targeted local actors. About 70% of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) funding will be allocated for investments 
through the Performance -Based Climate Resilience Grants (PBCRG)  and Blended Finance Facilities. PBCRG funding 
is provided via result -based payments, which offer liquidity for investments and establish an accountability system to 
enhance resilience in subnational adaptation finance.  
In the short term, the programme aims to secure additional resources through capitalization of outcomes and direct 
support for resource mobilization. Partners can supplement initial GCF funding through parallel financing, as 
demonstrated in Cambodia where multiple donors have utilized PBCRG to fund climate -resilient infrastructure. Over 
time, the reliance on donor resources is expected to decrease, with national  governments directly  co-funding the 
PBCRG s (ex. Of Benin through ecotaxes) . 
In the long term, the programme will focus on mobilizing domestic financing from central and local governments, 
ensuring sustainable and transparent mechanisms and strengthening the capacities of local actors in investment 
planning and management. The blended financing approach will be carefully implemented to avoid over -subsidizing 
the private sector while not crowding out private investors or distorting local markets. The Banque Ouest Africaine de 
Développement's (BOAD) experience in blended finance will support effective private finance mobilization while 
optimizing concessional finance use.  
Key points from the LoCAL initiative, which informs this programme, highlight the effectiveness of the PBCRG system 
in improving climate issue consideration by local governments. Integrating PBCRG into government systems avoids 
creating parallel systems, f acilitates scaling, and promotes national ownership. Performance measures reinforce local 
government capacities, and the use of technical assistance and capacity building alongside PBCRGs enhances 
transparency and accountability, verifying climate change e xpenditure at the local level.  
The proposed financing mechanisms capitalize on existing national and sub- national institutions and systems, reducing 
transaction costs and ensuring long- term sustainability and scalability of results. The integration of these mechanisms 
guarantees country  ownership and effective scaling up, with the LoCAL mechanism already proven across 18 countries 
in Asia, Africa, and the Pacific over a decade. Continuous learning and best practices from these experiences are 
integrated into the programme, enhancing the PBCRG system's effectiveness.  
The programme recognizes the strong potential for private sector participation in local climate action, revealing revenue -
generating investments that can be more efficiently financed through de- risking or blended finance instruments. This 
approach ultimately optimizes the use of scarce public resources for adaptation, ensuring the sustainable 
implementation of climate resilience measures at the sub -national level.  
 
 
 
13 see decree N°000414/PM/CAB of October 04, 2023.  
14République du Niger (2022) Plan National d’Adaptation aux Changements Climatiques. Available at : 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Plan- National -d%27Adaptation_Niger_Version- Finale.pdf


---
*Page 36*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 32 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the parad igm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point -scale rating ( low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note.  Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2(a)  (theory of 
change).         
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  Rural communities in the four 
target countries are particularly vulnerable to climate change 
because of their high dependence 
on the availability of natural resources and climate cycles for their income, with a very low capacity to adapt to stress and shoc ks. Yet, l ocal climate action 
and responses remain limited and constrained to drive climate 
resilient and compatible local 
development pathways . Low The climate resilien ce of local 
communities and economies is 
strengthened, therefore contributi ng to 
the achievements of Paris Agreements’ objectives, national sectoral targets and specific SDGs,  as the enhanced 
institutional, technical and financial capacity of local governments and local actors will increase  the share of 
adaptation investments and pave the way 
for the systemic integration of climate 
resilience considerations into ‘business 
as usual’ development.   The programme will  contribute to the 
realization of countries’ adaptation goals 
through local climate action by creating 
the enabling conditions for  to the 
enhancement of the role of local 
governments and local actors in 
adaptation decision- making and the 
systemtic integration of appropriate 
measures to address local climate risks in 
local development processes  (Outcome 
1). This is achieved through 
strengthening the capacities of local 
governments, local actors and 
communities to identify , mainstream and 
implement catalytic adaptation 
investments based on science- based 
evidence of localized climate risks  
(Outputs 1,2,3,4).  The Programme will


---
*Page 37*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 33 
  
  
 pilot, progressively scale up and 
institutionalize country -based financ ing 
mechanisms to channel climate finance 
at the local level (Output s 5.6.7) that will 
increase in the short , medium and long-
run the share of  adaptation finance 
available to realize locally -led adaptation 
investments  that responds to local 
resilience building needs  (Outcome 2).  
Replicability  Limited viable  financing 
mechansims exist in the four West 
African countries  and in the region, 
earmarked for adaptation action,  
that allow for a systemic and 
nation- wide deployment of climate 
finance at the local level , thus 
limiting climate action and responses at the local level  across 
localities and regions . Low Target countries  progressively 
institutionalize and roll out country -based 
and scalable financing mechanisms to 
channel predictable and adequate climate finance at the subnational level that help to advance national adaptation 
objectives through local climate action, and have proved the concept for 
replication in neighbooring EUMOA 
countries.  
  The programme will support  target 
countries to pilot, progressively scale up 
and institutionalize a standard and 
country -based financing mechanism for 
channelling climate finance to local 
governments ( Output 5,6)  while 
strengthening existing 
institutions /structures  dealing with private 
sector financing to design, pilot and 
deploy  dedicated adaptation windows to 
the benefit of a wider range of local private sector actors  (Output 7). The 
programme will thus use the 
demonstrative effect to roll out/ replicate 
the financing model s (in country and in 
the region) and attract other sources of 
funding (both domestic and international)  
to overall increase the share of climate 
financing flowing to the local level for 
resilience building investments (Outcome 
2).  
Sustainability  Main sources of climate finance in 
the four West African countries are often only available and accessed through application to national programmes that have specific, 
earmarked arrangements and 
which fall outside of established Low Target countries have systematically 
increased  the share of climate finance 
deployed for local climate investments , 
as proven, country -based and scalable 
financing mechanisms to channel and 
deploy predictable and adequate climate 
finance at the subnational level are The Programme will pilot, progressively 
scale up and institutionalize country -
based financ ing mechanisms  (aligned 
and intregated into existing national tranfers systems) (Output s 5,6,7) which 
are fully scalable and serve as a country 
standard to support the mobilization of 
climate finance accessible for locally led


---
*Page 38*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 34 
  
  
 decision -making processes and the 
public expenditure management 
cycle , thus limiting sut ainable 
financing approaches to adaptation 
action, especially at the local level.  institutionalized , while regular communal  
budget s are progressively ‘ acclimatized’ 
as capacities for the systemic integration 
of climate change consideration s into 
local development planning are 
increased.  adaptation  in short, medium and long 
term (Outcome 2) . 
 
The Programme will deploy technical 
assistance and capacity building to create 
an enabling environment (at multiple 
levels  of governance ) and a set of tools 
and methodologies (Output 1,2,3,4) to 
ensure the enhancement of capacities of 
local governments , actors and 
communities to integrate and 
progressively mainstream responses to 
climate change into business as usual 
development  planning processes 
(Outcome 1).  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators) .  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final15 
ARA 1/2/3/4  Core indicator 2: Direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  
ACCAF reports; 
progress reports; Annual 
Performance 
Assessments (APA)     0 or TBC 
based on local 
govenrments 
selection  Burkina Faso: 8,898  
Niger: 14,831  
Mali: 8,898  
RCI: 5,932  
Total: 38,561  
Approx. 50% women  Burkina Faso: 52,533  
Niger: 55,343  
Mali: 16,450  
RCI: 32,884  
Total: 157,211  
Approx. 50% women  Targets are estimated 
based on expected 
number of direct beneficiaries per country  
 Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting ACCAF reports; progress reports; Annual Performance 
Assessments (APA)     0 or TBC 
based on local 
govenrments 
selection  Burkina Faso: 8,898  
Niger: 14,831  
Mali: 8,898  Burkina Faso: 52,533  
Niger: 55,343  
Mali: 16,450  At least 30% of 
investments focuses on 
productive sectors to 
support climate 
 
15 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emiss ion reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 39*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 35 
  
  
 ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  
 improved and/or new 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options  RCI: 5,932  
Total: 38,561  
Approx. 50% women  RCI: 32,884  
Total: 157,211  
Approx. 50% women  resilient and diversified 
livelihoods options 
(agriculture,  fishery, 
etc.) – targets are 
estimated based on 
expected number of 
direct beneficiaries per 
country  
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with more 
climate -resilient water 
security  ACCAF reports; 
progress reports; Annual Performance 
Assessments (APA)     0 or TBC 
based on local govenrments 
selection
 Burkina Faso: 8,898  
Niger: 14,831  
Mali: 8,898  
RCI: 5,932  
Total: 38,561  
Approx. 50% women  Burkina Faso: 52,533  
Niger: 55,343  
Mali: 16,450  
RCI: 32,884  
Total: 157,211  
Approx. 50% women  At least 30% of 
investments focuses 
on water  sector  – 
targets are estimated 
based on expected 
number of direct 
beneficiaries per 
country  
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment  Supplementary 3.1: 
Change in expected 
losses of economic 
assets due to the impact 
of extreme climate-
related disasters in te 
geographic area of the 
GCF intervention ACCAF reports; 
progress reports; Annual Performance 
Assessments (APA)     0 or TBC 
based on local 
govenrments 
selection  Burkina Faso: USD 
120,000  
Niger: USD 250,000  
Mali: USD 120,000  
RCI: 100,000  
Total: USD 590,000  Burkina Faso: USD 520,000  
Niger: USD 800,000  
Mali: USD 520,000  
RCI: 550,000  
Total: USD 2,390,000  20% of investments 
concerns  the following 
sectors: social  
infrastructure, 
transport and storage 
– targets are estimated 
based on expected 
value of GCF -financed 
investments  per 
country  
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  
 Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non -
forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas 
brought under resoration ACCAF reports; progress reports; Annual Performance 
Assessments (APA)     0 or TBC 
based on local 
govenrments 
selection  TBC  based on local 
govenrments selection
 TBC based on local govenrments 
selection  20% of investments 
concern the following sectors: forest ry and 
environment al 
protection – targets are 
estimated based on


---
*Page 40*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 36 
  
  
 and/or improved 
ecosystems  expected number of 
direct beneficiaries per 
country  
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5- 8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.  
Core Indicator Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate -
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  The four West African 
countries witness a weak verticaliz ation of national 
adaptation objec tives 
(e.g. NDC, NAP, etc) , 
while limited country -
based financing 
mechansims that allow to channel and deploy climate finance at the local level  exist, hence 
limiting the role that local govenrments, local actors 
and communities may 
play in climate resilience building.  low Climate change adaptation is 
systematically integrated into 
national , sectoral and local 
development plans , ensuring 
effective  multi -level governance 
for climate action , with the role of 
local governments and local actors in leading on adaptation 
decision- making recognised and 
streghthened for locally led 
responses . Scalable and country -
based financing mechanisms that 
mobilize, channel and deploy 
climate finance at the local level are institutionalized and rolled out to increase the amount of finance and investments for adaptation at 
the local level.  The programme will contribute to the 
verticalization of countries’ adaptation goals by creating the enabling conditions for to the enhancement of 
the role of local governments and local actors in adaptation action and the systemtic integration of 
appropriate measures to address local climate risks in local development processes . The 
Programme will pilot, progressively 
scale up and institutionalize country -
based financing mechanisms to channel climate finance at the local 
level that will increase in the short, 
medium and long- run the share of 
adaptation finance available to realiz e 
locally -led adaptation investments.  Multiple sub -
national areas 
within a 
country  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF Despite the role of 
subnational governments low A critical mass of stakeholders 
and clear leadership at local, The prorgramme will  contribute to the 
further international recognition of Multi- countries


---
*Page 41*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 37 
  
  
 investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  in boosting a climate 
resilien t development  is 
widely acknowledged,  
standards, mechanisms 
and practices  which 
leverage on local action 
are hardly advocated for  
and experiences shared 
across countries and 
regions . national and regional level is 
consolidated to advocate for subnational adaptation finance and action, through the 
establishment and scale up of 
country -based  and country -driven 
mechanisms and standards that 
reinforce national decentralization 
processes and verticalization of 
national resilience building 
objectives.
  countr y-based mechanisms, such as 
LoCAL’s PBCRG system  and the 
Blended Finance Facilities, as 
sustainable and scalable models to 
mobilize, channel and deploy  climate 
finance at the local level.  The 
Programme will contribute to fuel  the 
LoCAL network of more than 30 countries in Asia, Africa and Pacific represented at the LoCAL Board as a 
south -south platfrom to share 
knowledge and learning, as well as 
advance joint advocacy efforts for 
increased support of locally led 
adaptation.  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes /outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co -benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numb ering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1 :  Local 
climate governance is 
strengthened and 
enables the systemic 
integration of 
appropriate local 
adaptation responses Number of  local 
governments that have 
strengthened financial , 
technical and 
institutional  capacities to 
finance, plan and act for 
inclusive and gender -
sensitive adaptation.  Progress report s, 
Annual Performance 
Assessments (APA) 
Capacity 
assessments 
(including baseline)  
Evaluation reports  
 0 or TBC based on 
local governments  
selection  35 local 
governments  
with enhanced 
capacity  85 local 
governments  with 
enhanced capacity  Externalities: Turn in p olitical will on  
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda, high turnover of local 
governments’ officials, political 
instanbi lity and security concerns 
impacting on local governments 
normal functioning.


---
*Page 42*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 38 
  
  
 into local 
development 
processes  
 Methodological Note: Strenghtened 
local climate governance under this 
indicator will be assessed against 
APA scores in each commune on a 
early basis and baseline vs. final 
scores. APA indicators e ncompass 
the following key and interconnected 
dimensions: (i) Good governance 
and public financial managemen; (ii) 
Adaptation mainstreaming in local 
planning, budgeting, procurement/ 
contracting and execution, (iii) 
Interface between good governance 
and climate adaptation.  
Output 1 Awareness of 
climate change risks and 
impacts is enhanced at the 
local level  Number of national and 
local authorities’ officials 
and community 
representatives that 
participated in awareness 
and capacity -building 
activities (disaggregated by 
sex and subject area)  
 
Percentage of local 
governments that are 
promoting community - 
based governance in one or 
more domains of planning, 
contracting, monitoring and 
management for adaptation 
investments  Progress reports, 
Annual Performance 
Assessments (APA), 
Training reports  
 
 0 
 
 
 
0 or TBC based 
on local 
govenrments 
selection  
 TBC based on 
local 
govenrments 
selection  
 
At least 60% of 
partcipating 
local 
governments as 
of end of Y2  
 
 TBC based on 
local govenrments 
selection  
 
At least 80% of 
partcipating local 
governments as of 
end of Y5  
 Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda, high turnover of local 
governments’ officials, political 
instanbility and security concerns 
impacting on local governments 
normal functioning.  
 
Output 2 Climate data 
availability and access are 
improved for risk informed 
local decision making  Number of targeted local 
governments that regularly 
collect, update and analyse 
climate change information 
for risk -informed planning 
 
Number of CRA/Climate 
information systems 
realized/developed to 
support risk informed 
localized responses  Progress reports, 
Annual Performance 
Assessments (APA), 
CRA and LISA reports  
 0 or TBC based 
on local 
govenrments 
selection  
 
 
 
2 localized CRA  At least 8 0% of 
partcipating 
local 
governments as 
of end of Y2  
 
 
4 localized CRA 
and/or LISA  At least 100% of 
partcipating local 
governments as of 
end of Y5  
 
 
4 localized CRA 
and/or LISA  Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda, high turnover of local 
governments’ officials, political 
instanbility and security concerns 
impacting on local governments 
normal functioning.  
 
Output 3   Capacities of 
local governments to plan, Amount of capacity -building 
and institutional Progress reports, 
Annual Performance 0 or TBC based 
on local  
USD 800k   
USD 2.6 million  Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration


---
*Page 43*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 39 
  
  
 budget, implement and 
monitor for effective locally 
led adaptation are 
enhanced  streghtening  grants  
delivered to national and 
subnational  governments 
for enhahnced localized 
climate response  
 
Number of targeted local 
governments that have 
integrated climate change 
adaptation responses into 
their local plans and 
budgets.  Assessments (APA), 
Letters fo Agreement  
 govenrments 
selection  
 
 
 
0 or TBC based 
on local 
govenrments 
selection  
 
  
 
 
 
 
At least 80% of 
partcipating 
local 
governments as 
of end of Y2  
  
 
 
 
 
At least 100% of 
partcipating local 
governments as of 
end of Y5  
 agenda, high turnover of local 
governments’ officials, political 
instanbility and security concerns 
impacting on local governments 
normal functioning.  
 
Output 4  Local actors are 
supported to access 
blended financing 
instruments and to prepare 
bankable adaptation 
investments proposals  Number of 
sensitization/awareness 
raising events realized with 
Blended Finance Facilities’ 
target beneficiares  
 
Number of private sector 
proposals supported 
through TA for bankable 
pipelines creation  Progress reports,  
Investment pipelines  
by BFF EEs  0 
 
 
 
0 Tbd 
 
 
 
Tbd Tbd 
 
 
 
Tbd Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda as well as clamite change 
agendas. Lack of appetatite from 
domestic financial sector.  
 
Outcome 2  Access to 
climate finance at the local 
is enhanced and 
increases  the share of 
resilience building 
investments in priority 
sectors  Volume of (adaptation 
eamarked) domestic and 
international resources 
channelled through 
and/or leveraged via 
PBCRG sytem 
(disaggregated by 
source)  
 
Volume of (adaptation 
eamarked) domestic and 
international resources 
leveraged via the 
Blended Finance 
facilities (disaggregated 
by source)  Progress Reports, 
APA, Financial 
reports from EEs 
 0 or TBC based 
on local 
govenrments 
selection  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 USD 700k  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tdb USD 1.5 million  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tdb Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda, shift in ODA priorities  and 
geography. Lack of appetatite from 
domestic financial sector.  
Output 5  The PBCRG are 
deployed, allocations are 
transferred to local 
governments, and Number and value of 
public adaptation 
investments financed 
through the PBCRGs 
(disaggregated by type,  
Progress Reports , 
APA, LG planning 0 or TBC based 
on local 
govenrments 
selection  130 investments  
USD 2.95 
million  
 530 investments  
USD 1.155.200 
million  
 Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda, high turnover of local 
governments’ officials, political


---
*Page 44*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 40 
  
  
 investments are 
implemented  sector and ecosystem and 
GCF ARA)  
 
Percentage of PBCRG 
investments and 
interventions explicitly 
targeting women  
 and budgeting 
documents , ACCAF  
 
  
 
 
0 or TBC based 
on local 
govenrments 
selection   
 
 
At least 5%   
 
 
 
At least 5%  instanbility and security concerns 
impacting on local governments 
normal functioning.  
 
Output 6 The PBCRG 
system is progressively 
institutionalized and 
attracts additional finance 
for the further scale up of 
the Facility.  
 Evidence of the 
institutionalization of the 
PBCRG system in 
participating countries  Official 
documentation for 
PBCRG 
institutionalisation 
(policy, regulation, 
institutional 
framework)  0 2 case study  4 case studies  Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda as well as clamite  change 
agendas  
 
Methodological Note: case study 
approach applied  
Output 7 Blended Finance 
Facilities are established 
and revenue generating 
adaptation investments 
are financed  Number and value of 
investments financed 
through the Blended 
Finance Facilities 
(disaggregated by type, 
sector and ecosystem  and 
GCF ARA ) Progress Reports, 
Investments 
documents  0 tbd tdb Externalities: Turn in political will on 
decentralization/deconcentration 
agenda as well as clamite change 
agendas. Lack of appetatite from 
domestic financial sector.  
 
Project/programme co- benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1  More 
dynamic and green local 
economies are promoted  Amount of green 
investments in targeted 
sectors  Progress Reports, 
Investments 
documents  TBC based on 
local govenrments 
selection  TBC based on 
local 
govenrments 
selection  TBC based on 
local govenrments 
selection  Externalities:  Deteriorating 
macroeconomic conditions and 
political instability  
Co-benefit 2  
Inclusiveness of local 
development processes 
and social cohesion are 
promoted  
 Rate of employment in 
sectors targeted by the 
intervention, 
disaggregated by sex, age 
group, disability status and 
economic sector  National Statistics  TBC based on 
local govenrments 
selection  TBC based on 
local 
govenrments 
selection  TBC based on 
local govenrments 
selection  Externalities:  Deteriorating 
macroeconomic conditions and 
political instability  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub- activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub- activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity.


---
*Page 45*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 41 
  
  
 Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Output 1: Awareness of climate change 
risks and impacts is enhanced at the local 
level 
  
Proximity support to local governments 
and local stakeholders, national and international technical assistance  
   Activity 1.1. Assessments of local 
stakeholders’ needs for tailored awareness -raising and capacity building 
are undertaken.  
Activity 1.2. Sensitization activities are organized with key local stakeholders and 
delivered according to the identified 
needs.  
Activity 1.3. A local outreach and 
communication strategy is developed and 
implemented.  Needs’ Assessments reports  
Sensitization events held  
Outreach and communication strategy  
Output 2: Climate data availability and 
access are improved for risk informed local decision making   
Proximity support to local governments 
and local stakeholders, national and 
international technical assistance  
 Activity 2.1. Localized analyses of climatic 
risks, looking at local hazards, exposure 
and vulnerabilities are conducted.  
Activity 2.2. Local Information Systems for 
Adaptation (LISA), in complement of existing early warning systems and climate information services, are set up in each 
target local government.  Climate Risks Assessments  
LISA set up 
Output 3: Capacities of local governments 
to plan, budget, implement and monitor for effective locally led adaptation are enhanced  Proximity support to local governments and local stakeholders  through capacity building, national and international technical assistance  Activity 3.1 Capacities of local authorities for participatory and gender -sensitive 
adaptation planning is strengthened.  
Activity 3.2. Annual Investment Plans 
(AIPs) for adaptation are developed and/or 
integrated into local development plans and adaptation investments budgeted in line with local planning cycles.  
Activity 3.3. Local government capacities 
to execute and manage adaptation 
investments are strengthened and 
mechanisms for community-based  
Annual Investments Plans for adaptation  
Local M&E system deployed (ACCAF) 
Training workshops on adaptation 
mainstreaming for local governments held  
Training workshops on participatory 
planning and management of adaptation 
investments for local governments held


---
*Page 46*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 42 
  
  
 contracting (especially for women's 
groups) strengthened.  
Activity 3.4. Local M&E to track adaptation 
investments are established and used by local governments to assess adaptation benefits.  
Activity 3.5. Target local governments are sensitized and trained on the LoCAL 
standard and PBCRG features.  
Output 4: Local actors are supported to 
access blended financing instruments and 
to prepare bankable adaptation 
investments proposals each target country  National and international technical assistance to national and subnational 
authorities.  Activity 4.1. Sensitization with relevant 
local stakeholders on access modalities to 
the Facilities is undertaken.  
Activity 4.2. Tailored capacity building support in climate smart production and processing processes is delivered the eligible stakeholders.  
Activity 4.3. TA to eligible local actors is 
delivered to develop compliant and 
bankable investments proposals.  Sensitization events held  
Capacity building to relevant local 
stakeholders delivered through training 
workshops  
Pipeline of eligible private sector 
sponsored projects  
 
Output 5: The PBCRG are deployed, 
allocations are transferred to local 
governments, and investments are 
implemented according to a pre-
determined menu of eligible adaptation investments.  
 PBCRG transferred and investments implemented.  
Proximity support to local governments, national and international technical assistance  Activity 5.1. PBCRG allocations are 
transferred to target local governments and investments are implemented in line with the menu of eligible adaptation investments.  
Activity 5.2. Annual Performance Assessments (APAs) are undertaken in target local governments on an early basis to assess effectiveness and efficiency on PBCRG use and adaptation investments 
implementation.  PBCRG - financed Adaptation investments 
implemented  
APAs undertaken  
 
  
Output 6: The PBCRG system is 
progressively institutionalised and attracts  
National and international technical 
assistance to national and subnational 
authorities. On-granting Agreement for Activity 6.1.  Institutions at both national 
are subnational levels are supported for 
the systematic adoption and 
operationalization of the mechanism.    
On-grating Agreements for capacity 
building and institutional strengthening


---
*Page 47*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 43 
  
  
 additional finance for the further scale up 
of the Facility  capacity building and institutional 
strengthening.  Activity 6.2. Institutional actors receive 
support for the mobilization of 
complementary financing (e.g. bilateral 
funding from bilateral and multilateral partners, and domestic resources) and 
direct access to international climate 
finance. PBCRG system operationalized at both 
national and subnational level  
Financing for PBCRG rolled out is 
mobilized  
Output 7: Blended Finance Facilities are established and revenue generating adaptation investments are financed in line with the menu of eligible investments in each target  BFF funding delivered.  Proximity support to local stakeholders, national and international technical assistance  
Activity 7.1. The Financing Facilities are 
set up and governance bodies established and operational.  
Activity 7.2. BBF funded adaptation projects are awarded and implemented in 
target local governments.  BFF- financed adaptation investments 
implemented  
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
A common monitoring and evaluation framework will be designed and will be aligned with the Assessing Climate Change Adaptation Framework (ACCAF) developed 
by UNCDF in partnership with the WRI. The ACCAF in cludes 9 components (building blocks) for an adaptation M&E system. Three components relate to the 
technical design elements of the mechanism in each country and six relate to the deployment of the PBCRG system from year to year. The ACCAF will be handed 
over to local governments, which will use the framework to track adaptat ion investments and benefits at the local level through the PBCRG. The same framework 
will be also extended to private sector -sponsored investments originating from the Blended Finance Facilities’ pipelines. It is expected that the ACCAF will contribute 
to the achievement of the programme’s adaptation objectives and demonstrate the its contribution through the financing mechanisms deployed.  The programme 
M&E system will be defined in such a way as to supplement or strengthen the monitoring systems of the program me partners and to feed the set of indicators 
presented in the logical framework.  
 
Continuous monitoring of the implementation of the program me will be carried out under the responsibility of the regional oversight bodies (Regional PMU) in close 
collaboration with national oversight and decision -making bodies (LoCAL Technical Committees, Blended Finance Facilities  Committees , EEs, and local 
governments) . At the level of each country, annual performance assessments of the target local government will be carried out - neutrality will be ensured from the 
pre-established performance measures.  The regional PMU  will be in charge of coordinating the reporting work and producing the annual report of each country. 
Each report will provide an account of the implementation of the activities, the difficulties encountered, the lessons learned, as well as the degree of achievement 
of the objectives measured by the corresponding indicators, referring to the logical framework matrix. The report will be des igned to allow a follow -up of the means 
envisaged and used, in financial terms. The national annual reports will be consolidated at regional scale then submitted to the Regional Programme Board, which 
will ensure the quality control of the results obtained and will contribute to the highlighting of the alert points and adjus tments if necessary. The report will then be 
submitted for validation to GCF  by BOAD  as AE.  
An evaluation report will be produced at the end of the program me as well as at mid -term - in order to take into account possible warning points and adjustments. 
These reports will be produced in coherence with the international evaluation benchmarks while specifically feeding the GCF i mpact and results indicators (sect ions 
E3 and E4). The ACCAF framework will be used to characterize resilience improvement trajectories. Reports will be shared with  program me partners; a transversal


---
*Page 48*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 44 
  
  
  
 
 working seminar for the 4 countries could be organized involving relevant national and subnational stakeholders . These reports will be sent to the GCF, once 
validated by the BOAD; where appropriate, adjustments and follow -up measures will be implemented. The evaluation work will be carried out by independent experts 
to ensure neutrality and objectivity.


---
*Page 49*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
 1. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
In Mali , Niger, and Burkina Faso, t he programme builds on a successful LoCAL pilot phase, which overall limits financial 
and operational risks. In each four target  countr ies, risks were assessed as part of the design and (see annexes 2)  
throughout  regular missions.   
Selected Risk Factor 1 – Organizational  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
  
Staff changes (technical) within national and subnational institutions disrupt the implementation of activities  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
National technical teams and expert field officers work with government partners in case adjustments are needed in the 
event of staff changes. By emphasizing the establishment of country -based and owned financing mechanisms and 
individual capacity, any change in personnel should not unduly affect country initiatives. As the LoCAL mechanism is 
strengthened by the pilot project (phase I) and subsequent deployment (phase II / III), the risk gradually decreases.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 – Governance  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  High 
Description  
Abuse of funds by public servants (mismanagement, corruption or "clientelism")  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Capacity building emphasizes the ability of government officials to use government systems properly to avoid 
inadvertent misuse of funds, while regular financial audits and annual performance assessments deter bad practices, 
corruption or "clientelism". These exercises identify any misappropriation of funds as soon as possible. Financial reports 
received from authorities must comply with predefined quality requirements to ensure disbursement of a next tranche of funds. The results of good governance and verification are integrated into the  design of the PBCRG system (in the 
form of minimum conditions for accessing grants at the local level each year)  
Selected Risk Factor 3 – Low impacts   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low High Select  
Description  
The projects identified and implemented do not ultimately contribute to improving climate resilience.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The menu of eligible investments is defined during the design of the mechanism in each country, in close collaboration 
with the country's stakeholders. The menu offers a reference document but should be interpreted in the light of localized 
and spatialised assessments of climate risks. When expanding to new local governments (phase II), the menu is 
modified accordingly. ACCAF (9 co mponents) will be implemented as part of the programme.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 – Financial Management  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description


---
*Page 50*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 Maintenance of investments is not done.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Investment maintenance funding through other own income or other transfers is tracked and documented on an annual 
basis during annual performance assessment and rewarded by the scoring system. The participation of local 
communities in the planning, implementation and monitoring phase helps mitigate risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 – Operational delays  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High Select  
Description  
Delays occur due to implementation delays and lack of co -funding from the government and / or other partners.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
National technical teams and expert filed officers provide day -to-day support to local governments to ensure timely and 
high- quality implementation of PBCRG and investments. This proximity support is complemented by national and 
international technical assistance and training. the Regional PMU support countries to document experience, lessons 
and results. Annual performance assessments inform capacity -building act ivities and possible adjustments to country 
mechanisms, particularly in phase I. Regular dialogue is maintained with development partners through working groups 
and bilateral meetings. Support is provided to develop complementary support programmes that respond to country priorities.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 – Environmental  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
 Projects implemented have negative environmental and / or social consequences.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Ecosystems and socio- economic vulnerabilities are included in localized and spatialized analysis of climate risks. 
Environmental protection measures and incentives for participation in planning, implementation and monitoring are incorporated into the desig n of the PBCRG mechanism (in the form of minimum conditions for accessing grants at local 
level and / or performance measures influencing the score and financial allocation of the following year). As countries 
move from Phase I to Phase II or III, environm ental and / or social opportunities are incorporated into the design of the 
mechanism (e.g. green job creation). All GCF financed investments will undergo a mandatory ESS according to relevant 
AE standards before approved for funding. Annex 6A 2 presents the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
of the programme.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 – Security  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Côte d'Ivoire is relatively politically stable . However, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger face political instability, posing 
potential risks to the proposed project.  Some areas are medium security risk areas - with armed groups and / or terrorist 
groups nearby. Depending on the area, this risk is more or less significant. It is likely to hinder the implementation of the mechanism and the mobilization of technical assis tance (e.g. endangering support teams, annual performance 
assessments, etc.) . A summary 
an analysis of each of these countries political /security situation and detailed miti gating 
measures  is provided  in annex 6C . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The programme intends to mitigate potential security risks through various strategies  (please refer to  Conflict sensitivity 
analysis ): 
Prioritizing stable regions:  Selecting project sites with minimal security concerns and a history of peacebuilding 
efforts.


---
*Page 51*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
 Engaging with local stakeholders:  Collaborating with local law enforcement, community leaders, and traditional 
authorities to understand local dynamics and build trust.  
Ensuring equitable resource distribution:  Implementing inclusive project development and resource allocation to 
prevent grievances and foster social cohesion.  
Employing a community -focused conflict resolution mechanism:  Respecting traditional practices while 
incorporating innovative approaches to address potential conflicts arising from the project.  
Implementing a comprehensive security protocol:  Conducting thorough risk assessments, establishing emergency 
response procedures, and providing security training for project personnel.


---
*Page 52*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
The environmental and social risk assessment for this program aligns with internationally recognized standards from 
the IFC, World Bank, and GCF, and adheres to BOAD’s policies. For detailed guidelines, see Annexes 6 on ESS. The 
assessment includes:  
a) Checklist for Category C - An "Environmental and Social Screening Checklist"16 has been developed according 
to GCF procedures for Category C projects, please refer to Annex 6A 1. 
b) ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  (Annex 6A 2); 
c) Indigenous People Plan  
d) Conflict sensitivity analysis  
e) BOAD’s General Guidelines on ESS   
 
In accordance with the "Operational Policies and Procedures of West African Development Bank Intervention for 
Environmental and Social Management in the Financing of Projects," E&S risks and impacts are assessed based on 
regulations of the intervention countries and guidelines from international organizations, including:  (i) United Nations 
Convention on Environment and Development;  (ii) United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women;  (iii) United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights;(iv) International Labour 
Organization conventions on human rights and labour law;  (v) World Bank policies and safeguard guidelines;  (vi) IFC 
safeguard policies on environmental and social issues;  and (vii) International good industry practices published by 
major industry associations.  In particular, the following environmental risks and impacts will be taken into account:  
- Environmental risks: related to community security; related to climate change and other cross -border and global 
risks and impacts; any real threat to the protection, conservation, preservation and restoration of natural habitats 
and biodiversity; related t o ecosystem services and the use of living natural resources, such as fish and forests.  
- Social risks and impacts: Human security threats from conflicts, crime, or violence; disproportionate impacts on disadvantaged or vulnerable groups; discrimination in access to development resources; economic and social impacts from land deprivation or res trictions; issues related to land tenure, access, food security, and land values; 
health, safety, and well -being of workers and communities; and risks to cultural heritage.  
The International Finance Corporation's Performance Standards (PS) are the key benchmark for assessing the 
programme's environmental and social risks.  All proposed adaptation interventions and related activities have 
been pre -screened and categorized under Category C according to the GCF Guidelines17, which covers activities 
such as:  
- Awareness raising, capacity building, advisory services, support for adaptation planning, technical support, and 
institutional strengthening.  
- Household -level facilities and production within built -up areas, including post -harvest processing, rainwater 
harvesting, small -scale renewable energy, energy efficiency, and smallholder agroforestry.  
- Small- scale rural and urban projects, including village- level water supply and drainage, rural energy, small -scale 
infrastructure, watershed management, habitat rehabilitation, climate- resilient agriculture, soil and water 
conservation, and community forest management.  
Please refer to Annex es 2 for the menu of eligible investments for the adaptation interventions for each individual 
country in this program me. All proposed adaptation interventions and related activities have been pre -screened and 
categorized under Category C according to the GCF Guidelines18 and are not required to undergo a formal ESHIA 
process at this stage.  
However, as some of the project information for the adaptation interventions are being developed, including detailed 
project area, all proposed adaptation interventions and related activities will undergo a second internal mandatory ESS 
screening under the relevant BOAD ESS and ESMP procedures before final selection for direct funding from PBCRGs. 
A checklist annex is attached.  
 
16 In answering this checklist, we have referred to Annex 1: Guidance on Part A ESS Screening of the “ Guidelines for the 
environmental and social screening of activities proposed under the SAP ”.  
17 GCF, ‘ Sustainability G uidance Note: S creening and Categorizing GCF -Financed A ctivities ’ (2019)  
18 GCF, ‘ Sustainability Guidance Note: Screening and Categorizing GCF -Financed Activities’ (2019)


---
*Page 53*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 Even in case of confirmation of Category C categorisation, where the outcomes of the ESS of a specific adaptation 
intervention will suggest so, a relevant Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be developed following 
the relevant BOAD procedures19. If there are material changes in the activities design and execution of the adaptation 
interventions which will create unanticipated environmental risks and impacts, or other circumstances that can elevate 
or potentially elevate the risk category and req uire additional or adjustments in the adaptation measures, these will be 
notified to the GCF.  An "Environmental and Social Screening Checklist"20 has been developed according to GCF 
procedures for Category C projects, please refer to Annex 6A. It has a "Part A: Risk Factors" and a "Part B: Specific 
environmental and social risks and impacts".  For all general guidelines, please refer to the Politique d’intervention de 
la Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement  en Matiere de Gestion Environnementale e t Sociale d ans le Financement 
des Projets ’, BOAD,  2019. 
Ethnic minorities in the relevant areas will be consulted during the planning process to include them in decision- making 
processes. All adaptation interventions selected from the menu of eligible will be designed and implemented so not to have any negative indirect impacts on indigenous peoples, ethnic minorities, or vulnerable and marginalized groups  
(see notably annex 6B, Indigenous People Plan) .  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
The LoCAL programme in Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, and Côte d'Ivoire integrates a gender -sensitive approach to 
climate change adaptation, recognizing that women, particularly in rural areas, are disproportionately affected by 
climate change. Gender assessments and an action plan, prepared by gender experts, guide this approach. The 
assessments focus on women's rights and status, climate and gender issues, and specific gender challenges for the programme.  
 Despite government efforts to integrate gender into public policies, significant gaps remain in application and resource allocation. Women are often considered secondary actors. Niger, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Côte d'Ivoire rank poorly in 
gender inequality indices, highlighting the need for effective gender mainstreaming.  Detailed gender assessments for 
the four countries are available in Annex 8.  
 
Main  recommendations from Gender Assessments:  
• Improve local -level data on gender inequalities, using indicators linked to Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) compiled by the African Development Bank.  
• Conduct studies on the co- benefits of inclusive, gender -focused adaptation.  
• Implement actions to change attitudes towards gender roles.  
• Facilitate women's professionalization through initiatives like FIRCA in Côte d'Ivoire's agricultural sector.  
 
Gender Action Plan Implementation:  
The Gender Action Plan ensures women's participation by:  
• Systematizing gender analyses in vulnerability assessments and activity reports.  
• Facilitating women's access to training.  
• Ensuring women's representation in local adaptation plans and investment choices.  
• Incorporating gender equality criteria in performance reviews.  
 
Key Dimensions for Gender Responsiveness:  
• Gender- Specific Vulnerabilities:  Adaptation responses will consider gender -specific vulnerabilities and 
benefits from proposed adaptation options.  
• Inclusive Civic Space:  Awareness and capacity building will address the needs of vulnerable groups, including 
women, to create an inclusive and gender -responsive civic space.  
• Participatory Planning:  The LoCAL mechanism promotes participatory and gender -sensitive planning, 
identifying investments that meet the needs of the most vulnerable and advancing gender equality.  
 
Design Features for Gender Equality:  
• Climate Risk Assessments:  Methodologies account for local stakeholder groups' specific vulnerabilities.  
 
19 See: POLITIQUE  D’INTERVENTION DE LA BANQUE OUEST AFRICAINE DE DEVELOPPEMENT EN MATIERE 
DE GESTION ENVIRONNEMENTALE ET SOCIALE DANS LE FINANCEMENT DES PROJETS, BOAD (2019)  
20 In answering this checklist, we have referred to Annex 1: Guidance on Part A ESS Screening of the “ Guidelines for the 
environmental and social screening of activities proposed under the SAP ”.


---
*Page 54*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 • Capacity Building:  Training and technical assistance will integrate gender mainstreaming throughout the 
PBCRG deployment cycle.  
• Gender- Responsive Investments:  A menu of eligible investments will target areas where women's 
participation is crucial and where they are most affected by climate change.  
• Performance Measures:  Local governments will be assessed annually on gender -responsive adaptation 
actions, incentivizing better performance and institutionalizing these processes.  
• M&E Tools:  The ACCAF methodology tracks adaptation benefits distribution, assessing improvements in 
gender -responsive adaptation at the local level.  
 
Blended Finance Facilities:  
The Blended Finance Facilities will develop investment policies ensuring contributions to gender equality and women's 
empowerment, using BOAD’s tools and policies to integrate gender considerations in project origination and financing.  
 
Investment Screening:  
Investments will be screened for climate rationale, considering impacts on vulnerable populations, including women. A quota will ensure that investments explicitly target women’s groups and associations.  
 
Safeguarding Policies:  
Policies on Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Harassment (SEAH) will be integrated into the Environmental and Social 
Safeguards (ESS) annexes and applied to GCF -financed activities, adhering to international safeguards throughout the 
programme execution.  
 Monitoring and Evaluation:  
Most indicators will be disaggregated by gender, with specific attention to social inclusion dimensions. The national 
technical committees will include organizations representing women’s interests to secure the implementation of the 
Gender Action Plan.  
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Financial management and procurement under this project will follow BOAD rules, regulations, and the Accreditation 
Master Agreement (AMA) with GCF. Grant proceeds will flow from GCF to the AE and then to funded activities based 
on the Procurement Plan.  
 
PROCUREMENT  
 
To ensure financing aligns with BOAD’s mandate and maximizes development effectiveness, the Bank promotes 
sound, fair, transparent, and efficient procurement systems. The project will apply BOAD’s guidelines for procuring 
consultancy services and awarding contracts for works, goods, and non- consultancy services.  
 
BOAD will review procurement files and provide approvals. AML/FT due diligence will be conducted as part of BOAD’s 
Financial Security Policy to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing. This policy follows international standards 
from the UN, OECD,  FATF, and the WAEMU Directive. It requires disclosing suspicious transactions to authorities and 
assessing clients' backgrounds against sanctions lists.  
 
The policy mandates that project funds must not originate from illicit activities and requires immediate reporting of any 
suspicions of unlawful funds. BOAD prohibits business relationships with entities on international sanctions lists related 
to money la undering and terrorist financing.  
 
AUDIT  
 
Annual audits will follow BOAD Guidelines for Financial Reporting and Auditing of Projects. An independent external 
auditor, approved by BOAD, will audit the Financial Statements according to international standards. BOAD may 
provide recommendations for im provements in accounting, systems, controls, and compliance with financial covenants. 
The audit cost will be covered by project resources. BOAD will ensure KYC -compliant due diligence, including anti -
money laundering.  
 
As an Implementing Partner , UNCDF will manage financial and procurement processes per its policies and BOAD 
guidelines. UNCDF -funded projects will adhere to its Financial Regulations, Rules, and Internal Control Framework, 
mandating competitive procurement through formal tenders. Procurement principles include:


---
*Page 55*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 • Best Value for Money: Selecting offers that best meet end -users’ needs and provide the best return on 
investment, considering quality, experience, vendor reputation, life- cycle costs, and alignment with social, 
environmental, or strategic objectives.  
• Fairness, Integrity, and Transparency: Ensuring fair, open, and rules -based competitive processes. All vendors 
are treated equally, with clear evaluation criteria, instructions, requirements, and easy -to-understand rules.  
• Effective International Competition: Providing timely and adequate information to all potential vendors, ensuring 
equal participation opportunities, and restricting competition only when necessary to achieve development 
goals.  
 
In summary, AE will ensure that all financial management, procurement, and due diligence processes align with 
international standards and best practices, ensuring transparency, fairness, and compliance with all relevant 
regulations. For further details, please refer to A nnexes 9 and the relevant sections.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the follow ing two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy,  and 
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 56*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 A Ivory Coast  
☒ Annex 1 B Niger  
☒ Annex 1 C Burkina Faso 
☒ Annex 1 D Mali  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 2 A 1 Feasibility study LoCAL Mali  
☒ Annex 2 A 2 (Extract) Menu of eligible investments Mali   
☒ Annex 2 B 1 Feasibility study LoCAL Niger  
☒ Annex 2 B2 (Extract) Menu of eligible investments Niger   
☒ Annex 2 C 1 Feasibility study LoCAL Burkina Faso  
☒ Annex 2 C2 Menu of eligible investments Burkina Faso  
☒ Annex 2 D 1 Feasibility study LoCAL Ivory Coast  
☒ Annex 2 D2 Menu of eligible investments Ivory Coast  
☒ Annex 2 E 1 West Africa Macroeconomic Research  
☒ Annex 2 E2 Technical Note Component 2.2 VF  
☒ Annex 2 F N iger CRA Report  
☒ Annex 2 G Mali Climate Report ( downscaling analysis ) 
☒ Annex 2 H Burkina Faso Climate Report (downscaling analysis ) 
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Framework  (ESM F) 
☒  Others : ESS checklist , Indigenous People Plan, Conflict Snesitivity Analysis.  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment s and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☐ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)


---
*Page 57*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. ☐ Annex 
16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 17 Multi- country project/programme information (template provided)  
☒ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
Annex 18A 2014- 2018 LoCAL Report  
Annex 18B 2020 LoCAL Report  
Annex 18C 2017 LoCAL Mid Term Review  
Annex 18D LoCAL 2019 -2022 Annual Report  
Annex 18 E LoCAL Evaluation  
 
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by the entity  
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 23 Theory of Change


---
*Page 58*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 74*
---

REBLIQUE DU NIGER  
 
Fraternité – Travail – Progrès  
===================  
CABINET DU PREMIER MINISTRE  
===================  
CONSEIL NATIONAL DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT POUR UN DEVELOPPEMENT DURABLE  
**********  
SECRETARIAT EXECUTIF  
===================  
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)  
       Niamey, 07/28/2024  
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by West African Bank of Development (BOAD ) regarding 
LOCAL CLIMATE ADAPTIVE LIVING FACILITY Plus (LoCAL+) – West Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory 
Coast, Mali  and Niger)   
Dear Madam, Sir,  
We refer to the programme titled LOCAL CLIMATE ADAPTIVE LIVING FACILITY Plus (LoCAL+) – 
West Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali and Niger)  in Niger  as included in the funding 
proposal submitted by West African Bank of Development (BOAD ) to us on 16 May 2024 . 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Dr. Kamaye Maâzou , the National 
Designated Authority  of Niger . 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we ackno wledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no -objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.  
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The government of Niger  has no -objection to the programme as included in the funding 
proposal;  
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national 
priorities, strategies and plans of Niger ; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme  as included 
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.  
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the programme as included 
in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
Kind regards,  
    
____________________________  
Dr. Kamay é Maâzou  
Executive Secretary of the National Council of the Environment for Sustainable Development (CNEDD)  
National Designated Authority  
Niger


---
*Page 75*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 75 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP 247 
Proposal name:  Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility Plus  (LoCAL+) – West 
Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali and Niger)  
Accredited entity:  Banque  Ouest  Africaine  de Développement  (BOAD)  
Countries:  Burkina  Faso,  Côte  d'Ivoire , Mali,  Niger  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
The program me presents innovative solutions to 
improve , at scale, the adaptive capacity of 
communities in the  target countries  through 
improved local governance that places 
communities and other local actors at the centre 
of adaptat ion planning and action . This will 
contribute towards ensuring that adaptat ion 
action and investments are focused at directly 
addressing  the adaptation needs of communities 
and their localities .  As three of the target countries are  faced with 
social and institutional fragility, there are 
additional risks for  a timely and synchroniz ed 
implementation  of the programme . A range of 
mitigation measures  have been built  into the 
programme’s design  including disaggregated 
disbursement  per country and reallocation 
clauses  and provision of a regional platform to 
enable the participating countries to share 
experiences and learn from each other.  
The focus on promoting the participation of local 
actors , especially communities and local private-
sector players such as  micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises ( MSMEs) , and the deployment of 
innovative financial mechanisms to facilitate their 
involvement in decision -making and 
implementation of adaptation actions and 
investments will help t he participating countries 
to uphold the principles of locally led adaptation 
including stimulating local capabilities and 
institutional strengthening ; invest ing in achieving 
the devolution of decision -making to the lowest 
appropriate level;  addressing the structural 
inequalities faced by marginalized groups in the 
societies of participating countries, including 
women and youth; and making p redictable 
adaptation finance more easily accessible.   
The programme’s focus on strengthening 
governance systems at the national and local 
levels of the participating countries and its 
implementation through both national and 
regional institutions is commendable, because it


---
*Page 76*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 76 
 
 
 
will enable  build ing on the existing capacities, 
structures and governance mechanisms in the 
West Africa region , while continuing t o build the 
region’s capacity at all levels.  
 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal  in accordance with the 
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity  (AE) , and, if considered 
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in a nnex II of document GCF/B.40 /02. 
II. Summary of  the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. The Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility+ (LoCAL+) – West Africa  programme is an 
intervention aimed at  promot ing climate -resilien ce among communities and local economies in 
Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire , Mali and Niger , by empowering local governments and stakeholders 
with knowledge and know -how to identify and plan for response to climate change risks and 
impacts, and with improved access to adaptation finance for deliver ing climate -resilient 
investments that ensure the resilience of local livelihoods and systems . The objective of the 
programme is to enhance the institutional, technical and financial capacities of local 
governments and private actors in the four target countries with the view to leveraging the 
improved capacities to stimulate the integrat ion of climate resilience into standard 
development practices and to boost climate -compatible investments in key sectors including 
climate  resilient livelihoods, health and well- being, water and food security, infrastructure, and 
ecosystems.  
4. The West Africa region is home to a large number of fragile communities which  are 
highly dependent on the local ecosystems for their survival, and are now facing agricultural 
losses, recurrent food crises, both water scarcity and extreme flooding, and environmental 
degradation induced by i ncreasing temperatures and shifting rainfall patterns. The e xtreme 
climate variability in the target countries has , since the 1970s , resulted in  challenges to 
livelihoods, food security and economic and governance stability . 
5. The pro gramme  will overcome these challenges by helping to empower local 
governments in the target countries to make risk -informed adaptation decisions based on 
locally identified solutions and priorities, and by supporting locally -led investments in key areas 
including climate -adapted agriculture, forestry and ecosystem conservation, agroforestry, water 
and health, energy efficiencies and renewables, climate -resilient infrastructure, and coastal 
areas.  
6. The pro gramme is requesting EUR  44.38 million of GCF financing. The total cost of the 
programme,  including co -financing , is EUR 5 2.82 million , with co -financing primarily in the 
form of grants and in -kind contributions from the West African Economic and Monetary Union,  
Council of Territorial Communities/ Union Économique et Monétaire Ouest Africaine , Conseil 
des Collectivit és Territoriales  (WAEMU CTC/ UEMOA CCT)  and the governments of the 
participating countries.  
7. In terms of environmental and social safeguards (ESS), this proposal has been 
categorized as environmental and social (E&S) risk Category  I3 (low level of intermediation) . 
The review by the Secretariat confirms the E&S  risk category assigned by the AE .


---
*Page 77*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 77 
 
 
 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1 : The awareness and response capacities of local governments, local actors and 
communities are strengthened and promote local adaptation responses  (total cost: EUR 15.83 
million; GCF  cost:  EUR 10.46 million ) 
8. Component 1 will provide dedicated technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of 
local governments and stakeholders to identify climate risks and plan for and implement 
mitigating and adaptation response measures by (i) enhancing a wareness of climate change 
risks and impacts at the local level s; (ii) improving the availability of and access for local 
stakeholders to c limate data for risk-informed local decision -making ; (iii) enhancing the 
capacities of local governments to plan, budget, implement and monitor for effective locally led 
adaptation ; and (iv) supporting l ocal actors in the target countries to prepare bankable 
adaptation investment proposals  and to  access blended financing instruments.  This component 
clearly demonstrates the added value that GCF investments will provide in supporting and 
complement ing the efforts of the vulnerable local governments and communities in the target 
countries  to identify, assess and develop plans for sustainable investment and financing of the 
additional cost of adaptation to the challenges that climate change poses for them . 
Component 2 : Country- based financing mechanisms to access and channel climate finance at the 
local level are established and enable locally led climate resilience building investments in priority 
sectors (total cost: EUR 34.92 million; GCF  cost:  EUR 31.85 million ) 
9. Component 2 will support the development of mechanisms for stimulating, enabling and 
promoting investment in and financing for locally led climate resilience building in priority 
sectors of the participating countries. Th is component will facilitate the  establishment and 
strengthening of country -based financing mechanisms to access and channel climate finance at 
the local level by supporting the institutionali zation and scaling out of the LoCAL Performance -
Based Climate Resilience Grant system in the four target countries, and by supporting the establish ment of blended finance facilities in the target countries to catalyse public - and private -
sector adaptation finance for revenue -generating investments at the local level. This c omponent 
clearly demonstrates some of the ways in which GCF  financing can be used innovatively to  
catalyse and promote the numerous advantages and benefits that enhanced direct access to 
financing for adaptation and locally -led climate action create for vulnerable communities.  
Program me management and coordination (total cost: EUR 2.06 million; GCF cost: EUR 2.06 
million ) 
10. Project implementation and monitoring and evaluation  costs have been adequately 
provided for , and specific activities have been planned and integrated within the design of the 
programme  to ensure that project implementation and monitoring and evaluation  processes 
will be effectively  coordinated . 
Gender  and environmental and s ocial management framework  aspec ts  
11. A costed environmental and social management framework ( ESMF ) was developed for  
the programme , outlining specific activities that will sufficiently ensure that ESS  safeguards are 
put in place and observed throughout the program me’s lifespan. A well -designed gender 
assessment and a ction plan was also developed, laying out costed plans of actions that will be 
undertaken in the f our program me countries to ensure that gender equality, equity and 
safeguards will be upheld throughout  the lifespan of the program me.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 78 
 
 
 
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                         Scale: High 
12. The  West African region where the project sites are located, faces  significant climate 
variability and change, affecting livelihoods, food security, and economic stability. Since the 
1970s, extreme weather events have led to agricultural losses, food crises, water scarcity, 
flooding, and environmental degradation. The re gion's warming exceeds the global average, 
with the Sahel region experiencing the most significant warming.  
13. The programme seeks to support the countries to addressing these climate challenges 
by contributing to the following GCF r esults areas:  
(a) A.1: Most vulnerable people and communities (30%)  
(b) A.2: Health and well -being, and food and water security (30%)  
(c) A.3: Infrastructure and built environment (20%)  
(d) A.4 Ecosystems and ecosystem services (20%)  
14. A consultative exercise in each country undertaken as part of the project development, 
resulted in a list of eligible adaptation investments based on specific conditions and climate 
risks (see annexes A2, B2, C2, D2). These investments will target sensitiv e locations with unique 
socio -economic and environmental challenges and opportunities. Local governments and 
communities will make decisions for relevant adaptation options. Geographical areas will be 
selected through consultations and assessment of condit ions to ensure effective and efficient 
GCF funding deployment. It will support local governments, actors, and communities in 
identifying, planning, financing, and implementing catalytic adaptation investments based on 
robust evidence of localized climate r isks and impacts.  
15. The programme will support 524,000 direct beneficiaries and 3.49 million indirect 
beneficiaries. It would effectively increase climate change resilience in up to 85 local 
governments in four countries by providing technical assistance (component 1), performance -
based climate resilience grants (component 2 activity 2.1), and blended finance instruments  
(component 2 activity 2.2).  
 
Table 1: Estimated beneficiaries of  the LoCAL+ programme per country   
Country  Target local 
governments  Estimated n umber  of 
direct beneficiaries  Estimated n umber  
of indirect 
beneficiaries  Total 
population  
Burkina Faso  20 175,111  1,167,406  20,903,273  
Côte d’Ivoire   20 109,61 3 730,757  26,378,274  
Mali  20 54,835  365,564  20,250,833  
Niger  25 184,479  1,229,857  24,206,644  
TOTAL  85 524,038  3,493,584  91,739,024  
Source : Funding proposal annex 17.  
 
16. The programme will specifically target adaptation investments in seven core areas for 
local climate resilience building in the four countries: climate change -adapted agriculture, 
forestry, agroforestry, water and health, energy efficiency, renewable energies, climate resilient 
infrastructure, and coastal areas ( Côte d'Ivoire ). The grant finance will cover additional costs of 
public, locally led climate resilient investments. The programme also aims to address adaptation 
finance constraints of local private sector actors through the blended finance facility.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 79 
 
 
 
17. Within the context of the region, where about 70% of the population derive their 
livelihoods from rainfed, subsistent agriculture, access to finance and terms (interest rates and 
tenure) of existing options remains a major challenge, and particularly climate finance is non-
existent.  
18. The benefits and impact potential of this intervention is therefore very significant.  
3.2  Paradigm shift potential             Scale: High 
19. The programme demonstrates high paradigm -shift potential in that this is the first time 
that a Blended Finance Facility will be used alongside the PBCRG system to support both local 
governments (public) and private sector adaptation investments in the region.  This model will 
mobilize GCF's financial products, local financial sector products, and private sector bankable 
projects, thereby strengthening climate resilience in local communities. This approach is 
envisaged to improve SMEs and local producer organiza tions' access to finance through flexible 
eligibility criteria and local -level funds.  
20. The paradigm shift potential is well embedded across the two components of the 
programme and is well designed to be impactful over the long term. It particularly, 
demonstrates the following drivers of paradigm shift:  
21. Transformational planning and programming: The programme aims to promote  
strategic approaches for enhancing efficiency and effectiveness in long -term planning and 
decision -making, including new investment models that can inform the programming of 
Readiness, NAPs, NDCs, local strategic plans. The programme seeks to establish the LoCAL and 
blended financing systems and processes in targeted countries and attract domestic/sub -
national and international climate finance through individual Financing Agreements wi th in -
country Executing Entities. It would benefit from UNCDF rich experience as an Implementing Partner, providing expertise and quality assurance for the design, implementation, and 
monitoring of PBCRG Facilities, thereby consolidating LoCAL and attracting domestic and 
international climate finance.  
22. It would adopt a strategic approach to stimulating a shift towards enhancing the 
adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the target countries by focusing on promoting 
knowledge of climate risks and impacts and adaptation planning and investment, and  on 
promoting active participation of local -level actors, including the most marginalized groups: 
women, girls and youth, as key players in shaping and driving adaptation action and innovative ways of financing it. This can help to ensure the long -term security and sustainability of 
adaptation solutions and investments by fostering needs -based prioritization of interventions 
and investments and encouraging mobilisation of local and national financing for sustaining and 
scaling up locally appropriate solutio ns and investments. The employment and income 
opportunities that the programme will create will help in cushioning communities from current 
and future climate shocks and impacts, while the investment in infrastructure, health, water and 
food, and ecosystem  sectors will further help to improve wellbeing and food and water security 
in the four participating countries.  
23. Catalyzing climate Innovation: When the proposal was initially submitted to the 
secretariat, it was a traditional LoCAL architecture with the business -as-usual interventions that 
did not comprehensively address the unique sustainable livelihoods challenges faced by the 
vulnerable commun ities in the region.  Access to robust climate risk information and decision  
support systems, and finance to drive community private sector uptake of local climate action 
was not adequately articulated.  
24. The secretariat project team then worked with BOAD to explore a number of paradigm -
shifting ideas from the GCF portfolio for consideration, which include an innovative financing


---
*Page 80*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 80 
 
 
 
architecture and implementation arrangement that builds on baseline interventions in the 
region that have demonstrated some level of good success and room for improvement. BOAD 
took on the challenge and commissioned a study to mobilize best practices and l essons in the 
region to re -define how a successful LoCAL and other decentralized local climate action 
intervention could be configured to maximize impact on the ground. Bringing together the 
micro -finance institutions within the intervention areas for loca l climate action and enabling 
coordination by well -established regional level mechanisms (The UEMOA CCT and CIF) is 
envisaged to ensure coherence, complementarity and learning at all levels. This has the 
potential to unlock barriers to regional integration  and trade among the participating 
communities and beyond.  
25. The programme proposes a climate risk -informed ACCAF M&E framework for 
evaluating the adaptation benefits and impacts on target communities through local 
governments to help track investments and progress in improving community resilience and 
local economi es. It envisages that a mid -term and final evaluation will inform countries on the 
strategic alignment of project implementation in meeting GCF and programme outcomes. Additionally, design and implementation insights w ould strengthen the paradigm shift pot ential 
of initiatives for effective local adaptation finance and action. It also ensures the rights of indigenous communities in each of the four countries are inherently addressed in the design 
and implementation.  
26. The programme also adopts a systems approach to comprehensively integrate feedback 
loops and causal relationships through a systems dynamic modeling and sustainable asset 
valuation . As a result , it adequately captures dynamic policy and decision -making processes 
across a range of spatio -temporal scales.  
27. The proposal will benefit from the adoption of digital transformation at the local level 
(e.g. e -infrastructure, IoT, Big data analytics, and connectivity) to help reduce costs and enhance 
resilience, efficiency, and effectiveness of interventions. Fintech  and related technologies can 
enhance financial transactions and utility of critical resources. Widely adopting satellite 
technologies can enhance locally -led anticipatory approaches and help reduce loss and damage, 
while promoting local low - emission and climate -resilient development. A strong collaboration 
with the national meteorological and hydrological services, regional climate centers (ACMAD 
and AGRHYMET) and the ICT community can drive uptake and investments in climate 
innovation. Since the programm e targets intervention at the local communities, it should ensure 
that project -scale disaggregated climate information services that resolves the spatio -temporal 
details of climate risks a re made widely available. It can learn from the county level climate 
services demonstrated in Kenya and the Woreda level information presented in Ethiopian National Framework for Climate Services.  
28. Mobilization of finance at scale: It aims to enhance access to domestic and 
international climate finance, promote blended finance, strengthen climate finance facilities, and 
make disaster risk finance more accessible to local governments, communities, and financial 
institutions, including  micro -finance institutions.  
29. Enabling collaboration among financial institutions, including micro -finance institutions 
in intervention areas, coordinated by an effective regional arrangement, promotes coherence, 
complementarity, knowledge learning, and catalytic potential for scaling up finance and 
innovation. It promotes a proven incentive -based mechanism to create an enabling 
environment for encouraging local governments and actors to pool expertise and resources to 
promote integration of adaptation needs and solutions into local dev elopment plans, budgets 
and processes.  
30. This is the first time such an approach is being applied in the communities to enable 
climate finance to reach the most vulnerable communities to demonstrate that security of


---
*Page 81*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 81 
 
 
 
sustainable livelihoods is possible where innovative concessional climate finance is made 
readily available to communities, government, private sector and stakeholders.  
31. Expansion and replication of knowledge: Local private sector, community and  
institutional collaboration on climate investments is being used for knowledge brokering, with a 
focus on monitoring evaluation and learning to ensure impact evaluation, lessons, and best 
practices inform future programming.  
32. In summary, the LoCAL+ programme presents an innovative and strategic approach to 
promoting and increasing the participation of the sub -national governments, communities and 
local -level private sector actors in the development and implementation of climate change 
adaptation strategies in the four target countries. The approach is scalable and can be practically implemented across the Sahel region and beyond, building on lessons and outputs 
and outcomes of the programme.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential             Scale: High  
33. The programme contributes directly towards efforts to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDG 1 (No poverty); SDG 5 (Gender equality); SDG 8 
(Decent work and economic growth); SDG 11 (Sustainable cities and communities); and SDG 13 
(Climate action).  
34. The programme also significantly aligns/contributes to the GCF targeted results for 
2024 -2027 (USP -2), specifically:  
(a) Target 1 (Developing countries directly supported to advance NDC/NAP/LTS 
implementation ): The four  developing countries  supported to implement their 
NDC/NAP/LTS  
(b) Target 2 (Direct Access Entities):  BOAD is a Direct Access Entity  
(c) Target 3 (Climate Information and Early Warning Systems ): Project  areas in the four 
countries would be protected by robust early warning systems  
(d) Target 4 (Food ): promote investment in transformative agricultural practices    
(e) Target 5 (Ecosystems) : Promote  investment in ecosystem -based adaptation measures  
(f) Target 6 (Infrastructure ): Social  and community infrastructure made resilient through 
investment  in climate proofing  
(g) Target 7 (Clean Energy ) Renewable energy sources to drive the interventions  
(h) Target 9 (Adaptation and Locally -led Action ): The proposal is an adaptation and locally -
led action proposal  
(i) Target 10 ( Local private sector early -stage ventures and MSME innovation) : The project 
will support the development of a Blended Finance Facility that will be deployed to 
provide grants as broad -based seed and early -stage capital to MSMEs and build the 
capacity of MSMEs to identify and develop and promote home -grown innovative climate 
solutions, business models and technologies in a  self-sufficient way  
(j) Target  11 (National and regional financial institutions ): Implementation  would be 
through financial institutions at the global, regional, national and subnational levels 
including micro -finance institutions – component 2  
35. To comprehensively assess the potential social, economic and environmental co -
benefits, the programme uses  a systems dynamic and sustainable asset valuation approach to 
explore the socio -economic and biophysical determinants to inform dynamic policy and 
decision -making processes that could result in sustainable livelihoods in the intervention areas.


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 82 
 
 
 
It demonstrates scenarios that could reduce climate -related costs and generate new benefits, 
supporting sustainable and climate resilient communities. It also shows how the co -benefits 
complement priority multi -sectoral /integrated interventions, such as water retention, forest 
restoration, solar water pumps, sustainable agriculture practices, and ecosystem quality.  
36. The assessment of eligible investment options for potential GCF -financed interventions 
for the four countries is presented in Table 2 below.  
Table 2 : Eligible investment options for potential GCF -�inanced interventions for the participating 
countries . 
 
37. The economic, social and environmental co -benefits that the programme offers would 
be achieved and sustained through the capacity -strengthening that the programme will provide 
to local governments and communities to enhance their ability to create, diversify and sustain 
local adaptation plans, livelihood strategies  and opportunities for the communities.  
38. The provision of financing for MSMEs will create livelihood opportunities which will 
help boost production and income, which will in turn contribute towards improved productivity 
and sustainable management of ecosystems by local communities, thus offering communities 
excellent opportunities to create value and economic possibilities across the value chain of the 
numerous local products and farming systems. This will help to establish resilient ecosystems 
and landscapes across the target countries, with the potential for scaling up to the entire West 
Africa region. These livelihood security and enhanced ecosystem management outcomes will 
further build resilience in the target communities.  
39. The climate -proof community infrastructure and the financing mechanisms that the 
programme will promote will provide the incentives and architecture to foster added value to 
key commodities and products in the jurisdictions of beneficiary local governments and bring 
innovation and technology into local health, water, and agriculture and food systems in the 
participating countries. These factors will help communities generate, process and transform 
key products, with enhanced access to surrounding markets an d thereby further generate 
security and resilience for livelihoods.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 83 
 
 
 
40. The programme clearly demonstrates how high sustainable development potential can 
be achieved by the appropriate selection of targeted interventions. The success of the 
programme greatly depends on the peace and stability of the region and particularly in the 
intervention areas. Major risks include the prevailing socio -political, environmental and 
economic risks of the region. Additionally, the regional nature of the programme could present some challenges with coordination and project implementation. The u se of information and 
communication technologies should bring some significant benefits including reducing 
transaction cost and enhancing coordination, efficiency and effectiveness. It is recommended 
that an adaptive management is adopted for the implement ation of the programme to ensure 
that risks in each country does not stall implementation in the others. It is also recommended 
that the programme implementation period be increased to 7 years given the complexities 
outlined above.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient  Scale: High  
41. The pro gramme  targets one of the world ’s most vulnerable regions , where water, food  
and livelihoods insecur ity conditions arise  from the various hazards posed by e xtreme climate 
variability , which are compounded by the high political fragility in the target countries . 
42. The communities are facing severe challenges from climate change that is threatening 
their current livelihood strategies and yet they lack the financial resources and access to credit 
facilities to support their effort to secure their livelihoods  and natural capital from the impacts 
of climate change. This is further complicated by the fact that the countries are heavily -indebted  
and unable to secure concessional finance internationally. Without access to concessional 
finance and investments, the local economies and food systems will not be able to provide 
vulnerable communities in the target countries with the safety nets they need. 
43. Through the blended finance facilities,  the proposed interventions will help 
communities transform their livelihood options, local food systems and ecosystems to become 
resilient and diverse  and to foster  long -term food systems and landscapes, thereby building 
resilience and adaptive capacity.  The program me will fill an important gap through work ing 
with key regional, national and local institutions in both the public and private sectors and will 
help to foster long -term solutions through financial innovation, building access for communities 
to resilient infrastructure  and health, water and food systems.  
3.5 Country ownership            Scale: High  
44. Country ownership is well embedded in the program me, which is fully aligned with the 
climate change and broader development aspirations, strategies  and policies of all f our target 
countries. The program me will promote the development of capacity among local governmental 
and non- governmental actors in the target countries  to identify and analyse the climate risks 
and impacts that they face and to identify their own solutions and means to implement them . 
The program me also places an important focus on ensuring better synergy with ongoing 
regional and national strategies a s well as  actions being implemented in the target countries.   
45. The program me is aligned with the n ationally determined contributions , national 
adaptation plans , climate change policies and programmes,  as well as the four GCF country 
programmes. Furthermore, the program me has been developed with the strong participation 
and commitment of the governments concerned , as well as the participation and commitment of 
other national and local -level stakeholders, involving all levels of stakeholder groups, including 
grassroot s and women and youth.  
46. The AE  is the West  African  Development  Bank /Banque Ouest Africaine de 
Dévelo ppment (BOAD ), which  has a long -standing presence in the target countries , and a wealth


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 84 
 
 
 
of experience working with stakeholders and dealing with the development and environmental 
challenges in the four countries . BOAD offers a unique structure as well as experience and 
partnerships that will facilitate  meaningful engagement and involvement of all relevant 
stakeholders in the target countries in the successful implementation and scaling up of the 
program me activities and outputs.   
47. The architecture of the program me consists of the country governments acting through 
relevant national institutions as the executing entities (EEs) . This will bolster the integration of 
local contexts and ownership in the program me’s activities and outputs.  
48. The program me is built on well -designed stakeholder consultations that were 
conducted throughout the program me development process, ensuring local knowledge, 
innovation and sustainability,  and participation is fully embedded in the  programme  design . 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness  Scale:  Medium  to high  
49. The program me will directly support poor and vulnerable communities in the 
participating countries to strengthen  their ability to secure , diversify and transform their own 
adaptive capacity and livelihood systems. It will target 524,000 direct beneficiaries and 3.49  
million  indirect beneficiaries and will drive innovation and transformation by providing access 
to finance  for communities and MSMEs to participate meaningfully in undertaking resilience -
building investments .  
50. The funding amount is well justified to provide the support needed to unlock the 
trans formation  of livelihoods and local health, water and food systems and to provide 
innovative approaches and lessons for transforming climate governance in the participating 
countries and in the West Africa region  in general. The program me is fostering an enabling 
environment for private and public sector investments through the structuring and deployment 
of Performance -Based Climate Resilience Grant mechanisms and blended financing facilities, 
and through collaboration with local governments, communities,  MSMEs, and other actors to 
propel capacity -building  and technology adoption and thereby foster an innovative approach to 
help create long -term financial innovation and sustainability .  
51. The program me also has an innovative exit strategy that will enable scaling up its 
approach to finance across West Africa and will build access and partnership between  local 
governments,  communities and local private sector actors to tackle  local climate change 
challenges with innovative and locally appropriate and developed solutions . 
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
52. The LoCAL+ f acility aims to support adaptation investments across seven key 
interventions area – identified as key drivers for local building climate resilience in the four 
West African countries. The f acility is categorized as having a low level of intermediation (I3), 
given that the proposed portfolio of investments includes financial exposure to activities that 
predominantly have minimal or negligible adverse environmental and social impacts. The 
Secretariat confirms this categorization , which  is within the AE’s accreditation level. Only 
Category C investments will be eligible for financing and Category A and B investments will be 
excluded. The LoCAL+ f acility has developed an environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) that will guide the screening, categorization and development of an appropriate environmental and social action plan on activities that may have minimal 
environmental and social risks and/or impacts.


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 85 
 
 
 
53. The programme intends to support numerous activities, including: awareness -raising 
and capacity -building, advisory services, support for adaptation planning, technical support and 
institutional strengthening, household -level facilities and production within an already built -up 
area (basic post -harvest processing, rainwater harvesting, pico - to micro -scale renewable 
energy, retrofit renewable energy systems and energy efficiency and conservation, smallholder 
agroforestry, and small -scale climate- resilient ag riculture) . Further activities are related to : 
small -scale rural and urban community -based projects, village -level rural water supply and 
drainage (including smallholder farm irrigation such as drip irrigation, shallow wells, etc.), rural 
energy, small- scale infrastructure (including in -situ rehabilit ation, upgrading, and maintenance 
of existing public facilities where waste will not be an issue), small -scale , community -based 
watershed, habitat management and rehabilitation, climate resilient agriculture, soil and water 
conservation, and community fore st management, among others.  
54. Consultations have been conducted with representatives from government entities and 
local governments, development partners, civil society and vulnerable groups, and the academ ic 
and research community . The private sector will systematically engage with all entities 
concerned throughout the programme cycle. The ESMF likewise provides guidance in 
developing a grievance redress mechanism to receive, address and resolve issues and concerns of people affected , or potentially affected , by the activities under th e LoCAL+ f acility. Given the 
sensitivit ies in the target countries, the programme integrates a community -focused conflict 
resolution mechanism to manage the intricate sociopolitical situation s that prevail.  
55. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy & ESS7 (Indigenous Peoples) . Screening notes  the 
presence of pastoralist s in most of the countries involved. Consistent with the ESS 
categorization, the AE has excluded undertaking any activity that may bring adverse impacts to 
Indigenous Peoples  and additionally provided an I ndigenous Peoples Plan ning  Framework , 
which foresees undertaking consultations with Indigenous Peoples well in advance of the s tart 
of the projects . Recommendations have been provided toward the inclusion of I ndigenous 
knowledge as a co -benefit . In line wit h their roles and functions, the Indigenous Peoples 
Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the AE  who is  also encouraged to share 
emerging good practices and success stories.   
56. Sexual exploitation, abuse and h arassment (SEAH)  safeguarding.  Recognizing the 
prevalence of GBV/SEAH in the host countries, the AE has identified both the contextual factors 
and risks specific to gender -based violence (GBV) and SEAH in all four targeted countries. The 
ESMF also identifies that the SEAH risks may be exaggerated  the project through (a) the 
presence of programme staff or consultants spending time in communities, and (b) from the 
survivors and/or communities being unable to identify or report instances of SEAH. Therefore, 
the AE has incorporated specific capacity b uilding activities and the establishment of a 
programme Grievance Redress Mechanism to prevent, management and address SEAH. The AE 
details the overall SEAH risks assessment and mitigation measures in the programme's gender 
assessment (Annex 8 of the funding proposal). Th e AE is recommended to further elaborate the 
SEAH risk screening and due diligence procedures as guidance to be followed at the subproject 
level under the blended finance facilities to be established by the programme. 
4.2 Gender policy  
57. The AE has provided a gender analysis and action plan and therefore complies with the 
gender policy of the fund.  
58. The gender analysis was conducted through desk reviews as well as consultations with 
communities. The consultations at community levels in the three out of the four countries sought the views of women and women’s groups. The desk review ensured to capture and 
incorporate lessons from a similar and previously conducted project, on the positive practices


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 86 
 
 
 
that promoted women’s empowerment and enhanced women’s participation.  All four countries, 
though committed to the empowerment of women and have policies and strategies in place, 
have gaps in implementing the policies and strategies to lift women and achie ve the desired 
equality between women and men. Many interventions and investments exist in these countries 
that address gender inequality one of which is the LoCAL. This project had demonstrated (in the 
three countries) useful improvements to women and their decision -making position in risk 
management and environmental degradation.  The project has seen results of the gender 
sensitive trainings which has helped elected officials and local authorities better serve 
vulnerable communities and in selecting wome n’s groups for revenue generation activities. 
Other investments have  focused on training for women’s groups which helped the women start 
their own businesses; local level plans have been refined to include the views and interventions 
that address the needs  of women and youth. These are some of the encouraging changes that 
has informed the design of the gender action plan for the project.  
59. The current gender action plan will conduct further assessment with a focus also on 
gender -based differences in capacity and access needs of climate data and information, climate 
risk planning and budgeting, decision making and resilience building initiatives. Further the 
plan includes activities that will address several challenges to women particularly in accessing 
resources and participating in planning and decision -making processes. The lack of engagement 
of women and vulnerable people in the planning p rocess is one of the bases for the increased 
vulnerability of women to climate change impacts and for leaving them behind in accessing 
needed resources to build resilient systems and develop mitigation measures. Women’s lack of 
participation and the limited space for their engagement in planning processes results in limited 
number and kinds of investments that alleviate their specific burdens. Women struggle with the 
burden of multiple responsibilities (domestic and productive roles) limited access to land,  
credit, and financial support, which hinders their informed involvement in climate smart investment and other economic activities. Additionally, the lack of enabling environment and 
institutions as well as lack of understanding and awareness of the depth of the needs of women 
and other vulnerable people limits, the level and kind of representation and voice of women. 
There are gaps in leadership roles for women as well as gaps in the presence and voice of 
women in key functions of institutions. The gender action plan will address the multifaceted 
gaps in terms of capacity, awareness, creating access to resources to women, engaging women in various institutional setups as well as a focused financial investment towards women’s 
groups. The gender action plan d efines activities, indicators, and targets for women's 
participation and benefit with corresponding timelines and budget. Gender expertise also from local institutions will be mobilized to support the implementation of the gender action plan 
along with bud gets to implement the gender action plan. 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( medium risk)  
60. The proposed adaptation programme for the four countries in West Africa  – Burkina 
Faso, C ôte D’Ivoire, Mali and Niger – aims to support investment in areas such as agriculture, 
forestry, water, energy efficiency, infrastructure and coastal areas.  The programme plans to 
work with national institutions and local government in the four countries to increase their 
capacities and to channel climate finance at the local level towards identified priority sectors.  
61. GCF has been requested to provide grant of EUR  44.38 million. Together with grant and 
in-kind contribution of EUR 8.4 4 million from the WAEMU CTC/ UEMOA CCT  and agencies from 
the four target countries, total programme financing is EUR  52.82 million.  The c o-financing ratio 
is 1.0:0.18 and accounts for 15 per  cent of total financing.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 87 
 
 
 
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
62. The AE is BOAD, a regional financial institution in West Africa mandated to promote 
development and economic integration in the subregion.  BOAD mobilizes a combination of local 
resources from member S tate countries and foreign capital to invest in climate mitigation and 
adaptation changes as well as public and private sector projects/programme s for economic 
development. BOAD has a history of working with GCF after it was first accredited in August 
2017 and re -accredited in July 2023.  To date, GCF has approv ed four funding proposals with 
BOAD for cross -cutting and mitigation projects in the subregion.  
63. BOAD will work with four national institutions as EEs , the Intervention Fund for the 
Environment (Burkina Faso), the Directorate General of Decentralization and Local 
Development (C ôte D’Ivoire), the National Agency for Local Governments’ Investment (Mali) 
and the National Agency for the Financing of Local Governments (Niger) to manage and channel 
funding for their respective countries.  The United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) 
will serve as implementing partner and assist BOAD in programme implementation through 
recommendations to each national technical committee . Established in 1966, UNCDF has 
experience working in 42 developing countries overseeing finance work with public and private 
resources.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific execution risks (medium risk)  
64.  The proposed programme plans to strengthen local government adaptation responses 
and implement country -based mechanisms to channel climate finance at the local level.   Several 
countries in the programme have experienced political instability in recent years.  The concern 
will be partly mitigated by the AE conducting comprehensive political analysis during project 
preparation and operations to ensure adequate understanding and preparation. These include 
engagement with stakeholders and closely monitoring national security situations.  To help 
create an enabling environment, the AE will also engage in pr oactive policy dialogue with host 
governments to anticipate any policy and regulatory issues to mitigate against regulatory risk. 
Governance risk will be managed by regular financial audits and annual performance 
assessments and these requirements will form part of conditions to access grants.  
4.3.4.  Programme viability and concessionality  
65. The proposed programme has outlined two activities under its funding component, 
namely: the performance -based  climate resilience grant and blended finance facilities to 
cataly se adaptation finance at the local level. The viability of these activities will benefit from 
the experience of UNCDF as the implementing partner that designed the Local Climate Adaptive 
Living Facility (LoCAL) that has been used in at least 14 countries.  The programme will also rely 
on the AE’s experience in climate -focused blended fi nancing in the subregion.  The proposed GCF 
grant will represent 85 per  cent of total programme size in a wholly grant -funded programme.  
The proposed concessionality level is justified given that several countries in the programme 
have low credit rating (in the CCC range). These countries have limited public resources and 
their ability to raise private capital is also limited.  The programme is expected to generate 
significant adaptation benefits for the  host countries.     
 
4.3.5.  Compliance risk ( medium risk)


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 88 
 
 
 
66. The programme activities, particularly the blended finance facilities, pose elevated 
compliance risk exposure. The AE will implement this component in partnership with the 
WAEMU CTC/ UEMOA CCT . 
67. The AE confirmed it will incorporate programme -specific mechanisms to mitigate 
integrity risks (i.e. money laundering/terrorist financing and other forms of prohibited 
practices) during implementation. In particular, the selection criteria used to screen t he 
beneficiaries of the loan facility will include anti -money laundering/countering the financing of 
terrorism (AML/CFT) and integrity due diligence checks. Furthermore, AML/CFT due diligence 
checks will also be completed on all other counterparties before commencing the programme’s 
financing activities. This process will be conducted under the oversight of the AE’s senior 
management , in line with the AE’s internal policies and procedures,  and adverse due diligence 
outcomes will preclude engaging in potential transaction s with any associated counterparty. 
Overall, considering the mitigation measures incorporated into the implementation design, the 
AE has assessed programme -specific risks as medium. The Secretariat, taking into account the 
AE’s assessment and  the impact of the mitigants proposed, also evaluates the overall 
compliance risk as m edium. 
4.3.6.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)   
68. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result s area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.7.  Recommendation  
69. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.   
Summary risk assessment  
Overall programme  Medium 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing entity (EE) capability  Medium  
Project- specific execution  Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium 
4.4 Fiduciary  
70.  The West African Development Bank /Banque Ouest Africaine de Dé velo ppment ) will be 
the accredited entity (AE) responsible for the implementation of the programme in close 
collaboration with the executing entities (EE s), WAEMU CTC/ UEMOA CCT  and national 
institutions as highlighted below. UNCDF will play the role of implementing pa rtner, providing 
key support and expertise and ensuring the effective implementation of the LoCAL standard – in 
coordination with the AE and EEs.    
71. As the AE of the programme , BOAD  will sign a funded activity agreement ( FAA) with 
GCF. Similarly, BOAD will sign a subsidiary agreement with the EEs to on -grant GCF resources  
for the implementation of specific activities of the program me in accordance with the FAA. On -
granting agreements will be signed between the AE and the national institutions (EEs) that will manage and channel the Performance- Based Climate Resilience Grant s – in line with the 
feasibility studies  (the Intervention Fund for the Environment in Burkina Faso ; the Directorate 
General of Decentralization and Local Development in Côte D’Ivoire ; the National Agency for 
Local Governments’ Investment in Mali ; and the National Agency for the Financing of Local 
Governments in Niger) .


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 89 
 
 
 
72. Financial management and procurement under this project will follow BOAD rules, 
regulations, and the accreditation master agreement (AMA) with GCF. Grant proceeds will flow 
from GCF to the AE and then to funded activities based on the Procurement  Plan.   
73. Annual audits will follow BOAD Guidelines for Financial Reporting and Auditing of 
Projects. An independent external auditor, approved by BOAD, will audit the Financial 
Statements according to international standards. BOAD may provide recommendations for 
improvements in accounting, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants. The audit cost will be covered by project resources. BOAD will ensure know -your -customer -
compliant due diligence, including anti -money laundering.   
74. As an executing enti ty, UNCDF will manage financial and procurement processes per its 
policies and BOAD guidelines. UNCDF -funded projects will adhere to its Financial Regulations  
and Rules, and its Internal Control Framework, mandating competitive procurement through 
formal tenders.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
75.  The results structure, monitoring and reporting of the programme were informed by 
the UNCDF’s overall approach to LoCAL. This proposal has also benefited from  learning from 
other proposals to GCF  that followed and used LoCAL. The proposal also presents an innovative 
component, the Blended Finance Facility, which would facilitate local adaptation project public -
private partnerships .  
76. The proposal aims to strengthen climate action at the subnational level. This is 
embodied in the theory of change that presents how LoCAL will be used to contribute to the 
improv ed capac ities and awareness at the local level,  improving national -based mechanisms, 
and tapping into the private sector for local adaptation finance. This will then lead to the climate 
outcomes that directly relate to GCF  adaptation result s areas.   
77. The logical framework has properly included a country breakdown of results for Core 
Indicator 2 (adaptation beneficiaries), Supplementary 2.1 (climate resilient livelihood options), 
Supplementary 2.3 (climate resilient water security), Supplementary 3.1 (expected losses due to 
economic damage), and Supplementary 4.1 (areas restored/ improved ecosystems). Targets 
were identified for each indicator except for Supplementary Indicator 4.1, noting that this is 
subject to local government selection.   
78.  Modest improvements were made to the means of verification as contained in the 
logical framework and the monitoring and evaluation p lan. However, the Secretariat is not 
convinced that the changes were made. The means of verification are still limited and must be 
improved to combine qualitative and quantitative methods of verification and secondary and primary sources.  
79. In addition, whil e the AE responded to the Secretariat’s comment on the quality 
assurance mechanisms for data provided by local governments, the re is still area for 
improvement on this .  
4.6 Legal assessment  
80. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 3 April 
2017, and became effective on 31 August 2017, which was amended and restated pursuant to a 
first amendment and restatement agreement dated 3 December 2023, and which became 
effective on 17 May 2024 (the “ AMA”).


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 09 
Page 90 
 
 
 
81. The Accredited Entity has provided a legal certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the programme.  
82. The proposed programme will be implemented in the following four countries, three of 
which GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other 
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, which risks 
need to be further assessed:  
(a) Burkina Faso : The GCF has signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities 
with Burkina Faso which became effective on 6 November 2021.  
(b) Cote d'Ivoire : The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of Cote d’Ivoire on 9 September 
2016.  
(c) Mali : The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities and 
a background note to the Government of Mali most recently on 21 December 2017.  
(d) Niger : The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities and 
a background note to the Government of Niger most recently on 14 February 2017.  
83. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is n ot provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the countries, or has been provided wit h appropriate privileges and 
immunities.  
84. To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 91 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP247 
Proposal name:  Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility Plus  (LoCAL+) – West 
Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali and Niger)  
Accredited entity:  Banque  Ouest  Africaine  de Développement  (BOAD)  
Countries:  Burkina  Faso,  Ivory  Coast,  Mali,  Niger  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Overview  
1. The Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility Plus ( LoCAL+ ) regional programme covers 
four countries in West Africa , namely Burkina Faso , Côte d’Ivoire , Mali  and Niger . The 
submission is under the standard p roposal approval process1 and is for a medium -size public 
sector adaptation pro gramme  in environmental and social safeguards risk category C . The 
Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement  (BOAD ) is the accredited entity ( AE). 
2. The four participating developing countries face  increasing ly high vulnerability to 
climate change , with limited readiness to address these challenges . Targeted local adaptation 
solutions are needed for poor and vulnerable communities that are highly exposed to climate 
change . However , capacity gaps and the availability of climate finance for adaptation action at 
subnational levels remain constraint s, and adaptation investments are considered too risky by 
the private sector in underdeveloped domestic financial sectors.  
3. LoCAL+  proposes to promot e climate -resilient communities and economies in the four 
countries by integrating climate change adaptation into local government planning and 
budgeting systems , raising awareness  of climate change impacts , and increasing the availability 
of funding for local governments  and the private sector for climate adaptation action.  
4. The programme builds on the Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility (LoCAL)  which was 
designed by the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), that directs performance -
based climate resilience grants (PBCRGs) to local governments in developing countries to cover 
the additional costs of climate -resilient investments.  UNCDF  has tested this mechanism through 
its LoCAL progra mmes in 18 countries and the results are promising.  
5. The UNCDF -LoCAL approach is conceptualized to be delivered in three phases. So far, 
phase 1 has been piloted in a few local governments in Burkina Faso , Mali , and Niger , with Côte 
d’Ivoire  now ready to come on board.  LoCAL+  will support phase 2 to extend the programme to 
85 local governments across all four countries and to sustainably integrate the approach of 
climate adaptation funding into local government systems so that LoCAL + can be scaled up in 
phase 3.  
6. The LoCAL+ programme also introduces a new dedicated blended finance facilit y in each 
country through which local private sector actors can access repayable grants for income -
 
1 The funding proposal was submitted to the independent Technical Advisory Panel  (iTAP ) on 9 August 2024. This  
assessment is informed by a set of written questions and answers further discussed in an online meeting between the 
iTAP and the accredited entity on 2 September 2024.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 92 
 
 
generating adaptation investments  that are aligned with local adaptation priorities.  Critical 
technical and capacity -building measures will also be provided alongside.   
7. Each country has developed a predetermined menu of eligible investments that will 
guide which activities are funded  through the PBCRG and the blended finance facilities .  The 
menu of activities is focused on seven eligible sectors of climate -smart agriculture: forestry, 
agroforestry, water and health, energy efficiency and renewable energies, climate -resilient 
infrastructure, and (for Côte d’Ivoire  only) coastal zones.  
8. The executing entit ies (EE) for the programme comprise : 
(a) the West African Economic and Monetary Union Council of Local Communities ( UEMOA  
CCT ) for the b lended finance component;  
(b) the Intervention Fund for the Environment (FIE , Burkina Faso ); 
(c) the General Directorate of Decentralization and Local Development (DGDDL , Côte 
d’Ivoire ); 
(d) the Agence Nationale d’Investissement des Collectivités Territoriales  [Local Governments  
National Investment Agency]  (ANICT, Mali ); and 
(e)  the National Agency for the Financing of Local Governments (ANFICT , Niger ). 
9. Key implementing partners include t he Confederation of Financial Institutions of West 
Africa ( CIF),2 which is designated as the regional financial operator responsible for  
administering the blended finance facilit ies. CIF will utilize its network of member financial 
institutions (yet to be selected) in the four target countries to transfer funds and provide 
financial products for local small and medium -sized enterprises ( SME s). The UNCDF  will 
provide technical advice  and strategic support across all programme components and will 
support dialogue between local governments.  
10. The governance and management structures include the establishment of a regional 
project management unit ( PMU ) located in Burkina Faso  and four national PMU s in each of the 
countries.  
11. The total budget of EUR  52.82 million comprises a request for GCF grant funds of EUR  
44.38 million, with contributions of EUR  8.43 million  comprising grants of EUR  7.17 million 
from UEMOA  CCT  and in- kind contributions totalling approximately EUR  1.26 million from the 
four countries . The implementation period is 5 years with an overall benefit stream of 20 years.  
12. The AE, BOAD , was accredited to GCF in 2016 and is a recipient of four GCF programmes 
worth a total of USD 3.8 million , including in  Niger  (FP1 76, 2021 ), Senegal (FP138 , 2020 ), Mali  
(FP102 , 2019 ) and multiple countries in West Africa (FP106 , 2019 ).3 
1.2 Impact potential        Scale: Medium  
13. The funding proposal sets out that a ll four participating West African countries 
experience multiple hazards and are highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Burkina 
Faso , a landlocked country  located within the Sahelian zone, is exposed to a highly variable 
climate and experiences acute water crises which impact livelihoods and livestock farming. Côte 
d’Ivoire  faces floods, storms, landslides, droughts, heatwaves, and bushfires, and its coastal 
areas are vulnerable to climate change and rising sea levels. Mali suffered six major droughts 
during the twentieth century and climate change in the country has resulted in a drier climate 
overall. Niger  faces increasing spatial and temporal variability of rainfall, a trend towards ris ing 
 
2 See https://www.cif -vie.bf/en/the -confederation- of-financial -institutions -of-west -africa  
3 See https://www.greenclimate.fund/ae/boad#projects .


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 93 
 
 
temperatures, and increased frequency and intensity of hazards such as droughts, floods, strong 
winds, sand and dust storms , and crop pests.   
14. Rainfall patterns have changed, with more extreme rainfall events projected in the 
future  across all four countries . The region has also seen significant temperature increases over 
the past 50 years , with projected future increases of 3 °C to 6  °C by the end of the century. 
Detailed annexes  to the funding proposal include the identification and mapping of climate 
hazards at the national and subnational levels for  Burkina Faso and for Mali respectivel y, an 
analysis of climate trends and their impacts for vulnerable sectors in Côte d’Ivoire , and a local 
climate risk assessment for Nig er.  Using representative concentration pathways RCP  4.5 and 
RCP 8.5, country -level reports predict increases in temperatures and in the numbers of hot days, 
and changes in annual total precipitation . 
15. The p opulations of these four countries are particularly vulnerable due to their reliance 
on agriculture and natural resources, and the impact s of climate change on food security and 
infrastructure . Women and children, particularly the poorest and most marginali zed, are 
disproportionately affected . 
16. LoCAL+  will provide support through two components and seven corresponding 
outputs , as set out in t able 1. Under component 1, some 85 local governments across all four 
countries will receive technical assistance to strengthen their capacities for integrating climate 
adaptation into planning and governance and will benefit from PBCRG s to cover the additional 
costs of small - to medium- sized adaptation and infrastructure investments needed for building 
climate resilience. Under component 2, local SME s in each countr y will benefit from access to 
climate finance through a blended finance facility that could not only help to increase incomes 
and livelihoods, but also deliver adaptation benefits for their communities. The expectation is 
that the demonstration effect could be used to attract further funding for adaptation at the local level.  
Table 1: Overview of LoCAL+  components, outputs  and financing  
Components and corresponding outputs  GCF contribution 
(EUR)  
Component 1:  The awareness and response capacities of local governments, local actors 
and communities are strengthened and promote local adaptation responses  10,464,199  
 Output 1: Awareness of climate change risks and impacts is enhanced at the local level.  
 Output 2: Climate data availability and access are improved for risk -informed local decision- making . 
 Output 3:  Capacities of local governments to plan, budget, implement and monitor for effective locally  led 
adaptation are enhanced.  
 Output 4: Local actors are supported to access blended financ e instruments and to prepare bankable 
adaptation investment proposals in each target country . 
Component 2:  Country -based financing mechanisms to access and channel climate 
finance at the local level are established and enable locally led climate resilience -
building investments in priority sectors  31,854,430  
 Output 5: PBCRG s are deployed, allocations are transferred to local governments, and investments are 
implemented according to a predetermined menu of eligible adaptation investments. 
 Output 6:  The PBCRG  system is progressively institutionali zed and attracts additional finance for the further 
scale -up of the m echanism. 
 Output 7: Blended finance facilities are established, and revenue- generating adaptation investments are 
financed in line with the menu of eligible investments in each target country.  
Project management costs  2,064,678  
Total for  GCF  44,383,307  
Source : Adapted from funding proposal and annex 4 . 
17. Programme impacts are listed under the four GCF adaptation results areas , as follows:  
(a) Most vulnerable people and communities (30 per cent of GCF contribution);  
(b) Health and well -being, and food and water security (30 per cent of GCF contribution);  
(c) Infrastructure and built environment (20 per cent of GCF contribution); and


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 94 
 
 
(d) Ecosystems and ecosystem services (20 per cent of GCF contribution).  
18. The target beneficiary numbers are provisional and will be firmed up during the 
inception phase , after the target local governments have been identified.  The number of d irect 
benefi ciaries is estimated to be approximately 524,0 00 (260,000 women and 264,000 men), 
representing 0.6 per cent of the total population in the four countries, and will include those 
that will benefit from access to resilient infrastructure and services under the PBCRG  
mechanism and the blended finance facilities. The number of i ndirect beneficiaries is 
approximately 3.49 million people (comprising 1.74 million women and 1.75 million men), 
representing 3.8 per cent of the total population  of the four countries . Indirect beneficiaries are 
taken to mean all people residing within the boundaries of a target local government that could 
benefit from programme -related investments in their localit y and from increased capacities of 
local governments to plan and deliver climate -resilient services.  See table 2 for a further 
breakdown.  
Table 2: Expected beneficiaries (provisional) of LoCAL+  by country   
Country  Target local 
governments  Estimated n umber  of 
direct beneficiaries  Estimated n umber  
of indirect 
beneficiaries  Total 
population  
Burkina Faso  20 175,111  1,167,406  20,903,273  
Côte d’Ivoire   20 109,61 3 730,757  26,378,274  
Mali  20 54,835  365,564  20,250,833  
Niger  25 184,479  1,229,857  24,206,644  
TOTAL  85 524,038  3,493,584  91,739,024  
Source : Funding proposal and annex 17 . 
19. The funding proposal confirms that a ll public and private investments under the PBCRG  
mechanism s and the b lended finance facilit ies will be selected from the predetermined menus 
of eligible investments ( annexes 2A2, 2B2, 2C2 and 2D2) for each country . These eligible 
investments are categori zed within seven key sectors and follow specific eligibility criteria that 
prioritize social inclusion and environmental sustainability . The eligible investments were 
identified in consultation with national and sub national  stakeholders . They  include activities 
that could bring benefits to local communities and are in line with each country’s nationally 
determined contributions ( NDC s). 
20. While the PBCRG  component has been tested under p hase 1 in three of the four 
participating countries, the blended finance facilit ies will be newly introduced to all four 
countries. However, in the view of the independent Technical Advisory Panel ( iTAP ), while the 
types of investments under the pre -identified menu have the potential to produce the 
adaptation impacts that are being projected , the precise composition of the portfolio to be 
funded is currently unknown.  Furthermore, the participating microfinanc e institutions are yet 
to be selected and their capacities to select investments based on the menu are as yet unknown.  
These factors  present some challenges in assessing the final impact potential . 
21. Based on the above, the iTAP  assesses the impact potential as medium . 
1.3 Paradigm shift potential       Scale: Medium  
22. The funding proposal clearly identifies how the programme proposes to tackle the main 
constraints faced by local governments , which include lack of technical capacities and access to 
information for climate -risk-informed planning , chronic underfunding of adaptation 
investments by the public and private sectors, and weak implementation capabilities in meet ing 
the adaptation needs of local communities and contribut ing to resilience -building.  The 
programme also recogni zes constraints that limit private sector participation in adaptation , 
noting that l ocal SME s commonly lack access to climate finance  due to inadequate collateral and 
limited financial literacy . There is also a widespread  lack of understanding of how to integrate


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 95 
 
 
climate adaptation into their business models.  Additionally, l ocal microfinance institutions often 
lack the knowledge and expertise to attract climate finance.  
23. The theory of change is logical, and the seven outputs to be delivered under two 
components (see t able 1 above ) cover the spectrum of support towards strengthening climate 
adaptation action at local levels for long -term climate -resilient development.  Together, these 
efforts could help in fostering an enabling environment for climate adaptation action  and bring 
about a fundamental shift in how local capacities are strengthened to undertake and finance 
climate adaptation actions in a way that benefits local c ommunities . 
24. Component 1 is comprehensively detailed in the proposal.  It seeks to strengthen local 
capacities to plan for and implement climate adapt ation. Under outputs 1 –3, awareness -raising 
and capacity -building will help local governments to integrate adaptation into local planning. 
The development of online l ocal information systems for a daptation ( LISA ) platforms in each of 
the four countries is expected to deepen stakeholder understanding and enable country wide  
access to climate information so that local  governments are better informed of risks and 
vulnerabilities when making planning and budgeting decisions. Output 4 will support local 
actors to prepare to access bankable adaptation investments  through sensitiz ation and 
awareness -raising activities.  
25. Component 2  introduces two complementary mechanisms that envisage a paradigm 
shift to enable adaptation climate finance to flow to local levels as follows:  
(a) Outputs 5 and 6 will enable PBCRG  funding for local governments through existing 
inter governmental  fund mechanism s. This funding i s intended to institutionaliz e and 
mainstream adaptation within decentrali zed processes in the four countries.  These 
PBCRG  funds will cover the additional costs of making investments climate -resilient  and 
aim to address the financing gap for actioning local resilience -building priorities.   
(b) Output 7 will establish b lended finance facilit ies for local private sector actors, such as 
SME s and producers’ organizations, to enable their participation in local adaptation 
activities.  The use of a revolving fund mechanism will enable grants to be provided for 
private  sector projects on a repayable basis (in local currency)  to ensure sustainability 
of the model . The UEMOA  CCT  and CIF will also aim to attract additional funders/donors 
by leveraging the results of financed projects.  
26. The potential for knowledge -sharing and learning is high as the regional PMU  and the 
regional programme board could facilitate cross -learning between the four countries.  The 
countries will also be able to join the global board of UNCDF’s LoCAL , with access to its wider 
network , and benefit from south –south learning among developing countries . 
27. The LoCAL mechanism is being undertaken incrementally in phases with a view to  
becoming the national system for financing climate change adaptation at the local level. Phase 1 
(piloting) tests the mechanism in a small number (two to four) of local governments and introduces the PBCRG s over one or two fiscal cycles.  Phase 2 (lessons) covers five to ten 
subnational authorities and aims to demonstrate effectiveness and create the conditions for a 
realistic, viable full national roll -out of the approach. Phase 3 (scaling up) aims to roll  out the 
PBCRG  mechanism across the country.  It also aims to leverage domestic and international 
finances from national government, donors, climate funds and other financing institutions.  
28. The four participating countries are at different phases of implementing LoCAL (see 
table 3). Burkina Faso  has completed one fiscal cycle;  Mali  is preparing to enter phase 2; and 
Niger  has 15 local governments already benefit ing from PBCRG s and is gearing up to move to 
phase 3. Côte d’Ivoire  is preparing to enter the  pilot phase 1 . 
Table 3:  Proposed s equencing of LoCAL+  phases by country across years  
  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Countries   Phases of LoCAL +


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 96 
 
 
Burkina Faso   1 2 2 3 3 
Côte D’ivoire   1 1 2 2 2 
Mali   1 2 2 3 3 
Niger   2 3 3 3 3 
Source : Accredited entity  clarificatory responses to questions raised by the independent Technical Advisory Panel. 
29. The selection of 85 local governments is yet to be confirmed and will be completed 
during programme inception.  Criteria that will be used to inform t he selection of participating 
local governments includ e the country context, level of buy -in, availability of funds and level of 
institutionalization.  LoCAL technical committees  which function as oversight supervisory 
bodies , will be closely consulted.  
30. While the programme has the potential to bring about paradigm shifts in each of the 
countries, the iTAP  understands that these are likely to be gradual and will vary across 
countries according to levels of institutional buy -in, local capacities, access to reliable climate 
information, availability of funding, interest of financial institutions and SME s, the evolving 
socio political  landscape and emerging national priorities.  
31. The potential for uptake and scaling will largely depend on the capacity of local 
governments to implement the programme and to demonstrate results that are scalable and 
replicable . The number of local governments covered by phase 2 represents a small proportion 
of the overall population.  A risk is that local governments that come on board mid way  through 
the programme may not sufficiently build capacity or demonstrate results within the remaining 
time  frame  of the programme.  
32. The funding proposal lacks clarity on what mechanisms will be put in place to ensure 
that local governments use LISA , once the systems are set up, to draw on climate risk 
information to plan local investments . It is also not clear which agency will be responsible for 
maintaining the LISA  platforms , including beyond the programme. Furthermore, the funding 
proposal does not provide details of how climate risks will be factored into the proposed 
investments under different scenarios, nor does it clarify whethe r the LISA platforms will be 
available to private sector stakeholders.  It is also not clear how climate finance assessments will 
be applied to select the most optimum investment in adaptation among  an array of other 
adaptation investment measures.  In the view of  the iTAP , this is a critical gap that carries the  
risk  of investment choices not sufficiently tak ing into account the highest adaptation priorities.  
33. As the blended finance facilit ies are  being tested in the  four  countries , it will be 
important for a high success rate of returnable grants to be maintained so that the revolving 
facility can be sustain ed within and beyond its ten-year operational lifetime.  The potential for 
scaling will also depend on the ability of the programme to sustain engagement with local 
private sector actors  so that they invest in adaptation , and on how successfully the programme 
is able to establish a proof -of-concept mechanism that could trigger further capital flows for 
local adaptation.  The streng thening of existing financial institutions – namely the CIF  (the main 
financial operator and coordinator ) and other local financial institutions – could help to 
strengthen the enabling environment  for improved access to adaptation funding by the local 
private sector. For scale and a paradigm shift to occur, t he mechanism will need to mobilize 
significantly more financial resources , but the proposal does not detail where these resources 
could come from . 
34. The socio political  context in these countries is a major factor in determining the extent 
to which the programme ’s impacts may reasonably achieve a paradigm shift.  Three of the four 
participating countries –Burkina Faso , Mali , and Niger  – are experiencing episodes of internal 
and regional conflict, instabilit y and security threats. Conflicts between ethnic groups are often 
driven by competition over scarce resources,  such as land, water  and pastures.  
35. These  instabilities and risks  could have profound implications for the LoCAL+ 
programme.  The funding proposal set out its approach to a conflict resolution mechanism that


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 97 
 
 
enables participatory approaches, inclusive governance structures  and tailored risk -mitigation 
strategies. Even though LoCAL+  proposes to select project sites where security is relatively 
stable and law and order issues are minimal, the potential for scale -up through a future p hase 3 
will depend on the wider enabling environment.  The AE has confirmed to the iTAP  that, d uring 
programme implementation, the approach will be adapted to any shifts in the socio political  
realities. This could involve modifying imp lementation timelines, adjusting the geographic al 
focus  or strengthening partnerships with local organizations that have a deep understanding of 
the current context.  
36. The iTAP  assesses the paradigm shift potential as medium.  
1.4 Sustainable development potential             Scale: High  
37. The programme is aligned with 12 (of 17) of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , 
of which SDG 13 (Climate Action)  has the closest alignment. Other SDGs include:  SDG 1 (No 
Poverty), SDG 2 (Zero Hunger), SDG 3 (Good Health and Well -being), SDG 5 (Gender 
Equality), SDG 6 (Clean Water  and Sanitation ), SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy), SDG 8 
(Decent Work and Economic Growth ), SDG 10 ( Reduced Inequalities), SDG 11 (Sustainable 
Cities and Communities), SDG 15 (Life on Land)  and SDG 17 (Partnership s for the G oals).  
38. The proposal has a comprehensive e nvironmental and s ocial management framework 
(annex 6 A2), an I ndigenous people’s plan (annex 6B), a  conflict sensitivity analysis (annex 6C), a 
gender and social inclusion action plan  (annex 8A) and a gender assessment (annex 8B). 
39. The e nvironment al co-benefits  could be substantial.  Capacity -building and 
awareness -raising wil l help to sensitize communities and local stakeholders to the impacts of 
climate change. Activities to be funded from the menu of eligible investments are likely to 
support environmentally  friendly practices , such as land restoration and integrated water 
resources management. The programme has been subject ed to an environmental and s ocial 
screening assessment and is designated as category C (low risk), and all proposed investments 
will undergo environmental and social safeguards screeni ng (for category C) before final 
funding selection . 
40. Social co-benefit s are likely from reduced vulnerabilities of poor communities affected 
by climate change. Inclusive and participatory stakeholder engagement in planning and 
implementation processes will help to ensure that the voices of the most vulnerable groups, 
including women, youth and minorities,  are represented.  Annex 6B also outlines how these 
participatory processes are culturally appropriate, gender -sensitive and intergenerationally 
inclusive in accordance with the customs, norms and values of the local communities.  The 
meaningful involvement of Indigenous p eoples is also proposed in local development and 
adaptation planning processes, and in the identification and design of sub projects . 
41. Gender co -benefits  could be reali zed through recogni zing the vulnerabilities  faced by 
women, tailoring information and knowledge products to their needs, and encouraging their 
active participation in decision -making and implementation activities.  A positive feature of the 
proposal is that it aims for 50 per  cent of eligible investments to explicitly focus on gender 
dimensions.  The gender and social inclusion action plan (annex 8A)  outlines actions to advance 
gender sensitivity, equality and women’s empowerment in the four countries, both directly and indirectly.  The programme also proposes to capture gender -disaggregated data wherever 
possible  and will support local authorities in assessing the extent to which public adaptation 
investment projects contribute to women’s empowerment and gender equality by using indicators from the Women Economic Empowerment Index, developed by UNCDF . 
42. Economic  co-benefits  could be reali zed from creating direct and indirect employment 
opportunities for communities and local SME s and improving the enabling environment for 
local business es to invest in adaptation actions.  An assumption is that the blended financ e


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 98 
 
 
facilit ies will support income -generating projects that reflect the adaptation priorities identified 
in local planning processes and as highlighted in the menu of investments.  In the long  run, 
capacity -building of stakeholders and the blended finance facilit ies could encourage financial 
institutions to provide tailored financial products to SME s, thereby enabling them to implement 
climate -smart practices in their businesses while contributing to economic growth.  Activities 
funded through the PBCRG s, such as  productive farming practices and rehabilitation of rural 
road and transport infrastructure, could help communities to apply more sustainable and 
productive models, boost employment  and livelihood opportunities , and make agricultural 
incomes less vulnerable to the effects of climate change . Similarly, coastal protection 
investments could help to reduce damages and losses to assets and infrastructure.  
43. The sustainable development potential of the project is assessed as high.  
1.5 Needs of the recipient               Scale:  High  
44. All four participating countries in West Africa are high ly vulnerable  to climate change 
and climate variability, with limited readiness to address these challenges. Increasing 
temperatures and shifting rainfall patterns are already affecting livelihoods, food security, and economic and governance stability. Annex 8B highlights the vulnerability of women to the 
impacts of climate change  specifically in countries where women have unequal social, economic 
and political status.  It notes gender disparities and inequalities in access to resources that 
disadvantage women and children.  
45. Three of the four countries (Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger) are Least Developed 
Countries, and face socio economic  vulnerability , have unstable macro economic  contexts , and 
are heavily aid  dependent . While Côte d'Ivoire is one of Africa's fastest -growing economies, it 
faces several socio -economic disparities and poverty challenges.   The populations of all four 
countries are heavily reliant on c limate -sensitive sectors such as agriculture, forestry and 
fishing , which comprise significant proportion s of the countries’ g ross domestic product  (GDP ). 
As of 2019, these were 20.3 per cent of GDP  in Burkina Faso , 15.6 per cent of GDP  in Côte 
d’Ivoire , 37 per cent of GDP  in Mali  and 38 per cent of GDP  in Niger .4   
46. The funding proposal references the significant funding gap for adaptation highlighted 
in each of the NDC s: USD 2.8 billion for Burkina Faso , USD 12 billion for the Côte d’Ivoire , USD 8 
billion in Mali  and USD 2.7 billion in Niger . 
47. The LoCAL+  approach is seen as central to supporting local governments to tackle the 
capacity and resource gaps impeding effective  action  towards climate adaptation and resilience-
building . The funding proposal explains how the programme plans to address the needs of the 
recipient s – particularly in terms of institutional weaknesses, poor coordination between 
central and local governments, weak technical expertise, and limited access to adaptation 
finance as key barriers that affect the ability of local governments to take appropriate and 
timely climate adaptation action. It also aims to respond to the adaptation funding gap that can 
inhibit SMEs from taking local adaptation action.  
48. Needs of the recipient is assessed as h igh. 
1.6 Country ownership         Scale:  Medium  
49. The national designated authorities of all four participating countries have provided no -
objection letters (annexes 1A –1D)  and will contribute in -kind co -financing.  
 
4 See annex 2E1 of the funding proposal: ‘West Africa macro -economic research ’.


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 99 
 
 
50. All four countries are members of the UEMOA , which, as a regional bloc, supports 
climate -related issues, economic integration  and development program mes.5 LoCAL+  operates 
under UEMOA  structures , ensuring that the countries can cooperate within regional climate 
finance mechanisms and initiatives.  
51. At the national level, t he proposed programme aligns with the respective countries’ 
national strategies and action plans on climate change.  Each of the four countries ha s submit ted 
its NDC s: Burkina Faso  (2021) , Côte d’Ivoire  (revised 2022) , Mali  (revised 2021) and Niger  
(revised 2021). All four countries ha ve submitted three national communications on c limate 
change  to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  
52. The proposal is also aligned with each country’s national policies for sustainable 
development  and for decentralization and  is tailored to the political and institutional 
frameworks and capacities of the individual country contexts.  
53. Annex 7 summarizes the overall approach to stakeholder consult ations  and the 
stakeholder engagement plan . The document does not seem to have been updated since it was 
produced some time ago.  The supporting aide s-memoir es (annexes 7 A-7H) of the country -level 
consultations to finalize programme design do not contain much information on the stakeholder 
groups, the topics covered  or to what extent the se consultations  influence d programme design.  
However, annex 8B outlines recent consultations with women during field missions in 2023 to 
gather beneficiaries’ impressions and feedback on the implementation of PBCRG s in three of the 
four targeted countries, namely Burkina Faso , Mali , and Niger . It also confirms that women will 
continue to be key stakeholders for engagement and consultation throughout programme 
implementation.  
54. Scoping visits for the design of the UNCDF -LoCAL project in Mali  and Niger  date back to 
July 2013 and June 2014 , respectively ; during which relevant strategies, institutional structures 
and entry points were identified . In these two countries , consultations continued throughout  
the implementation of p hase 1 , including through national and regional workshops, discussions 
with central and local governments, LoCAL technical committees,  and the activities of 
development partners . In Côte d ’Ivoire, a scoping mission was carried out in May  2019  and a 
design mission in September 2019, while scoping was completed in Burkina Faso  in November 
2019 and  the design was finalized in February 2020. 
55. For this LoCAL+ funding proposal , regional discussions were initiated through a seminar 
in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, on  5 and 6 November 2019 to validate and finalize the content 
and modalities of the funding proposal.  However, there is no detail available on what issues 
were discussed or which stakeholder groups were represented.  None of the stakeholder 
consultation documents include details of participation by women or vulnerable groups.  
56. National consultations were conducted in all four countries,  but they  appear to have 
mainly focused on validating the institutional framework and the financial flows.  These took 
place in  Bamako, Mali  (13–14 May 2024), Ouagadougou (16–17 May 2024), Niamey, Niger  (20–
21 May 2024) , and Abidjan, Côte d’ Ivoire  (23–24 May 2024).  Most of the consultation meetings 
seem to have mainly involved national -level representation ; the extent to which they included 
subnational and local -level representation and involved non -governmental or civil society 
organi zations is less clear.  
57. The annexes mainly elaborate on the LoCAL mechanism with local governments.  It is 
less clear to what extent stakeholder discussions focused specifically on the b lended finance 
instruments,  which, in the view of  the iTAP , is a gap.  The stakeholder engagement plan does not 
clearly set out which representative stakeholder groups will be consulted, at what stages of 
implementation, or how the programme will ensure that the voices of communities are 
adequately reflected in programme implementation. 
 
5 Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger left the Economic Community of West African States in 2024.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 100 
 
 
58. Overall, c ountry ownership of the project is assessed as medium.  
1.7 Efficiency and effectiveness        Scale:  Medium  
59. The co -finance ratio is low at 1:0.19. The programme will receive co-financing from 
UEMOA  CCT (EUR 7,168,000) for activities under outputs 4 and 7 , as well as in -kind financing 
from countries , and technical support from UNCDF . 
60. A majority of GCF resources are allocated to component 2 (72 per cent) , with the 
balance allocated to c omponent 1 ( 23 per cent ) and project management costs ( 5 per cent ). 
Within component 2, the PBCRG  (output 5)  will support approximately 530 local investments,  
and the allocation of funds will vary by country, based on criteria such as local population, land 
size, poverty, absorptive capacities of local governments and results of the last performance 
cycle.  The blended finance facilit ies (output 7) anticipate financing up to EUR 150,000 per 
project with the aim of impacting a total of 500 beneficiaries across the four countries.  The 
distribution of GCF resources across the four participating countries is expected to be fairly even, as shown in table 4.  
Table 4: Distribution of GCF resources by country  
Country  Estimated GCF 
funding (EUR)  Overall resource 
envelop es by 
country  Target local 
governments  
Burkina Faso  10,474,122  12 583 170  20 
Côte d’Ivoire   10,661,794  12,770,841  20 
Mali  10,565,828  12,674,875  20 
Niger  12,681,563  14,790,610  25 
TOTAL  44,383,30 7  85 
Source : Annex 17 to the f unding proposal . 
 
61. The funding proposal allows for p erformance monitoring and safeguards to be put in 
place to ensure that GCF resources are used for the purposes intended. The PBCRG  allocation to 
local governments will be determined by their ability to meet minimum criteria (70 per cent) 
concerned with good governance and public financial management, and a performance -based 
element (30 per cent) based on scores receiving during a nnual performance assessments.  
62. In terms of fund flows, t he national EE s will manage and channel PBCRG  funds to their 
local authorities . For the blended finance facilit ies, UEMOA CCT will act as the regional EE  on 
grant funds to selected financial institutions,  within the framework of the national steering 
committee . 
63. The iTAP  finds that the process for identifying and selecting country -level microfinance 
institutions for the blended finance  facilities is currently unclear . The selection of institutional 
partners with adequate capacities, standards, reach and interest in climate adap tation finance 
will be critical to the effective functioning and sustainability of the blended finance facilit ies, 
especially in the context of the proposed program me set-up, where these institutions will have 
to play a key role in selecting, structuring and monitoring adap tation and mitigation 
investments that conform to the GCF selection criteria . The iTAP  thus recommends inclusion of 
a condition precedent to first disbursement under the Funded Activity Agreement between GCF 
and the AE  as part of the project approval by the GCF Board . 
64. The governance arrangements ( see f igure) are complex , and it is not clear how decision -
making will be coordinated across the separate technical committees for the two financing instruments.  There could be some risk of separation of decision -making between the PBCRG 
mechanism and the blended financing facilities,  which could lead to inefficiencies of 
coordination, duplication  or suboptimal  utili zation of GCF resources.  In the view of  the iTAP , it


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 101 
 
 
will be important to ensure that these two streams are managed coherently so that the potential 
of the local investments can be maximi zed and duplications reduced.  
Figure:  Governance arrangements  
 
Source : Funding proposal . 
65. While the programme outlines the vision for its long -term sustainability , its actual 
reali zation will largely be contingent on the extent to which  the four countries institutionaliz e 
local climate finance through inter governmental fiscal transfers, whether the private sector 
retains interest in the blended instruments, and the ability of  the four c ountries to attract 
external funding mobili zed from domestic and international sources to sustain the blended 
instruments and PBCRG s. Capacity -building and technical assistance for local actors, 
demonstration of proof of concept of the financing mechanisms, and emerging results could be 
important in building local ownership  and could help to  maintain the programme’s operations 
and impact .  
66. Under the b lended finance facilit ies, the funding proposal envisages a repayment rate of 
70 per cent  of gran ts to the revolving facility , with potential defaults.  Although t he funding 
proposal sets out strategies to manage these risks, regular monitoring will be critical to manage 
risks of non -repayment to ensure that the revolving fund mechanism is sustainable.  
67. The exit strategy from the blended finance mechanism involves seeking new equity and 
loan guarantees to ensure sustainability. BOAD  and UEMOA  are currently looking for this 
additional equity capital, from partner banks and private sector players , and the funding 
proposal does not provide any evidence that there have been credible expressions of interest 
from institutions to supply additional capital . 
68. In the view of the iTAP , the investment framework ( annex 3A)  lacks a crucial element – 
that of evaluating climate -related risks.  The investment framework does not build in sensitivity 
to the specific impacts of climate change  under different scenarios , on project assets, operation 
and maintenance (O&M), revenue generation  or the overall cost of doing business.  The AE has 
acknowledged to  the iTAP  that there is need for a more nuanced approach to incorporating 
climate risks into the financial assessments. The iTAP  finds that it will be important to


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 102 
 
 
strengthen the investment framework – for instance, to demonstrate and justify why one 
particular investment choice in adaptation offers the most value for money.  
69. O&M  plans are not well detailed in the funding proposal.  The AE subsequently  clarified 
to the iTAP  that maintenance of public assets created under the PBCRG  facility  is envisaged to 
be done by local authorities and communities to foster a sense of local ownership . The 
programme will also provid e community -based management capacity -building and assist local 
governments to put in place resourced management and maintenance plans. The arrangements 
for private sector investments are yet to be designed and the AE envisage s that primary 
responsibility for O&M will fall to the private sector entities that financed and built the 
investments.  
70. The monitoring and evaluation ( M&E ) framework is yet to be fully designed , and the AE 
has clarified that the logical framework will be updated with disaggregated targets by country 
once the selection of local governments is complete , which is expected by the end of y ear 1. The 
M&E  framework is envisaged to be in line with  the LoCAL’s  established Assessing Climate 
Change Adaptation Framework ( ACCAF ),6 previously developed jointly by UNCDF  and the 
World Resources Institute.  The ACCAF  will apply to all components of the programme, including 
the PBCRG  and blended finance facilit y in each of the four countries . 
71. Local governments will be responsible for using the ACCAF  to track adaptation 
investments and benefits through the PBCRG , national PMU s will oversee the M&E  of the 
financing mechanism, and the regional PMU  will coordinat e reporting and produc e annual 
report s for each country. Technical assistance will also be provided to SME s and financial 
institutions to help  them m eet the reporting requirements. Annual performance assessments 
will be conducted by independent international consultancy firms.  
72. The funding proposal also notes that the ACCAF  will be used to characterize resilience 
improvement trajectories.  This could offer important lessons for the participating countries, the 
wider region and other developing countries , and should therefore be considered as a critical 
part of the M&E  framework.  
73. The efficiency and effectiveness potential are assessed as medium . 
II. Overall  remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
74. The funding proposal for the LoCAL+  mechanism is comprehensive . The institutional 
framework and PBCRG  financing scheme s for local governments in all four countries are clearly 
articulated and consistent with the LoCAL approach developed and implemented by UNCDF  in 
other countries . The iTAP  recogni zes that while the blended finance facilit ies could be 
innovative in the four participating countries, there could be some associated risks as the 
programme  tests  and scales  a model for local private sector actors to access scarce climate 
finance for adaptation action. Additionally, p olitical and security risks remain a key 
consideration and could undermine programme efforts . 
75. The iTAP  recommends that the AE  undertake the following  during project inception : 
(a) Clarify how the governance mechanisms will enable coordinated management and action across the two financing mechanisms, namely the PBCRG s and the b lended 
financ e facilit ies, which will be  essential to delivering a coherent programme ( see para . 
64 above) ; 
 
6 For d etails on the ACCAF see ACCAF: A UNCDF LoCAL Framework for Climate Change Adaptation Monitoring and 
Evaluation  (Impact Capital for Development) . Available at https://www.uncdf.org/article/7738/accaf -a-uncdf -local -
framework -for-climate -change -adaptation -monitoring -and-evaluation .


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/ Add.09  
Page 103 
 
 
(b) Develop an d apply  an investment framework that also factors in the climate risk of the 
proposed investments under different scenarios  (see para s. 67 and 68 above ); 
(c) As intended by the funding proposal, ensure that the ACCAF  and M&E  framework build 
in measures to track resilience improvement trajectories.  This could also offer 
important lessons for all participating countries and for other countries in the region 
that are also vulnerable to climate change ( see para s. 70–72 above) ; and 
(d) Build in appropriate measures to ensure that the LISA  system will be used by local 
governments in planning processes and be made available for use by private sector 
entities in investment choices (see para . 32 above) . 
76. The iTAP  recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal with the following 
conditions to be fulfilled (see para 63 above) prior to the first disbursement of GCF proceeds . 
77. Conditions precedent to the first disbursement of GCF proceeds under the funded 
activity agreement : 
(a) Delivery by the  Accredited Entity to the GCF, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat of:  
(i) A detailed list of all microfinance institutions (“MFIs ”) that have been identified 
as potential participants in the program me across the host  countries ; 
(ii) A detailed description of the process that the A ccredited Entity  will follow to 
select the qualifying MFIs  as participants in the programme across the host 
countries, such process to ensure transparency, inclusiveness, and be aligned 
with the program me's objectives of fostering climate resilience at the local level;  
(iii) A clearly defined set of criteria that are to  be applied to evaluate and qualify the 
MFIs , such  criteria to include financial capacity, alignment with climate 
adaptation goals, ability to manage climate adaptation investments, and capacity 
to support local businesses and vulnerable communities; and  
(iv) A short report c onfirm ing that new consultations have been undertaken with 
local stakeholders, including private sector actors, civil society, and local 
governments, to ensure that the selection model for the MFIs  is sustainable and 
supports the objectives of the program me.


---
*Page 104*
---

  
       GCF/B.40/02/Add.09  
Page 104 
 
 
 Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment  
Proposal name:  Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility Plus  (LoCAL +) – West 
Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali and  Niger)  
Accredited entity:  Banque  Ouest  Africaine  de Développement  (BOAD)  
Countries:  Burkina  Faso,  Ivory  Coast , Mali,  Niger  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
 To maximize sustainable development  outcomes, Microfinance Institutions will be selected 
according to strict specifications. This will take into account their geographical position, 
experience, local deployment capacity, as well as their compliance with financial standards in 
the WAEMU region , overseen  by the Confederation of Microfinance Institutions . Funded 
projects will align with local priorities and structured according to the Assessing Climate 
Change Adaptation Framework approach. The terms of reference will be available from the 
start of implementation, and their development will be conditional on a participatory approach 
invol ving all stakeholders to ensure the relevance and effectiveness of the funding.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The LoCAL methodology is already proven , tested  and performance -based ( through annual 
assessments and capacity building) , with selection criteria ensuring  rapid and effective results 
even for potential new local governments. The Local Information System for Adaptation is 
an online platform that provides shared access to climate information, enabling local 
governments and relevant private sector actors to make risk -based decisions for local planning 
and budgeting. The Local Information System for Adaptation enables participatory 
feasibility studies that analyze country -specific contexts in order to develop appropriate 
strategies . The blended finance facility will mobilize funding to help communities in: i) 
adopting  more sustainable production models ; ii) enhancing  employment and livelihoods ; iii) 
reduc ing damage and losses to assets  and infrastructure ; and iv) mak ing income  streams  less 
vulnerable to the  effects of climate change . 
Sustainable development potential  
N/A  
Needs of the recipient  
N/A  
Country ownership  
All stakeholders were thoroughly  consulted. All stakeholders have been thoroughly consulted. 
At the beginning of the project, a consultation and information workshop will be held, followed


---
*Page 105*
---

  
       GCF/B.40/02/Add.09  
Page 105 
 
 
 by a start -up report to be submitted to the GCF Secretariat. This approach will gather updated 
information to enhance project implementation.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The accredited entity will focus on the careful selection of Microfinance Institutions based on 
a comprehensive set of criteria, ensuring their capacity to manage climate investments. The 
Regional Management Unit will coordinate activities to ensure optima l program execution. The 
sustainability of the blended finance facility will be guaranteed by the technical and financial commitment of BOAD, WAEMU , and the Confederation of Microfinance Institutions. Building  
the capacity of Microfinance Institutions will  help integrate climate finance into their business 
models. Additionally, BOAD and its financial partners (AFD, KFW, EIB) will offer climate 
refinancing lines to commercial banks and Microfinance Institutions in the region.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
The institutional framework will be organized around a Regional Management Unit (RMU) 
responsible for coordinating the activities of the four (4) National Management Units to ensure synergy and effective project implementation. This approach will harmonize  efforts between 
the two financing instruments (Performance -Based Climate Resilient Grants and the Blended 
Finance Facility) at regional and national levels. An investment framework that accounts for climate risks under different scenarios will be developed. Resilience tracking will be integrated into monitoring and evaluation using the Assessing Climate Change Adaptation Framework. The Local Information System for Adaptation  will be made accessible for local adaptation 
planning for public and private stakeholders. A detailed list of Microfinance Institutions and 
the selection process will be provided to the GCF before the launch of sub -component 2.2


---
*Page 106*
---

LOC
AL CLIMATE ADAPTIVE 
LIVING FACILITY Plus (LoCAL+) – 
West Africa (Burkina Faso, Ivory 
Coast, Mali and Niger)   
Gender Assessment s Gender documentation for FP2 47


---
*Page 107*
---

1- FOREWORD  
 
Women are not only the first observers but also the first victims of climate change by virtue of their 
roles in looking after the family and responsibilities in food production, collecting fodder, fuelwood, and 
water. They are the first to observe the decreased agricultural productivity and depletion of water resources. They are the most vulnerable as, when climate change disrupts livelihoods, they are the most affected. Disasters and the social disruptions of climate change often have different impacts on women and men. Women and children are more likely than men to die or be injured in disasters, specifically in 
countries where women have unequal social, economic, and political status. Nevertheless, women are 
also effective agents of change as they often c ope and adapt differently to men, and they play a 
preeminent role in the family.  
Despite their vulnerability, women should not be seen only as victims of climate change, but they should also be seen as active and effective promoters of adaptation and mitigation. For example, women have historically developed knowledge and skills related to water harvesting and storage, food preservation and rationing, and natural resource management. Thus, gender mainstreaming is essential in climate change projects to both empower women’s capacity and knowledge and provide them with the tools and skill s for climate adaptation.  
The LOCAL CLIMATE ADAPTIVE LIVING FACILITY Plus (LoCAL+)  West Africa programme  intends to reach 
the population of up to 8 5 local governments  of Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali, and Niger  and build the 
adaptative capacity of communities by contributing to reducing their vulnerability to climate change impacts. Strengthening climate resilience will support local economies, with tangible benefits for vulnerable groups, women especially and c an be expected to indirectly generate new job opportunities 
for both m en and women.  
The initiative will therefore seek to participate in enhancing the socio -economic empowerment of 
women at the local level for example by supporting the establishment of community contracting systems for local green and resilient investments and supporting access to finance and improved infrastructures. Throughout its design and implementation, it will mainstream gender and social inclusiveness considerations so as, in particular:  
(a) To ensure that the voice, needs and perspectives of all social groups have the opportunity and a safe space to be conveyed;  
(b) To take into account the above perspectives and input in the design and delivery of all 
Programme activities;  
(c) To avoid at all times any unintended negative repercussion of any Programme activity on any 
specific group (incl., women);  
(d) To exploit the Programme as an avenue to foster wider participation and engagement in public 
governance by multiple stakeholders (incl. women).  
 
The programme notably builds on the experience of the LoCAL mechanism, already implemented by 
UNCDF in Mali, Niger  and Burkina Faso. LoCAL has an important track record in supporting to address 
gender inequality realities in particular in the countries targeted under this programme. UNCDF, in 
partnership with UNIDO, has notably had the opportunity to put the LoCAL approach to good use in the implementation of the project “ Support for risk management linked to environmental degradation 
through adaptation measures in areas at risk of inter- community conflict ” in Mali, funded by the Peace 
Building Fund. This project, implemented over an 18-month period, notably aimed to support local 
communities, and women in particul ar, in better managing the risks associated with environmental 
degradation and climate change in 4 local governments of Mali.


---
*Page 108*
---

In terms of results, support to the local planning and enhanced management of natural resources at the 
local level as part of said program has had long-term effect in terms of prevention of potential conflicts 
arising from their exploitation. The gender sensitive training provided to elected representatives and local authority officials was also beneficial, enabling them to carry out their work more effectively and better serve vulnerable communities. In addition, the project has encouraged the selection of  women's 
groups for revenue generating activities. These women's groups have been trained and supported to 
launch their businesses. By raising awareness of environmental degradation and its causes, particularly 
the effects of climate change, and by helping  target populations (notably women) to have more 
sustainable work opportunities, the project has certainly helped to reduce their vulnerability. In addition, women and young people have been systematically involved in consultation frameworks and training courses on conflict management, choice and implementation of community investments, 
contributing to their involvement in the community. Communes have had their planning documents 
updated to include aspects of adaptation, environmental management, and gender and conflict 
sensitivity, and the exercise served as the basis for planning sessions in subsequent years, helping to reduce potential conflicts and include women in their roles as actors in development and peace. The project has had a positive impact on t he lives of the beneficiaries. It has helped to revitalize certain 
women's groups, strengthened social cohesion and inclusion, rethink the implementation of certain communal interventions, and reduced/mitigated the risk of conflict.  
These experiences with LoCAL have informed the design of the current proposal and are reflected throughout the intervention’s design.  
It deserves be noted that women have been consulted during the participatory process to develop the current proposal and will remain key stakeholders for engagement and consultation throughout the 
programme’s implementation. Regular field missions have also been undertaken which allowed to 
gather beneficiaries’ impressions and feedback on the implementation of PBCRGs  in three of the four 
targeted countries . Such mission was organized in Niger between 24 and 28 October 2023, during which 
local authorities an d beneficiaries – women groups in particular - of the communes of Abalak (Tahoua 
region), Falwel and Sokorbé (Dosso region) were met, and their testimonies recorded.
1 Another mission 
was organized between 12 and 26 December 2023 in 12 communes of Niger (Damagaram Takaya, Kagna 
Wamé, et Kantché, Abalak, Tchintabaraden, Tébaram, Bagaroua et Allela, Dogon Kiria, Soucoucoutan, Falwel et Sokorbé) which notably allowed to raise local governments and communities’ awareness on planning and budgeting of climate resilience grants. Another mission was organized from 22 January to 4 February, in the Niger communes of Gadabédji, Soli Tagriss (Maradi region), Tarka, Tanout and Falenk o 
(Maradi region) which aimed to contact, inform, and mobilize customary and municipal authorities and beneficiary communities on the PBCRG system. In Burkina Faso, a similar mission was held in the three communes of Pabré, Loumbila and Saponé from 16 to 2 5 August 2023 and repeated in December of the 
same year (04-09).
2 In Mali, analogous field missions were organised between 12 and 14 November 
2023 and held again between 22 and 28 January 2024 in the communes of Sandaré and Simby (Kayes region).  
Conclusions of these successive consultations have both informed and benefit ted from the below  
gender assessment which  have been conducted to p rovide a snapshot of the  gender equality situation 
in the 4 countries targeted by the programme. Based on a set of guiding questions, each country specific 
assessment  provides details on the overall  national situation relating to gender (rights and status of 
women), relationship  between  climate  and gender  in the proposed  program footprint  area, as well as 
gender  specific  challenges  to be addressed  in each  country.  
 
1 https://www.uncdf.org/article/8636/small -investments- delivered -at-scale -are-transforming -futures -for-the-most-
vulnerable -in-niger   
2 https://www.uncdf.org/article/8584/communities -facing -double -threat- of-climate -change -and-insecurity -begin -resilience -
building -with- local


---
*Page 109*
---

 
2- GENDER ASSESSMENTS  
 
BURKINA  FASO  
Summary:  challenges  of integrating  gender  equality  into adaptation  and resilience  programmes  in 
Burkina  Faso   
Gender equality and women's empowerment is a priority development issue in Burkina Faso. By 
adhering to the Beijing Platform for Action (1995) for the promotion of women's rights as well as the Sustainable Development Goals adopted by the United Nations in  2016, the country committed itself to 
undertaking profound reforms to  improve the living conditions of its population, particularly of women, 
and to adopt policies, legislation and institutions that will make it possible to achieve gender equality. 
 
  
The political will to integrate gender, climate change adaptation and resilience is also present in Burkina 
Faso. The Plan National d’Adaptation aux Changements Climatiques [National Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan – NAP] (2015) is exemplary in this respect, placing gender at  its heart and dealing with 
it in a cross -cutting manner, making a real effort to integrate it across the different sectors (which is not 
the case in all key policies dealing with climate change). This political will is supported by international 
donors, who support different initiatives involving gender issues, making this approach an opportunity to obtain necessary funding.  
  
  
However, this political will does not always translate into concrete action and the gap with real -life 
experience  remains wide. The diagnosis established by the Plan National de Développement 
Economique et Social [National Economic and Social Development Plan – PNDES], the reference 
framework for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals in Burkina Faso, shows that 
despite the progress made, considerable inequalities in poverty, education, employment, access to 
production resources and elected  positions still exist, particularly to the disadvantage of women and 
young people. Generally, despite the fact that gender equality is enshrined in the legislative framework, social norms that discriminate against women and girls have an impact in all areas of development, whether in terms of access to resources, access to education, political participation or access to justice. 
Women’s living conditions and rights continue to be marred by various forms of exclusion and violence, 
as stated in the national report on the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action (Government of Burkina Faso, 2019) 25 years later. 
  
  
In the areas of disaster risk reduction and resilience to climate change, there is an emphasis on women's 
vulnerability  rather than their potential. The notion of gender often comes down to women as a 
homogeneous group with the same challenges and needs, rather than exploring their different capacities to act on climate change.  
  
  
Another challenge that may undermine the political will to address climate change and gender jointly is 
the security situation in the north -east of the country  and the internal displacement caused. This 
situation increases the vulnerability of women and girls and gives rise to an emergency logic : providing 
assistance to affected populations as quickly as possible, rather than an integrated and long -term policy. 
As the events are recent, it is still difficult to assess their magnitude and the impact they will have on 
national climate policy and action.    
 
a- Country gender overall situation: rights and status of women in the country


---
*Page 110*
---

Guiding questions   Analysis – national level   Data at subnational 
level if available   
What are the national 
policies covering gender 
issues? (include policy 
name, date)   
 
Programmes/action plans?   • National strategies for strengthening the role of women in 
the development process (1991).   
• Politique Nationale Genre [National Gender Policy] (2009). 
Goals: "the qualitative transformation of Burkinabe society 
with a view to removing sociocultural and economic 
obstacles to equitable and sustainable development; the 
elimination of inequalities between men and women in all 
areas; the strengthening of comm unities’ and 
development actors’ capacities and skills in the area of 
gender with a view to reducing poverty; the removal of 
obstacles to gender parity in national strategies, budgetary 
policies an d procedures to achieve the aims of the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and Millennium 
Development Goals; and the promotion of the human 
rights of women and men for greater social justice and 
equal opportunities in development" (National Gender 
Policy, 2009).    
• National Plan for Economic and Social Development – 
PNDES (2016 -2020): the second strategic focus on the 
"development of human capital" aims to reduce gender 
inequalities and make women dynamic actors in 
development.  
• Sectoral strategies with gender equality among their 
objectives: Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de 
Développement Durable [Strategy for Accelerated Growth 
and Sustainable Development] 2011 –2015 (SCADD): 
gender is one of the priority cross -cutting issu es. 
Programme National d’Accélération de l’Alphabétisation 
[National Accelerated Literacy Programme] 2011– 2015 
(PRONAA) (2011a): aims to reduce disparities between 
women and men.    
• Stratégie Nationale d’Accélération de l’Education des Filles 
[National Strategy for Accelerating Girls' Education] 
(2012).    
• Plan National de Développement Sanitaire [National 
Health Development Plan] 2011 –2020: focus on maternal 
health (Government of Burkina Faso, 2011).  
• Plan Stratégique de Sécurisation des Produits de Santé de 
la Reproduction [Strategic Plan for Reproductive Health 
Commodity Security] (2010).   
• Politique Nationale de Sécurisation Foncière en Milieu 
Rural [National Rural Land Security Policy] (Government of 
Burkina Faso, 2007): states that women have the same 
rights to land as men.   
  National, Regional 
and Communal 
Councils for the 
Promotion of Gender 
(CONAP Gender).   
Who is the governmental 
body (Ministry? Agency? 
Office?) in charge of gender 
issues?   • Ministry of Women, National Solidarity and the Family    
• National Council for the Promotion of Gender   
• National Committee for the Fight Against the Practice of 
Excision    
• In addition, gender groups, institutional and ministerial 
units for gender promotion have been established in all 
ministries, although their capacities need strengthening 
(Japan International Cooperation Agency [JICA] 2013).


---
*Page 111*
---

• A national gender observatory is housed at the National 
Institute of Statistics and Demography (INSD) and is 
responsible, among other things, for defining monitoring 
and evaluation indicators.    
Are gender -disaggregated 
data/statistics available?   • Yes – in 2015, the INSD produced four "Livrets Genre” 
(“Gender Booklets”), one national and three regional. 
These booklets contain gender -disaggregated statistics and 
information on demography, health, education, standard of 
living, employment and vocational training, violence an d 
crime, governance and decision- making.    
• The Social Scoreboard 2017 also provides gender -
disaggregated data on themes similar to those of the 
gender booklets, with additional sections on housing, water 
supply and sanitation, poverty, sustainable development 
and food security, sports and recreatio n, justice and 
security.    
• International databases such as the World Bank's Gender 
Data  Portal 
(http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/burkina -
faso) also provide gender -disaggregated data on Burkina 
Faso in addition to the INSD (2009) statistical yearbook of 
sex-disaggregated and/or gender- sensitive 
sociodemographic indicators.   Three booklets are 
regional (Centre -Est, 
Centre -Sud and Est 
regions).   
What is the legal status of 
women and children in the 
country of intervention 
(existing gender -responsive 
policies? Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against 
Women (CEDAW)? 
Ratification of international 
laws?)   • The Constitution of 11 June 1991  prohibits discrimination, 
in particular “those based on race, ethnicity, region, colour, 
sex, language, religion, caste, political opinion, fortune and 
birth”.  
• Customary law is recognized by the Constitution as a source 
of law insofar as “customs shall be ascertained and brought 
into harmony with the fundamental principles of the 
Constitution”. With regard to inheritance, the Persons and 
Family Code gives widows and minor daughters the right to 
inherit property. In practice, customary law prevailed: 
minors had no right to inherit and it was common for the 
family of the deceased husband to appropriate the couple’s 
property and assets, to the detriment of the women and 
children. Article 15 of the Constitution guaranteed the right 
to property for all and the agricultural and land tenure 
reform gave women equal access to land, yet in practice 
women continued to have little access to land.   
• The Persons and Family Code  establishes that spouses are 
equal partners: the mother and father share equal 
authority, responsibility and obligations towards the 
children. However, if the spouses do not agree on the place 
of residence, the right of decision rests with the husband 
(article 294). Each of the spouses has the right to exercise a 
profession without the consent of the other, provided that 
such profession is not contrary to public order and morality 
and does not prejudice the interests of the famil y (article 
295).   
• Since 1996, a law has prohibited female genital mutilation 
(FGM); however, in practice, it persists.   
• A law on “gender quotas” was approved in 2009: it 
establishes that 30 per cent of candidates for local and 
legislative elections must be women (French Development 
Agency [AFD], 2016).


---
*Page 112*
---

• International laws:  Ratification of the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW) in 1987 and the CEDAW Protocol in 2005, as well 
as the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and 
Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa in 2006.   
What are commonly held 
beliefs, perceptions, and 
stereotypes related to 
gender roles and status in 
the project/programme 
footprint area or the 
country?   • Two thirds of the population (60 per cent of whom are 
women) do not think that they should be involved in 
decisions about their own health, a choice that is left to 
their husbands (Organization for Economic Co -operation 
and Development [OECD], 2018).    
• Inequalities and disparities in the division of labour give 
women more work than men, and girls more than boys, 
with damaging impacts on their health, productivity, leisure 
time and reinvestment in human capital.    
• Traditional practices that restrict the physical and moral 
integrity of women continue to exist, as do certain 
traditions that maintain prejudices and stereotypes related 
to the gender of individuals.    
• Sexual violence such as rape, sexual harassment, sexual 
assault and abuse, paedophilia and child pornography 
affects both women and men, but is more pronounced 
among women.   
• The sexual exploitation of young girls.    
• Inequalities in access to or maintenance of processes of 
social exclusion or self -exclusion, particularly of women and 
children (girls and boys) in decision- making spheres 
(National Gender Policy, 2019).   
• Boys have preferential access to education.  
• There is individual and collective mental resistance to 
accepting equality between men and women. These 
resistances are all the more worrying as they appear among 
certain opinion leaders (National Gender Policy, 2009).   
• Nearly half of Burkinabe say that the decision on a woman 
working for pay outside family businesses or plots should 
be made by her husband or partner. Only 12 per cent 
consider that women can make this choice alone. And even 
if she participates in the deci sion, the wife must ask her 
husband for permission. This applies to 95 per cent of the 
population. On the contrary, according to social norms, 70 
per cent of people think that a man can make his decision 
without his wife’s opinion (OECD, 2018).   Burkina Faso is a 
country that 
embodies ethnic 
pluralism, with more 
than 60 
ethnolinguistic units 
listed and grouped 
into several families, 
resulting in diverse 
sociocultural 
practices and 
formations that have 
forged strong 
traditions and 
established diffe rent 
systems of gender 
relations.   
What are the gendered 
health issues (what is the 
maternal mortality rate, 
infant mortality rate, life 
expectancy (disaggregated 
by sex) in the country of 
intervention and/or the 
project/programme 
footprint area?)   • At the national level: Maternal mortality: 122.3 deaths per 
100,000 births. Infant mortality: 92 per 1,000 live births (at 
the national level, infant mortality is higher among boys 
than among girls).   
• Life expectancy for women was 57.5 years in 2006 
compared with 55.8 years for men (Livret Genre, 2015).   Centre -Est Region:  
Maternal mortality: 
92.3 deaths per 
100,000 births. Infant 
mortality: 185 per 
1,000 live births.    
Life expectancy for 
women is 1.9 years 
longer than that of 
men (Livret Genre 
Centre -Est, 2015).   
Centre -Sud Region:    
Maternal mortality: 
42 deaths per 
100,000 births. Infant


---
*Page 113*
---

mortality: 83 per 
1,000 live births (the 
booklet notes a 
higher rate of female 
infant mortality).   
Life expectancy for 
women is 1.2 years 
longer than that of 
men (Livret Genre 
Centre -Sud, 2015).   
Est Region:   
Maternal mortality: 
134 deaths per 
100,000 births. Infant 
mortality: 143 per 
1,000 live births.    
The life expectancy of 
women is slightly 
lower than that of 
men (Livret Genre Est, 
2015).   
More precise data are 
available in the Livret 
Genre National 
2015.    
Do women have equal 
access to education, 
technical knowledge, 
and/or skill training (what is 
the educational status of 
girls and boys? Adult 
literacy rate disaggregated 
by sex?)   • The proportion of girls among all primary school pupils has 
been gradually increasing since the 2008/2009 school year. 
It rose from 46.1 per cent in 2008/2009 to 48.6 per cent in 
2015/2016.   
• Over the period 2008 –2015, the gross enrolment rate at 
the national level rose from 77.1 per cent to 85.9 per cent 
for boys and from 67.7 per cent to 86.4 per cent for girls.   
• Between 2009 and 2015, the proportion of girls in the total 
number of post -primary pupils in general education 
increased from 43.1 per cent in 2008/2009 to 48.7 per cent 
in 2014/2015.   
• During the period 2009 –2015, the proportion of girls 
among students in technical and vocational secondary 
education decreased from 48.2 per cent to 44.1 per cent.   
• Only three out of every 10 students enrolled in a public 
institution are women.    
• The literacy rate in 2016 was 52 per cent for men and 28.7 
per cent for women (Social Dashboard 2017).   The Social Dashboard 
(2017) also contains 
gender and regionally 
disaggregated data 
on primary school 
enrolment (page 56–
57).  
Access to education 
has been severely 
compromised by the 
unstable security 
situation in the north -
east of the country, 
and most internally 
displaced children do 
not attend school, 
according to the 
United Nations 
International 
Organization for 
Migration 
(IOM/United Nations) 
Migration Report 
(2019). However, the 
report does not 
specify whether girls 
are affected 
differently from 
boys.    
  
According to Alice 
Albright (Global


---
*Page 114*
---

Partnership for 
Education) and Ulla 
Tornæs (2019), girls 
are particularly 
affected by the 
security context, as 
they are more 
exposed to gender -
based violence (GBV), 
which jeopardizes 
their schooling or 
deters them from 
attending school.    
What is the information in -
country related to gender -
based violence (including 
intimate -partner violence, 
early -marriage and FGM)?   • Forty -four per cent of married women were married before 
the age of 18 compared with only 3 per cent of men. Nearly 
one in two Burkinabe thinks that a union can take the form 
of litho, levirate, sororate or abduction. One third of the 
population says that women should not be involved in 
decisions related to their marriage. These are considered 
the responsibility of their father (23 per cent of opinions) 
or both parents (8 per cent). This denial of the right to freely 
choose one's spouse is more widespread i n rural areas (40 
per cent) than in urban areas (23 per cent), particularly in 
the Sahel (52 per cent) and Nord (58 per cent) regions 
(OECD, 2018).   
• Only 19 per cent of women have escaped both FGM and 
domestic violence and see their right to reproductive 
autonomy respected.   
• Domestic violence: More than a third of women have been 
victims of domestic violence in their lifetime and a third of 
the population justifies the practice.   
• Reproductive rights and reproductive health: Only one 
third of women who do not want to have children 
immediately use a contraceptive method and one third of 
the population states that women may not take part in 
decisions about contraceptive use, birth spa cing and the 
number of children, all of which are the responsibility of the 
husband.   
• FGM: More than two thirds of women have undergone 
FGM and 18 per cent of Burkinabe believe that the practice 
should be retained.   
• Early pregnancy: 17 per cent of mothers are under the age 
of 18, and a quarter of Burkinabe believe that a girl can give 
birth before reaching adulthood, while no one believes that 
this age is appropriate for a boy (OECD, 2018).   
• In the north- eastern part of the country, women are 
particularly vulnerable to GBV since the 2019 terrorist 
attacks and the internal displacement caused by them. 
Women account for 57 per cent of displaced people and, 
even if they do not feel insecure, they are particularly 
affected by the feeling of insecurity caused by the risk of 
GBV, especially rape (IOM, 2019).    Women living in rural 
areas face greater 
discrimination. In the 
Centre, Est, Hauts -
Bassins and Centre -
Ouest regions, levels 
of discrimination 
within the family are 
lower than the 
national average. On 
the other hand, 
women in the rural 
regions of Boucle du 
Mouhoun, Centre -
Est, Cascades and 
Nord are one and a 
half times more 
discriminated against 
than those in Centre, 
the most urbanized 
region, which is home 
to the capital (OECD, 
2018).   
Being married before 
reaching adulthood is 
more likely in rural 
areas (48 per cent) 
than in urban areas 
(25 per cent). No less 
than 81 per cent of 
married women were 
married before the 
age of 18 in 
Bougouriba Province, 
68 per cent in the 
Sahel region, 65 p er 
cent in Sud -Ouest and 
63 per cent in Centre -
Nord against 28 per 
cent in Hauts -Bassins 
and 22 per cent in 
Centre. Early -
marriage is all the 
more common as


---
*Page 115*
---

women are poor and 
poorly educated 
(OECD, 2018).   
Seven times as many 
women have been 
victims of domestic 
violence in Sud -Ouest 
(42 per cent) as in the 
Boucle du Mouhoun 
(6 per cent), while 
attitudes justifying 
this practice are eight 
times more frequent 
in Centre -Sud (66 per 
cent) than in Est (8 
per cent ). These 
practices and social 
norms tend to be 
weakened in urban 
centres, despite some 
tenacity. Violence, 
FGM and early 
pregnancy are more 
common and 
accepted by rural 
populations, while 
women's ability to 
make decisions about 
their health, including 
repr oductive health, 
is more common and 
supported by urban 
populations. Changes 
in social norms and 
practices 
guaranteeing women 
control over their 
bodies, as well as 
knowledge and 
application of the 
legal framework, 
seem to be more 
marked in the less 
isolated  regions 
(OECD, 2018).   
Two thirds of women 
have been victims of 
FGM in Burkina Faso 
(63 per cent), and 
more than three 
quarters in the 
Centre -Est (75 per 
cent), Nord (76 per 
cent), Central Plateau 
(77 per cent) and 
Sahel (83 per cent) 
regions. The practice


---
*Page 116*
---

appears to be less 
common in the 
Centre -Ouest (25 per 
cent) and Centre (36 
per cent) regions. 
Similarly, FGM is 
more common in 
rural areas (68 per 
cent) than in urban 
areas (48 per cent) 
(OECD, 2018).   
What are the main issues 
for accessing justice and 
the barriers that women 
face?   • The stigma attached to violence prevents victims from 
seeking help to end it. Only 41 per cent of female victims 
and 42 per cent of male victims of domestic violence sought 
help or told someone about it (Figure 26). Men tend to 
confide in their families (6 8 per cent) or friends (24 per 
cent). Women are more likely to turn to their families (65 
per cent) or their husbands' families (42 per cent). Recourse 
to public institutions (police, health or social services 
personnel) or religious leaders is almost non- existent. 
Similarly, women's low propensity to tell neighbours and 
friends as a first resort is a sign of shame. This is all the more 
true when the violence has been committed by the partner, 
symbolizing the internalization and justification of the 
phenome non.   
• The objective education provided by family planning 
facilities and schools has only been able to reach one third 
of the population, which explains the lower use of modern 
practices and the persistence of FGM (OECD, 2018).   
• The National Gender Policy discusses a need to "work to 
strengthen the legal culture among the people, and to 
define and institutionalize accessible and affordable 
justice.” In short, understanding and acceptance of the 
modern justice system, among people and the justice 
actors themselves, must be heightened. A favourable 
judicial environment, with the availability of the necessary 
assistance, must therefore be created” (National Gender 
Policy, 2011).    
• “In practice, women's ability to access justice and to bring 
cases of discrimination before the courts is limited by 
factors such as lack of information on their rights, legal 
costs, the persistence of traditional justice systems, 
illiteracy, complexity of legal procedures and other 
practical difficulties in accessing courts. Furthermore, the 
Committ ee is concerned that enforcing court rulings 
remains a challenge. The Committee further notes that, 
although the State party has carried out a reform to the 
National Human Rights Commission, it has yet to allocate 
sufficient financial and human resources f or its effective 
functioning” (CEDAW, 2010).   The IOM Report 
(2019) highlights the 
difficulty for 
government and 
humanitarian 
assistance to access 
conflict -affected 
areas in the north -
east.    
What are the current 
indicators and trends 
related to poverty and 
development? (Human 
Development Index (HDI)? 
HDI world rank? Gross • HDI: 0.423, 183rd out of 189 countries and territories 
(United Nations Development Programme [UNDP], 2018).   
• GDP per capita: 1,650 (2011 ppp$) (UNDP, 2018).


---
*Page 117*
---

Domestic Product (GDP) 
per capita)   
What do national 
statistics/census say about 
women's economic 
situation (employment 
rate? Average income? 
Gender pay gap? Any data 
on gender differences in 
the informal sector? And in 
the agricultural sector?)   • At the national level, the net activity rate according to the 
International Labour Organization (ILO) is 85.9 per cent for 
men against 78.8 per cent for women, a difference of 7.1 
points (Social Scoreboard, 2017).  
• Women's economic participation is lower than that of men, 
although higher than the African average: 77 per cent of 
Burkinabe women were active in 2016 compared with 63 
per cent south of the Sahara. This has not increased since 
2006 (OECD, 2018) and is conf ined to the informal sector. 
In 2015, women accounted for only 24 per cent of 
employees in the public and formal private sectors (Centre 
d'Information et de Formation en matière de Droits 
Humains en Afrique [Centre for Human Rights Information 
and Training  in Africa – CIFDHA] et al., 2017).  
• Female employment is precarious and vulnerable. This 
labour -force is mainly composed of family workers (35 per 
cent), providing 80 per cent of the unpaid labour on family 
farms and businesses. In other cases, women are self -
employed in agriculture (25 per cent), trade and crafts (15 
per cent) (OECD, 2018). The same report speaks of 
“opportunity entrepreneurship” for men and “survival 
entrepreneurship” for women, with a strong over -
representation of women in the informal sector (OECD, 
2018).  
• The Global Gender Gap Report (2011) gives Burkina Faso 
0.77 for gender pay inequality, where 0 represents perfect 
equality and 1 represents complete inequality.      
What is the situation in 
terms of access to financial 
resources for men and 
women in the area (access 
to banking? Microcredit? 
Savings account? Self -help 
group?)   • In 2017, 51 per cent of men had a bank account compared 
with 34 per cent of women. 12 per cent of women and men 
have money saved in a financial institution (World Bank 
Group, 2017).  
• Precise data on the number of women benefiting from 
microfinance projects or self -help groups were not found. 
However, many initiatives target women in particular: the 
government has created funds to enable women to access 
credit, such as the Support Fund for the Income -Generating 
Activities  of Women Farmers (FAAGRA) and the Support 
Fund for Women's Income -Generating Activities (FAARF). 
These funds, directly managed by government structures, 
have enabled organized women’s groups to access 
microcredit, without collateral, on the basis of a thi rd-party 
guarantee. Access to microcredit for the rural poor, 
especially women and youth, remains a challenge 
(International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), 
2018).   
    
What is the situation in 
terms of access to land? 
Property rights?    • Article 15 of the Constitution guarantees the right to 
property for all and the agricultural and land tenure reform 
gives women equal access to land, yet in practice women 
continue to have little access to land (AFD, 2016).   
• The patrilineal- filiation system and the principle of 
exogamy means that women are often excluded from 
inheriting land (Konaté, 2006).  The Konrad -
Adenauer -Stiftung 
report (2016) 
provides regional 
data on land -use 
disaggregated by 
gender. Programmes 
such as the Land


---
*Page 118*
---

• Land is generally made available to women on a temporary 
basis and not for use as a landowner (Konrad- Adenauer -
Stiftung, 2016).   Security Project have 
enabled more women 
to access land, but 
difficulties remain 
and the report notes 
that some women 
abandon the process 
under the weight of 
social pressure and/or 
threats from their 
husbands.    
 
b- Climate  and gender  in the proposed  project/program  footprint  area 
 
 at the national level  
 
Guiding questions  Gender equality – national level  
How are the national climate 
policies and strategic plans 
(National Adaptation Plans (NAPs), 
National Determined Contributions 
(NDCs), other) addressing gender 
issues? (Include policy name, date)   • The gender dimension is not very visible in Burkina Faso's NDC (2015). It 
is stated that the Coordination Unit will work with other ministries on 
cross -cutting themes, including the Ministry for the Promotion of 
Women and Gender [sic].   
• The NAP (2015) pays more attention to this issue and uses vulnerability 
analysis to propose climate change adaptation measures for activity 
sectors and for different social groups: Gender mainstreaming is one of 
its guiding principles (“Gender mainstreaming: the adaptation options 
identified in the NAP require the participation of men and women in 
actions for greater relevance and significant impacts. Therefore, in view 
of women's increased vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate 
change and their participation in development, gender mainstreaming in 
the implementation of actions is  necessary”). For the development of the 
NAP, Burkina Faso set up a multi- sectoral and gender -sensitive team of 
experts in the following sectors: (i) Agriculture, (ii) Animal production, (iii) 
Environment and natural resources, (iv) Meteorology, (v) Energy , (vi) 
Health, (vii) Infrastructure and housing, (viii) Women's associations, (ix) 
Civil society organizations (NAP, 2015).   
What are the governmental bodies 
(Ministry? Agency? Office?) in 
charge of the interface between 
these issues?    • Ministry of Environment and Fishery Resources, Ministry of Women, 
National Solidarity and the Family, sectoral ministries.    
What are the priority sectors 
targeted by climate change -related 
NAPs and NDCs?   • NAP pillars of accelerated growth: agriculture, livestock, forestry, energy 
and infrastructure, food and nutrition security, water resources, physical 
security of people and property, natural ecosystems and health.   
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC): sustainable land 
management, forestry, energy, environmental education and food.   
Are there national programmes 
addressing each climate change 
and gender inequality 
independently or in an integrated 
manner?    • Africa Hydromet  Program – Strengthening Climate Resilience in Sub -
Saharan Africa: Burkina Faso Country Project includes a Gender Action 
Plan (Green Climate Fund, 2018).   
• Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Policy for 
Gender  Mainstreaming in Energy Access (Green Climate Fund, 2019).   
• The gender dimension is taken into account in national climate action in 
the areas of health, energy and finance according to UNDP (2016).


---
*Page 119*
---

How does the government frame 
both issues?    • Vulnerability of women: "People who are weak like women" (Politique 
Nationale de Sécurisation Foncière en Milieu Rural [National Rural Land 
Security Policy], 2007).   
• “Women are more vulnerable to climate change than men.”  "The most 
vulnerable groups are among the rural poor (women, youth, small- scale 
farmers)” (NAP, 2015).   
• But the important role of women in development and the need to 
strengthen their participation and capacities is also recognized (NAP, 
2015).    
• UNDP lists Burkina Faso as one of the countries for whom “gender 
equality is referred to as cross -cutting, mainstreamed or a pillar in either 
the INDC or national climate change policy; national (sustainable) 
development planning, strategy or policy; national vision or commitment 
for development; or the national constitution” (UNDP , 2016).   
Are there any policies specifically 
referring to gender equality/social 
inclusion in climate change 
initiatives (both adaptation and 
mitigation)? Any background 
studies?   • The NAP proposes a “Women's Adaptation Plan” which includes three 
projects:    
Project 1: Training/information/awareness -raising for women's associations   
o Strengthen the initial literacy skills of women members of 
associations in the areas of non- timber forest products, market 
gardening, wood energy, traditional pharmacopoeia, household 
waste management and sanitation, processing of fishery 
products, agriculture and livestock.   
o Raise awareness among women for effective participation in 
local governance.   
o Strengthen women’s and men’s capacities in gender and 
women's leadership.   
Project 2: Strengthening the resilience and adaptive capacity of women's 
associations to climate change through the implementation of income -
generating activities   
o Strengthen the capacities of women's associations in 
running income -generating activities for women’s 
empowerment.    
o Ensure that irrigation water levels at market gardening sites 
are managed by restoring wells and boreholes.    
o Improve nutrition among the most vulnerable groups 
(women and children) by making available sufficient quantity 
and quality of products.    
o Equip women with appropriate equipment and technology 
to carry out their activities.   
o Increase cereal and market gardening production to 
contribute to food security.   
Project 3: Research on good adaptation practices that benefit and reach 
women (NAP, 2015)   
o Incorporate local traditional knowledge into research 
strategies to improve women’s climate change adaptation 
practices.    
o Mainstream improved technologies that are less physically 
constraining and less costly to implement.   
 
National benchmarks result in low -carbon, gender -sensitive and sustainable 
second -generation regional and communal development plans.   
  
Are there international 
organizations supporting the 
government on gender and climate 
initiatives?    • Burkina Faso has received financial support from Denmark, Japan, Global 
Environmental Finance (GEF) and UNDP to support the Burkina Faso NAP 
process (NAP, 2015) and to jointly implement all three projects (closed 
since 2012):


---
*Page 120*
---

-  Capacity -building on adapting and reducing vulnerability to 
climate change in Burkina Faso (Programme d’Action 
National d’Adaptation [National Adaptation Programme of 
Action] for Climate Change (NAPA -BKF-UNDP/Danish 
International Development Agency (DANID A))  
  
- Adaptation to climate change for improved human security 
in Burkina Faso (NAPA -BKF-UNDP/DANIDA)   
  
- Capacity -building for better integration of climate change 
adaptation concerns into the preparation and 
implementation of development plans, proj ects and 
programmes (NAPA -BKF-UNDP/Japan).    
  
Are there background studies on 
both adaptation and gender?   • Sophie Rigg, Emma Lovell, Florence Pichon (2016). Assessing gender in 
resilience programming: Burkina Faso.   
• Oxfam (2011). Climate Change and Women Farmers in Burkina Faso, 
Impact and Adaptation Policies and Practices . Burkina Faso.   
• Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) (2014). 
Subnational study, focus on the Yatenga .  
• Frances Crowley, Chesney McOmber, Camilla Audia, Alexander Ritchie, 
Mark Pelling, Emma Visman (2017). Building resilience by challenging 
social norms: Towards a gender transformative approach in BRACED. 
(Subnational study).   
What do available studies say 
about the anticipated differences 
in men’s and women's vulnerability 
and adaptive capacity to climate 
change?   • Women’s workload, which combines productive, reproductive and 
community responsibilities, is already greater and may become even 
more difficult to manage.    
• Women are less educated and have less access to the means of 
communication through which climate information is transmitted (Rigg, 
Lovell and Pichon, 2016). They also have limited access to tools and 
technologies that could facilitate their work on the lan d (Oxfam, 2011). 
Women have less decision -making power within households (and 
therefore less influence on adaptation strategies) (Rigg, Lovell and 
Pichon, 2016).    
• During periods of food insecurity, women are less likely to migrate than 
men. They are less mobile because of dependency in the form of 
pregnancies or young children. Some return to live with their families 
(Rigg, Lovell and Pichon, 2016). The possibility for men to migrate and 
obtain paid employment makes them less dependent on natural capital 
than women, even though women have very little decision- making 
power over this capital, which remains predominantly controlled by men 
(Oxfam, 2011).   
• Women are more vulnerable to food insecurity (Oxfam 2011), as they are 
responsible for caring for those who cannot work or support themselves 
materially (Rigg, Lovell and Pichon, 2016). Similarly, few women are able 
to save in preparation for hard times as  they use their income to provide 
for their family (Oxfam, 2011). Vulnerability to food insecurity, as well as 
the high number of childbirths for many women, contributes to a high 
risk of poor health for women (Oxfam, 2011).   
  
What do available studies say 
about existing gender inequalities 
that may be exacerbated by 
climate change impacts?   • Climate change could affect, directly or indirectly (by increasing male 
migration, in particular), women's already -heavy workloads and the 
reconciliation of their multiple responsibilities: productive, domestic and 
community. Women's vulnerability to food insecurity, already more 
pronounced than men's, could also be increased (Oxfam, 2011; Rigg, 
Lovell and Pichon, 2016).


---
*Page 121*
---

 
C-  Gender -specific challenges for the programme   
 
Guiding questions  Gender equality  
What are the targeted regions or 
local government to be supported 
by LoCAL? What challenges can we 
anticipate?    • The targeted regions/local governments are not yet known.    
• At the national level: The “status of women in Burkinabe society and their 
poor access to education and information [...] In Burkina Faso, as in other 
Sahelian countries, the enrolment rate of girls is low compared with boys. 
Without access to education, women find themselves at a disadvantage 
because they are excluded from discussions on the s ustainable 
exploitation and protection of natural resources” (NAP, 2015).   
• The National Gender Policy identifies three risk factors that may 
jeopardize its implementation:  
(i) Gender resistance (“there is individual and collective mental resistance to 
accepting equality between men and women. These resistances are all 
the more worrying as they appear among certain opinion leaders”).   
(ii) Sociocultural burdens (“the persistence of sociocultural burdens 
reinforces gender inequalities and resistance to change. The aggravating 
factor is the low level of education and illiteracy of a large part of the 
population (men and women)”).   
 (iii) The inadequacy of resources (“the insufficient resources allocated 
by the State for the implementation of the National Gender Policy which 
will require significant technical, financial and human resources; 
technical and financial partners not fulfill ing t heir commitments and the 
weakness of their contribution; and disregarding the principle of 
fungibility that can lead to very complex management procedures and 
the extension of disbursement deadlines”) (National Gender Policy, 
2009).    
What are their capacities in both 
sectors (human, technical, financial 
capacities)?   • This issue will be addressed once the regions/locations are known.    
What are local government’s 
responsibilities and attitudes vis -à-
vis gender mainstreaming in 
development planning?    • This issue will be addressed once the regions/locations are known.    
What is the typical participation (or 
lack thereof) of women in decision -
making processes at the local 
government level? How many 
women are part of the local 
government decision -making 
committee?   • According to Oxfam, women's organizations take part in community life 
and are consulted in decision- making processes. However, their 
participation remains low and their representation at the provincial, 
regional and national levels is minimal (Oxfam, 2011) .  
• The NAP stresses that despite the active role of women in natural 
resource work, they do not have decision -making power over water 
resources and forests (NAP, 2015).   
• At the local level, an Overseas Development Institute (ODI) study admits 
that it was difficult to capture and represent women's specific opinions 
and needs because women were more silent and reluctant to share (Rigg, 
Lovell and Pichon, 2016).   
• By 2015, women will occupy 13 per cent of parliamentary seats and 13 
per cent of ministerial positions. There has never been a female head of 
state (Global Gender Gap Report [GGGR], 2015).    
Have any 
projects/activities/decisions been 
implemented by the local 
government to support women's 
rights and/or empowerment in the 
past in the area of intervention?   • This issue will be addressed once the areas of intervention are known.


---
*Page 122*
---

Are there any women’s 
organizations, women's groups 
and/ or gender advocates present in 
the area of  intervention? If so, what 
do they focus on? Who is the main 
point of contact? Are they involved 
in local development planning? In 
the implementation and 
maintenance of 
initiatives/infrastructure? What are 
their capacities like?   At the national level:    
 
• Le Mouvement Burkinabé des Droits de l’Homme et des Peuples [Burkina 
Faso Movement for Human and Peoples' Rights] (MBDHP): human rights 
non-governmental organization (NGO) created in 1989. Carries out 
advocacy, training and awareness -raising activities to promote women's 
rights and provides legal advisory services.    
• Réseau de Communication d’Information  et de Formation des Femmes 
dans les ONG [Network for Communication, Information and Training of 
Women in NGOs] (RECIF/ONG -BF): seeks to contribute to the 
strengthening of the positions and decision- making power of women in 
associations through communicati on, information and awareness -raising 
activities.    
• Association des Femmes Juristes  du Burkina Faso [Association of Female 
Legal Practitioners in Burkina Faso] (AFJBF): created in 1993, this 
association aims to “fight for the promotion of law and against all forms 
of discrimination against women”. Partners: Canadian Centre for 
Internatio nal Studies and Cooperation (CECI), World Bank, UNDP, US 
Embassy, Canadian Embassy, German Agency for International 
Cooperation, Courants de Femmes [Women’s Movement], Agence 
Intergouvernementale de la Francophonie 150 [Intergovernmental 
Agency of La Franc ophonie], Avenue de l’Union Economique et 
Monétaire Ouest Africaine [West African Economic and Monetary Union] 
(UEMOA) Ouagadougou. Tel.: (+226) 5033 5307. Fax: (+226) 5033 5307. 
E-mail: afj -bf@cenatrin.bf – contact.    
• Association Femmes Solidarité – Femmes Chefs d'Entreprises [Female 
Solidarity Association – Female Business Leaders]: association created in 
1990, bringing together businesswomen. 01 BP 1638. Tel.: (+226) 5035 
0171 Fax: (+226) 5035 0171 E- mail: noomde@cara mail.com or 
noomde@gmail.com.    
• Association Kebayina des Femmes du Burkina [Kebayina Burkinabe 
Women’s Association]: through awareness -raising and training activities 
among the most disadvantaged strata, the association seeks to “stop 
retrograde practices and ideas that hinder women’s de velopment”. E -
mail: akebayinafb@hotmail.com.    
• Association pour la Promotion de la Femme et la Sauvegarde de 
l’Environnement [Association for the Promotion of Women and the 
Safeguarding of the Environment]: created in 1999, this association 
involves several activities, including raising awareness of en vironmental 
issues and raising women’s overall awareness and literacy, as well as 
promoting their access to credit. Partners: Swiss Agency for 
Development and Cooperation (ENABEL), Canadian Local Initiatives 
Canada Fund for Local Initiatives (CFLI), Parten ariat pour l’Education Non 
Formelle [Partnership for Non- Formal Education] (PENF, Canada). Sector 
29 – Behind the Lycée Scientifique [Science High School], near SIAO 06 
BP 9129 –  Ouagadougou 06. Tel.: (+226) 61 33 93.   
  
• Association Tin -Mua – Femmes, Battons -Nous [Women, We Fight]: the 
association works on several subjects, including poverty (setting up a 
tontine), illiteracy, unwanted pregnancies and HIV and AIDS, FGM, forced 
or early -marriages and desertification. BP 120  – Ouahigouya. Tel.: (+226) 
23 28 26/+226 55 08 25. E- mail: Mailsazetou@yahoo.fr –  Mrs Awa Maïga 
(President).    
• Appui Moral Matériel et Intellectuel à l’Enfant [Material and Intellectual 
Moral Support for Children]: works in particular on raising awareness 
among women and men on the use of contraceptive methods. The


---
*Page 123*
---

President of the association, Cécile Beloum, is a member of the network 
of Francophone women formed at the end of the Kinshasa Forum and is 
active alongside State family planning facilities in the Nord Region. Cécile 
Beloum (President, former Minister of Parliamentary Relations). E -mail: 
cecile.beloum@yahoo.fr.    
• Association Songui Manégré/Aide au Développement Endogène [Songui 
Manégré Association/Support for Internal Development] (ASMADE): 
combats poverty and works to promote social rights in Burkina Faso. 
Nearly 15 years after its creation, the association direct ly or indirectly 
reaches more than two million people in various sectors: education, 
health, training and employment. With funding from the French 
Embassy, PAJE, a youth centre where Burkinabe meet to develop cultural 
projects, train or look for work, was created. Ms Juliette Compaore 
(founder and member of the network of Francophone women formed at 
the end of the Kinshasa Forum). E -mail: asmade@ongasmade.org.    
• Fonds National pour l'Alphabétisation et l'Education Non Formelle 
[National Fund for Literacy and Informal Education] Ms Alice 
Tiendrébéogo (Director, former MP, former Minister of Education in the 
1990s and member of the network of Francophone women forme d at 
the end of the Kinshasa Forum). E -mail: astiendre@gmail.com.    
• Fonds d’Appui aux Activités Rémunératrices des Femmes [Support Fund 
for Women's Income -Generating Activities] (FAARF – under the control 
of the Ministry of Economy and Finance): support for women’s income -
generating activities, access to credit. 01 BP 5683  Ouagadougou.   
• Association Développement et Eveil Pugsada [Association of Support and 
Awakening Pugsada] (ADEP): ADEP was created in 1995 and was 
recognized in 2013 by the Government of Burkina Faso as a public non -
profit organization. Founded with 11 members, ADEP now h as 57 active 
members. Its main objective is to work to improve the legal status and 
socioeconomic living conditions of young girls in Burkina Faso. Member 
of the Réseau des Observatoires de l’Egalité de Genre [Network of 
Gender Equality Observatories] (ROE G). Partner: Genre en Action 
[Gender in Action]. Address: 06 BP 6691 Ouagadougou 06, Burkina 
Faso/Website: http://pugsada.org/ Contact: Agnès OUBDA, President. 
Tel.: (+226) 70 26 80 60. E- mail: agnesoub@yahoo.fr. Hortense LOUGUE, 
Coordinator. Tel.: (+226) 70 2 6 35 76. E- mail: 
louguehortense@yahoo.fr.    
• Coalition Nationale pour l'Education Pour Tous [National Coalition for 
Education for All] (NC -EFA/BF): created in the aftermath of the World 
Education Forum (held in Dakar in 2000 and focused on education for 
all), the CN -EFA/BF is a grouping of 27 civil s ociety organizations. Its main 
mission is to ensure the implementation of the commitments made by 
the heads of state and government for universal achievement by 2015. 
One of the Coalition's specific objectives is to monitor the commitments 
made by decision  makers in the area of girls' schooling. Member of the 
Réseau des Observatoires de l’Egalité de Genre [Network of Gender 
Equality Observatories] (ROEG). Partner: Genre en Action [Gender in 
Action]. Address: 05 BP 6515 Ouagadougou 05, Burkina Faso/Website: 
www.cneptbf.org. Samuel DEMBELE, President of the Coalition. Tel.: 
(+226) 70 29 90 10. E- mail: dembelesam_hotmail@hotmail.com. Tahirou 
TRAORE, National Coordinator. Tel.: (+226) 25 38 83 72; (+226) 70 26 79 
16; (+226) 76 26 79 16. E- mail: traoretahirou2005 @yahoo.fr.   (AFD, 
2016).   
 
At the local level  :


---
*Page 124*
---

• Association des femmes burkinabé de ouahigouya [ouahigouya 
burkinabe women's association]: created in 1977, this association now 
has 3,200 members. It works on education for girls and women as a 
priority, but also on access to water (construction of wells in partnership 
with the groupement des femmes de vence-ouahigouya [the vence -
ouahigouya women’s group]), information and awareness -raising and 
the economic promotion of women through training in income -
generating activities. Partnership and support from th e swiss agency for 
development and cooperation. Tel.: (+226) 40 55 04 58 fax: (+226) 5031 
1966. E- mail: afbo@fasonet.bf – ms madina (president).  
• Association pour la formation et l'insertion de la jeune fille [association 
for the training and integration of young girls]: an association that has 
been in existence since 1998 offering training in sewing, dyeing, 
embroidery and making bogolan to young g irls in two neighbourhoods of 
ouagadougou. Products are produced and marketed through the 
association, which is under the supervision of the ministry of women, 
national solidarity and the family. Bp 4979 ouagadougou (near 
pharmacie de la savane, sector 3).  Tel.: (+226) 5031 6176/+226 5030 
2281. E- mail: mailafijef@yahoo.fr – ms felicite tiendrebeogo (president).  
• Association des femmes pag -la-yiri de zabre [pag -la-yiri women's 
association of zabre]: an association whose aim is “to contribute to the 
development of women living in rural areas by meeting their daily needs 
and concerns”. Main partners: the burkinabe st ate and its devolved and 
decentralized structures, the permanent secretariat of non -
governmental organizations (spong), the national fund for literacy and 
non- formal education (fonaenf), the network for access to essential 
medicines (rame), emmaus internat ional, emmaus africa, emmaus 
finland, ngo croix du sud (italy), nouvelle planète [new planet] 
(switzerland), international institute of communication for development, 
european union (eu), ico foundation and ngo martta (finland). 09 bp 335 
ouagadougou. Tel.: (+226) 5036 3400/+226 5036 3400 e -mail: 
paglayiri@fasonet.bf.    
 
 
 
 
IVORY COAST  
Summary: challenges of integrating gender equality into adaptation and resilience programmes in Côte d’Ivoire  
The strategic vision in the Côte d'Ivoire National Development Plan (NDP) 2016 –2020 calls for better 
integration of gender and environmental issues into public policies. There is even a dedicated budget 
for this. However, there is as yet no clear implementation of this vision. Despite there being a directorate responsible for promoting gender mainstreaming in all sectoral policies, within the Ministry for Women, the Family and Children, it lacks sufficiently competent staff supported by an adequate budget t o 
monitor the effective integration of equity issues within other government entities. Thus, the gender 
units that were relaunched in 2014 to support sectoral policies in each ministry have not been 
maintained and are now almost non -existent (with the exce ption of the gender unit in the Ministry of 
Agriculture, and the gender focal points in the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development) and inoperative due to a lack of human capacity and budget.  
 
Gender is clearly seen as a donor priority and therefore an opportunity to receive funding.  It is in this 
context that the National Gender and Climate Change Strategy enables the National Climate Change Programme (NCCP) to confirm the State's willingness to integrate gender issues into efforts to mitigate


---
*Page 125*
---

and adapt to climate change. However, as there is wide disparity in knowledge and understanding of 
the concept between different government representatives, the term “gender” is being superficially 
integrated into policy documents and project proposals to make them more “gendered”. This is 
contributing to removal of the political dimension of gender inequality and the actions needed to 
address it. Thus, there is a gap between the commitment to gender mainstreaming shown by the various 
stakeholders in adapta tion initiatives and the effective translation into programmes that work to 
promote gender equality in all sectors and at all levels.  
 
There are few examples of policy documents where gender issues are integrated and documented in 
depth.  Many decision makers sum up gender as women's issues and give examples of one- off projects 
where women's groups were supported and where awareness -raising activities were carried out, 
particularly during International Women's Rights Day, on 8 March each year. A notable exception is the 
work carried out by the Fonds Interprofession nel pour la Recherche et le Conseil Agricole 
(Interprofessional Fund for Agricultural Research and Advisory Services –  FIRCA). It has a department 
dedicated to Gender and Environment, which has created an Agricultural Gender Platform to bring 
together local p artners from each sector. FIRCA’s experience, and the network on which it draws, could 
be a valuable asset in determining the scientific studies to be conducted in the agricultural sector, and 
the consultations to be carried out to better understand the va rious issues in climate change adaptation.  
 
It will be essential to generate knowledge that is better informed about current inequalities in Côte 
d'Ivoire, and their impacts on different socioeconomic groups, to enable relevant adaptation planning.  
There is a clear need for scientific studies that document the impacts of current and future climate 
change at regional, national,  and local scales and the implications for different sectors and populations. 
Studies into the co -benefits of inclusive adaptation from an economic, social,  and environmental po int 
of view could support advocacy by gender teams/departments within the different State entities so they can receive more institutional and financial support.  
It is important that commissions for studies communicate clear requirements on integrating gender into research methodologies (for example, through terms of reference that require gender analyses in each 
study and data disaggregated by sex and age). Ultimately, all environmental assessments, feasibility 
studies, project proposals and logical frameworks for monitoring and evaluation must reflect gender 
considerations. In parallel, the Indicators on Gender, Poverty, the Environment and Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals in African Countries, compiled by the African Development Bank, 
provide a basis to support both the identification of relevant indicators for the National Adaptation Plan 
(NAP) and a baseline.  
 
a- Country gender overall situation: rights and status of women in the country  
 
Guiding questions  Analysis – national level  
What are the national policies 
covering gender issues?  
(include policy name, date)  
Programmes/action plans?  • The National Development Plan (NDP) 2016 –2020 provides for better 
integration of gender and the environment into public policies, although 
gender is not explicitly considered in climate -related development 
objectives.  
• The 2009 National Policy on Equal Opportunities, Equity and Gender promotes the elimination of gender disparities in all development sectors, 
and equitable access to and control of resources. The policy also refers to 
eradicating discrimination, including 
violence against women. This 
document was updated in May 2018 and is still awaiting adoption by the Government.
 
• The topic of gender does feature in policy documents (particularly in the 
revised Constitution and in the NDP), but there is a gap between


---
*Page 126*
---

references to the issue in the national policy document and its effective 
translation into laws, decrees and programmes that work to promote 
equality in all sectors and at all levels. There are few examples of policy 
documents where gender issues are integ rated and documented on the 
basis of gender analyses.  
Who is the governmental body 
(Ministry? Agency? Office?) in 
charge of gender issues?  • Ministry for Women, the Family and Children (12 July 2018):  
• Directorate for the Promotion of Equality and Gender  
Directorate for Promotion and Empowerment of Women  
• The National Observatory for Equality and Gender (ONEG)  Decree No. 
2019- 592 of 3 July 2019 on the creation, structure and operation of ONEG.   
• The 14 gender units created within technical ministries in 2007 have not 
been maintained and are now almost non- existent and inoperative (see 
the inventory of the gender units carried out by the African Development 
Bank in 2015). The exception is the gende r unit of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, created by decree in 2016, which brings together established focal points in each department of the Ministry. However, these focal 
points are not gender specialists, apart from the Secretary -General of the 
Unit, and have demonstrated a need for capacity -building.
 
• Gender focal points are not appointed in all ministries, and their 
appointment is often informal rather than official (through internal mail). 
They receive no capacity -building, their role is little valued, they are not 
allocated any budget and their decis ion-making power is almost nil.  
• The Directorate for the Promotion of Equality and Gender at the Ministry 
for Women, the Family and Children (2018).  
• The ONEG is the entity responsible for monitoring the integration of gender into development policies, to boost gender equity and equality, but this entity is not supported by sufficient funding. The ONEG is also an 
appeals body for individuals experiencing discrimination or violations of 
their rights.  
• The gender audits carried out in four ministries, and those to come, are an opportunity to better understand the barriers to integrating equality considerations in the various sectors, and to support the mapping of the 
institutional capacities of each ministry. This is on the condition that these 
audits are shared with other departments, which is not the case at 
present.  
Are gender -disaggregated 
data/statistics available?  • Yes, but only in reports by international organizations and in some 
sectoral development policy documents:  
• Analyse Genre Du Programme De Coopération Cote D’ivoire [Gender 
Analysis  for the Côte d’Ivoire Cooperation Programme] – UNICEF (2003–
2007)  
• Le Rapport de la Mise en Œuvre de Beijing, 20 ans après [Report on 
Implementation of the Beijing Declaration, 20 years after its adoption] 
(Ministry of Solidarity, 2014)  
• Le Rapport de la Mise en Œuvre de Beijing, 25 ans après [Report on 
Implementation of the Beijing Declaration, 25 years after its adoption] 
(Ministry for Women, the Family and Children, 2019)  
• Profil genre de la Côte d'Ivoire  [Gender profile for Côte d’Ivoire] (African 
Development Bank [AfDB], 2015)  
• Are Women the Key to Unlocking Economic Emergence in Côte d’Ivoire? 
Report (World Bank, 2018a)  
• Household Living Standards Survey (National Institute of Statistics [INS], 2015)  
• Les Indicateurs sur le genre, la pauvreté, l’environnement et progrès vers


---
*Page 127*
---

les objectifs de développement durable dans les pays africains  [Gender, 
poverty, environment indicators and progress towards the Sustainable 
Development Goals in African countries]  (AfDB, 2017)  
• International databases such as the World Bank's Gender Data Portal (https://genderdata.worldbank.org/countries/cote -d-
ivoire) also 
provide gender -disaggregated data on the population of Côte d'Ivoire. 
According to the World Bank, 49.5% of the population  of Côte d'Ivoire 
is female: this proportion was used to calculate the number of female 
beneficiaries of the project in Côte d'Ivoire.  
What is the legal status of women 
and children in the country of 
intervention (existing gender -
responsive policies? Convention 
on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW)? Ratification of 
international laws?)  • The country is ranked 171 out of 188 countries in the United Nations 
Gender Equality Index (index of 0.814) (United Nations Development 
Programme [UNDP], 2016).  
• Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1995.  
• The Constitution of Côte d'Ivoire provides for the equality of all citizens before the law and for equal opportunities. The principle of gender equality is enshrined in the Constitution of 8 November 2016 and applied 
in various areas (articles 35, 36 and 3 7) (parity in the labour market, 
political participation and combating violence against women) (UNDP, 2017).  
• Customary law is recognized as a valid source of law by the Constitution 
insofar as it is consistent with substantive law (article 71, Constitution).  
• New laws since 2013 more favourable to gender issues: law on marriage 
that obliges spouses to manage the household jointly, law on compulsory 
schooling for all children (girls and boys) between 5 and 16 years old, civil 
service statute and labour code.  
• 
Under -representation of women in decision- making positions in the 
Administration. They are in a very small minority in elected positions, even though they represented nearly 52 per cent of voters registered on the 
2010 electoral lists (World Bank, 2013).
 
• Only 11.4 per cent of parliamentarians are women (in 2018). Only 15 out of 216 mayors are women (6.94 per cent), and only one of the 31 Regional 
Councils has a female President (3.2 per cent). Moreover, of the 30 ministers in office in the Government of Cô te d’Ivoire, over the period 
January 2017 to July 2018, only six were women (20 per cent). In State 
institutions, only 20 per cent of Presidents of Institutions, 20 per cent of 
Ministers, and 12 per cent of Ambassadors are women (Ministry for 
Women, 2019).   
• Law No. 2019 -870 of 14 October 2019 promotes the representation of 
women in elected assemblies.  
 
What are commonly held beliefs, 
perceptions, and stereotypes 
related to gender roles and status 
in the project/programme 
footprint area or the country?  • In the review of the Beijing Declaration 20 years later, the government 
concluded that the principle of gender equality must be accepted as a 
fundamental human rights principle, to break down resistance and 
deconstruct harmful sociocultural stereotypes. Po sitive discrimination or 
affirmative action is often necessary.  
• The Beijing+25 report summarizes the five main obstacles to equality:  
- non-institutionalization of gender budgeting  
- weakness of funding mechanisms  
- persistent sociocultural burdens  
- lack of temporary special measures and insufficient dissemination of 
legislation


---
*Page 128*
---

- social norms and lack of ownership of the Gender and Development 
approach  
• There are two known failings in the achievement of gender equality and 
women's empowerment: (i) failure to improve the representation of 
women in decision -making positions and elected assemblies, as 
envisaged by the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beij ing, (ii) lack 
of a mechanism for citizen oversight of actions taken by the public 
authorities in the area of gender and women's empowerment (Ministry 
for Women, the Family and Children, 2019).  
What are the gendered health 
issues (What is the maternal 
mortality rate, infant mortality 
rate, life expectancy 
(disaggregated by sex) in the 
country of intervention and/or the 
project/programme footprint 
area?)  • Young population with a high number of dependants: one out of two 
Ivorians is aged under 20 years and nearly two out of three Ivorians are 
aged under 25 years (Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, 2016a).  
• The health situation remains a cause for concern due to high morbidity 
and mortality from malaria and HIV/AIDS. Life expectancy (54.3 years in 
2015) is among the lowest in the world (AfDB, 2018).  
Do women have equal access to 
education, technical knowledge, 
and/or skill training (what is the 
educational status of girls and 
boys? Adult literacy rate, 
disaggregated by sex?)  • Access to education has improved, with an estimated primary school 
enrolment rate of 78.9 per cent in 2015 (INS, 2015).  
• Inequality of access to schooling is exacerbated by the level of poverty: 
there is a literacy rate of 56 per cent among men compared with 36.8 per 
cent among women (INS, 2008).  
What is the information in-country related to gender -based 
violence (including intimate -
partner violence, early marriage, 
FGM)?  • Prevalence of physical and/or sexual violence perpetrated by a spouse at 
least once since the age of 15 years: 26 per cent (Demographic and Health 
Survey – DHS, 2012).  
• Prevalence of physical and/or sexual violence perpetrated by a spouse in the past 12 months:  22 per cent (DHS, 2012).  
• Female genital mutilation (FGM) rates: 38 per cent; among the highest in 
West Africa, despite the fact that the practice has been prohibited by law 
since 1998 (French Development Agency [AFD], 2014).  
• 
Early marriages are prohibited by law but continue to be practised at a rate of 27 per cent (DHS, 2012). One third of girls between 15 and 19 years of age report having had at least one pregnancy. Although they do not all 
drop out of school, almost all of them fall behind and find it difficult to 
follow classes (Ministry of National Education, Les grossesses en milieu 
scolaire en Côte d’ivoire  
[Pregnancies in schools in Côte d'Ivoire], 
September 2016).  
• The Penal Code prohibits sexual harassment (article 356) and rape (article 
354: rape is punishable by five to 10 years' imprisonment (AFD, 2014)).  
What are the main issues for 
accessing justice and the barriers that women face?
 • Legal and judicial care for victims of sexual violence remains very weak. However, there are initiatives such as the decentralized legal clinics run 
by non- governmental organizations (NGOs).  
• 
Access to legal aid is hardly ever free of charge. The victims themselves 
have to bear the cost of legal actions. Apart from a facility located in 
Attécoubé – the Centre de prévention et d'assistance aux victimes des 
violences sexuelles  (Centre for Prevention and Assistance to Victims of 
Sexual Violence –  PAVVIOS Centre) attached to the Ministry for Women – 
there are no well -funded shelter and relief facilities for women and girls 
who are victims of violence, or medical, psychological an d other 
counselling.   
• There are no established measures for punishing the perpetrators of 
violent practices and acts against women such as genital mutilation,


---
*Page 129*
---

infanticide and dowry -related violence (Ministry for Women, 2019).  
What are the current indicators 
and trends related to poverty and 
development? (HDI? HDI World 
rank? GDP per capita)  • According to the latest Human Development Report, Côte d’Ivoire ranks 
171th out of 188 countries in the low human development category in 
2015 (UNDP, 2016).  
 
What do national statistics/census 
say about women's economic 
situation (employment rate? 
Average income? Gender pay 
gap? Any data on gender 
differences in the informal sector? 
And in the agricultural sector?)  • Division of labour: Women work primarily in self -sufficient gardening, 
growing crops for consumption by their own households (cassava, maize, 
bananas and other crops) while men work in commercial agricultural 
plantations (cocoa, palm and rubber) (Japan Int ernational Cooperation 
Agency [JICA], 2013). Nevertheless, women have a strong presence in all 
economic sectors: 29.9 per cent in agriculture; 31.6 per cent in industry; 
59.5 per cent in trade and 39.5 per cent in services (INS, 2015).  
• The majority of the poorest people are women: the rate of working poor 
is also higher among women (34.68 per cent) (INS, 2015). Fifty -three per 
cent of women aged 15 –64 years are economically active, compared with 
82.1 per cent of men (International Labour  Organization [ILO], 2012). 
Women's wages are the equivalent of $125 per month, compared with 
$240 per month for men, a gap of 50 per cent (World Bank, 2018a).  
• Combined unemployment rate (i.e. taking into account 
underemployment and vulnerable and informal employment): 26.5 per 
cent (Agence d’études et de promotion de l’emploi [Agency for 
Employment Research and Promotion], in AfDB, 2018).  
What is the situation in terms of 
access to financial resources for 
men and women in the area 
(access to banking? Microcredit? 
Savings account? Self -help 
group?)  • Women have unequal access to credit due to lack of collateral and 
reduced capacity to save and invest. Microcredit projects are potentially beneficial to women, but are limited in number (French Development 
Agency [AFD], 2014).  
• An adolescent girl in Côte d'Ivoire is half as likely to complete secondary education as a boy. A woman, even with the same level of education as a 
man, finds it more difficult to find a paid job, and her salary is on average 
30 per cent lower (World Bank,  2017).  
• At the national level, only 12 per cent of women have a bank account with 
a financial institution, compared with 18 per cent of men (World Bank, 
2017).  
• Within the Ministry of Solidarity, Social Cohesion and the Fight against 
Poverty, the Directorate for the Fight against Poverty is developing a 
policy to improve financial inclusion for women.  
 
What is the situation in terms of 
access to land? Property rights?  • Property rights: the law provides for equal access to land between men and women, but in practice women in rural areas have difficulty getting 
access to land (AFD, 2014).  
 
• Unequal access to land and resources: the law in Côte d’Ivoire allows 
women to purchase land, but this right is only exercised in urban areas; in 
rural areas, local customs prevent women from acquiring land (AFD, 
2014). Only 8 per cent of women hold a land title or certificate of sale, 
compared with 22 per cent of men. The difference, however, diminishes 
when customary law is taken into account (World Bank, 2017).  
 
 
b- Climate  and gender  in the proposed  project/program  footprint  area  
 
 at the national level


---
*Page 130*
---

Guiding questions  Gender equality – national level  
How are the national climate 
policies and strategic plans (NAP, 
NDCs, other) addressing gender 
issues? (include policy name, date)  • The reference policy document for climate action is currently the one 
on Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) for Côte d'Ivoire. It incorporates adaptation strategies in the areas of Water Resources, 
Agriculture, Forestry and Land -Use, and Hydrometeo rological 
Disaster Management.  
• Gender is considered as a “sector” in the NDCs, without further detail 
on the implications it has for the vulnerability of the population or of 
certain sectors, or for adaptation.  
• The Education sector is not identified as a priority sector in the NCCP 
Strategy or the NDCs, but Health is now on the list of priority sectors 
for the NAP process.  
• 
The Third National Communication provides a more comprehensive database, particularly in the sectors of Agriculture, Health, Water and 
Climate Hazards. Gender considerations are still addressed 
superficially, through specific references to the presence of women in certain sectors such as agriculture and to the need to improve their 
access to property.
 
• The 2009 National Policy Document on Equal Opportunities, Equity and Gender is not available on the Internet and is not cited in climate 
change -related reports or referred to (or known) by actors involved 
in adaptation initiatives.  
What are the governmental body 
(Ministry? Agency? Office?) in 
charge of the interface between 
these issues?  Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development:  
 NCCP , responsible for climate change issues under the supervision of 
the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development, 
created in 2012  
 A gender and climate focal point within the NCCP was appointed in 
2017  
 Gender and Social Inclusion Unit  
What are the priority sectors 
targeted by climate change -related 
NAPs and NDCs?  • As part of the NAP process, the NCCP is aiming to develop climate 
change adaptation planning by focusing on the sectors identified in 
the NDCs as being highly vulnerable: agriculture, access to water, land -use and coastal zones. Health is now added to thes e (it was 
previously identified as a sector of medium vulnerability). The forest sector is covered by the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and 
forest Degradation (REDD+) Programme.  
Are there national programmes 
addressing each climate change and 
gender inequalities independently 
or in an integrated manner?  Yes, the NCCP:  
• Gender issues will be cross -cutting for the priority sectors for 
adaptation.  
• The NCCP has also commissioned a National Strategy on Gender and 
Climate Change, expected to be completed by the end of 2019.  
• Examples of effective gender mainstreaming in sectors include the creation of the Agricultural Gender Platform by FIRCA in 2017, which brings together local partners from each sector to represent the 
interests of different socioprofessional groups. Platfor m members 
have received training on equity issues.  
• 
The work for and with the support of the Economic Community of 
West African States (ECOWAS) on gender mainstreaming in the 
energy policy of West African countries is another example of sectoral 
gender mainstreaming. A research officer within the Ministry f or


---
*Page 131*
---

Women is involved in this work. Meanwhile, energy issues are 
addressed by the NDCs.  
How does the government frame 
both issues?  • Discourse about gender among representatives of the sectoral 
ministries is highly politicized: it is a subject that is clearly considered 
a priority for donors and development partners and therefore an 
opportunity to receive funding.  
• In the consultations, many of the decision makers reduced gender 
considerations to recognition of the presence of women in certain 
sectors and the need for parity in decision -making positions. The 
importance of equality and gender mainstreaming through nat ional 
development plans is not explained, nor is it made explicit in the 
initiatives mentioned in the consultations, although stakeholders did 
put forward examples of specific projects where women have been 
supported. For example, the Ministry of Animal Re sources and 
Fisheries does a lot of work with cooperatives of women who raise 
livestock or process fishery products.  
• The problem also lies with the wording used for gender, which is not 
well understood by decision makers, and according to the ONEG, is 
perceived as a passing fad. In a book edited by UNDP and published 
in 2015, the various ministries of Côte d’Ivoire contr ibuted to 
exploration of the subject of sustainable development in relation to 
their sector. A chapter dedicated to gender and sustainable 
development, with priorities given to climate change adaptation in 
Africa, was written by the gender equality officer  of the United 
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
(UN Women) Office in Côte d'Ivoire (Allah- Kouadio et al., 2015).  
 
Are there any policies specifically 
referring to gender equality/social 
inclusion in climate change 
initiatives (both adaptation and 
mitigation)? Any background 
studies?  • The next National Strategy on Gender and Climate Change, planned 
for the end of 2019  
• The technical note by the Ministry of the Environment and 
Sustainable Development, supported by the NAP Global Network 
2018, on opportunities for mainstreaming gender in the national 
adaptation process  
• The 2018 UNDP situational analysis on gender mainstreaming in 
climate change policies, plans and programmes  
Are there international 
organizations support the 
government on gender and climate 
initiatives?  • The NAP Global Network  
• UNDP, with funding from the Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF)  
• AfDB 
• AFD, Adapt'Action Facility  
• European Union, Global Climate Change Alliance Plus (GCCA+)  
 
Are there background studies on 
both adaptation and gender?  • The technical note by the Ministry of the Environment and 
Sustainable Development, supported by the NAP Global Network 2018, on opportunities for mainstreaming gender in the national 
adaptation process  
What are the documented and 
projected climate change impacts 
that will affect the country?  • An average increase in temperature of 2 degrees, variability in rainfall and a 30 -cm rise in the sea level all along the coast are the main 
manifestations of climate change expected in Côte d'Ivoire between 
now and 2050 (World Bank, 2018b).  
• 
The direct impacts of these changes include a reduction in water resources and inland fishing areas, a delay in the agricultural season, 
an increase in disease transmission vectors, coastal erosion and an


---
*Page 132*
---

increase in extreme hydro -climatic phenomena (floods, storms, bush 
fires, drought).  
• Indirect impacts of climate change include declining agricultural and 
fishing yields, the areas suitable for cocoa cultivation being at higher 
altitudes, potentially leading to migration, land conflicts, disruption of 
livelihoods, loss of life and destruct ion of habitat and infrastructure 
through coastal erosion and disasters.  
What do available studies say about the anticipated differences in men's 
and women's vulnerability and 
adaptive capacity to climate 
change?  • A 2013 study (Kaman, 2013) includes an analysis of vulnerabilities and 
human, social, geographical and economic capacities to address 
major disaster risks at the national level, providing a relevant baseline 
for better integration of disaster risk reductio n and climate change 
adaptation activities.  
• Neither this study, nor currently any other, documents the 
differential impacts of natural hazards, disasters and climate change 
on women and men in Côte d'Ivoire. However, socioeconomic 
differences between different social groups in the composition of 
economic sectors, and unequal access to resources and decision -
making between men and women, suggest that populations within 
the different communities will not be affected in the same way. The 
sectors most affected are water resources, agriculture and coastal  
erosion, according to the AfDB’s Gender Profile for Côte d'Ivoire (2015).
 
• As part of the process for the NAP financed by the Green Climate 
Fund, a vulnerability study is needed to highlight the different impact 
of climate change on women and men by presenting their needs, 
challenges and priorities in this area.  
What do available studies say about 
existing gender inequalities that 
may be exacerbated by climate 
change impacts?  • Based on existing studies on the impacts of climate change in Côte 
d'Ivoire and West Africa, different gender roles in the agricultural, 
forestry and fishing sectors suggest that declining productivity will 
have different impacts on household livelihoods, incomes and 
resources.  
o Reduced fishing yields will have a direct impact on the 
income of fishers (the vast majority of whom are men) and 
thus on their main activity, but also along the value chain for 
fish processing, which largely employs women and young 
people. Little is known  about the impact on the prices of raw 
and processed fishery resources, the consequences for 
livelihoods along the value chains, or the alternatives 
available to men and women.  
o Declining yields in cereal production will have a major 
impact on farmers' incomes, while water stress could affect 
both cash and subsistence crops. However, the 
consequences will be different depending on the crops 
affected, and on the differing capacitie s of smallholders and 
groups to respond to change and to protect themselves or adapt. For example, negative impacts on cocoa plantations 
will more widely affect the activities of men, who are in the 
majority in this sector, but may also affect women throug h 
deforestation. 
 
o Prolonged lean seasons and food insecurity are exacerbating 
the seasonal or permanent migration of men in search of 
alternative livelihoods, and the pressure on women to 
manage the day -to-day household needs for water, food and 
energy.


---
*Page 133*
---

o The changes in temperature and rainfall that will require 
crops (such as cocoa) to move to higher altitudes will 
increase migration, pressure on land and potential land-
related conflicts. In a post -conflict context and in areas still 
vulnerable to land dis putes between nomadic pastoralists 
and farmers, these changes could carry risks of 
intercommunity violence which will affect the well- being of 
both men and women.  
o Changes in temperature and rainfall also increase the use of 
traditional and industrial fertilizers (Yeo et al., 2016) the 
environmental impacts of which are poorly documented. 
The accountability of farmers who use industrial supplies, 
the constraints they  face and the opportunities for 
implementing climate -smart agriculture need to be analysed 
from a gender perspective to better target groups with awareness -raising and support. 
 
 
• Changes in economic activity due to climate change and declining 
income (Yeo, 2016) will mainly affect those categories of people who 
are confined to certain roles or sectors, especially in an economic 
context characterized by a very significant division o f labour between 
men and women. Women have less access to productive 
employment than men, as almost all of them are employed in small and informal enterprises, which are characterized by low productivity 
and therefore they are relatively low paid. This is the case for 90 per 
cent of women, while it is only 68 per cent for men (World Bank, 
2017). This gap is even greater in urban areas, where 52 per cent of 
men hold paid employment in a formal enterprise or the public 
sector, compared with only 26.4 per cent  of women (ibid.).
 
• In addition to the impacts of climate change, anthropogenic activities 
are exacerbating environmental degradation. The rapid urbanization 
of coastal cities (movement towards Abidjan and San- Pédro) is 
contributing to the proliferation of health risks (Repub lic of Côte 
d'Ivoire, 2014a). The degradation and destruction of mangroves and 
coastal forests for domestic fuelwood or smoking of fish is 
contributing to coastal erosion (ibid.). At the same time, sand mining, 
industrial pollution and overexploitation of aquatic resources are 
impacting conservation of coastal areas and contributing to 
irreversible reduction in biodiversity (International Performance 
Computing and Communications Conference [IPCCC], 2014). How are 
different social groups involved in these ac tivities that are degrading 
the coastline? What are their constraints and how are these being addressed by the government to support environmentally sound 
economic development strategies? 
 
• Due to the lack of studies with a gender perspective, the differences between women's and men's needs, interests, vulnerabilities and 
capacities in relation to climate change adaptation are not well 
understood, and are not integrated into sectoral public policies.  
 
 
Summary of the literature  
 
Issue  Link to differential vulnerability  to climate change


---
*Page 134*
---

Economic disparities between 
men and women in the 
agricultural sector . • Poorer farmers (mostly women and young people) are less able to 
access resources (irrigation information and knowledge, seeds, 
markets, equipment and other supplies).  
• Power imbalances disadvantage small farmers when selling their 
products.  
• Smallholders have difficulty generating sufficient funds for 
investment in water management technologies, and the agricultural 
investments needed to generate higher profits and take on 
proportionally greater financial risks (Marloes et al., 2016).  
Imbalance in the right of access 
to resources (land or water).   • Women in rural areas have difficulty accessing land (AFD, 2014) due 
to customary and religious inheritance systems that discriminate 
against women. This limits their decision -making power and their 
flexibility to protect their crops or adapt to changes.  
• Women in Africa receive less than 10 per cent of the credit granted 
to smallholder farmers, and 1 per cent of all credit to agriculture 
(Oka -Balima, 2015).  
Imbalance in labour and time 
spent on domestic chores.  • Difficulties with water supply adversely affect women more than 
men: 78 per cent of households (67 per cent in rural areas and 92 per cent in urban areas) get their drinking water from an improved 
source. Nearly two out of 10 households (17 per cent) have to spend 
30 minutes or more obtaining drinking water (INS, 2012). It is mainly 
women who are responsible for fetching water; access to water is 
limited and is likely to worsen with the decrease in surface water due to climate change. This means they have t o devote a considerable 
amount of time to this task (AfDB, 2015).  
Women have higher exposure to 
vector -borne diseases, due to 
their domestic roles coupled 
with endemic health 
vulnerability in Côte d'Ivoire  
(meningitis, malaria, respiratory 
infections, diarrhoeal diseases, 
malnutrition, measles, etc.)  
(Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, 
2014a). 
 
 • This contributes to increasing the risk of mortality from infectious 
diseases and limiting prevention strategies.  
• There is a positive correlation between changes in rainfall and 
temperature and the incidence of malaria, respiratory infections and 
diarrhoeal diseases in several localities in Côte d'Ivoire. (Besancenot 
et al., 2004; Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, 2014a ).  
• Coupled with the scarcity of water reserves, health vulnerability is at 
the root of certain water borne  diseases such as cholera (Republic of 
Côte d'Ivoire, 2014 a). 
• The health system is characterized by an unequal national 
distribution of human resources for health, with a high 
concentration in the south of the country, particularly in Abidjan, 
creating an imbalance in the supply of services.There is also a 
shortage of specialized medical staff, with only five nurses and 
midwives per million population (World Bank, 2018a), a lack of 
professional development plans, and a lack of budgetary allocation 
for the remuneration of planned staff (Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, 
2016 c) . 
Unequal division of productive 
and reproductive work: a large 
proportion of employment is in 
the informal economy and does 
not benefit from social 
insurance (Republic of Côte 
d'Ivoire, 2014f ). • Women have unequal access to credit due to lack of collateral and 
reduced capacity to save and invest. Microcredit projects are 
potentially beneficial to women, but are limited in number (AFD, 
2014).  
• An adolescent girl in Côte d'Ivoire is half as likely to complete secondary education as a boy. A woman, even with the same level 
of education as a man, finds it more difficult to find a paid job, and her salary is on average 30 per cent lower (World Bank,  2017).  
• At the national level, only 12 per cent of women have a bank account with a financial institution, compared with 18 per cent of men (World 
Bank, 2017).


---
*Page 135*
---

Lack of recognition of 
indigenous knowledge in the 
Sahel (Nyong, Adesina and 
Osman -Elasha, 2007).  • This is creating a shortfall in supporting climate change adaptation 
processes (Nyong, Adesina and Osman -Elasha, 2007).  
Discrimination against women 
and girls, including gender -
based violence (see Table 1).  • The main reasons for interruption of girls' schooling are:  pregnancy, 
forced marriage, lack of financial means, and lack of drinking water 
and sanitation infrastructure in schools (AfDB, 2015).  
• The early age of marriage and pregnancy contributes to reducing economic opportunities for young women, who often have to drop out of school or give up work (Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development [OECD] Development Centre, 2017).  
• 
Women who experience physical, sexual and/or psychological 
violence on a daily basis are less likely to access and control 
resources equally and equitably with men.  
• Domestic violence reduces the resilience of survivors and their 
households in preparing for periods of stress and crisis (Le Masson 
et al., 201 9). 
 
C-  Gender -specific challenges for the programme   
 
Guiding questions  Gender equality  
What are the targeted regions or 
local government to be supported 
by LoCAL? What challenges can we 
anticipate?  • The targeted regions will be identified in the initial phase of the programme.  
What are their capacities in both 
sectors (human, technical, financial 
capacities)?  • This will be identified during the initial phase.  
What are local governments’ 
responsibilities and attitudes vis-à-
vis gender equity issues in 
development planning?  • The Beijing+25 implementation report highlights the low impact of development actions and low involvement of grass -roots 
communities:  
- Small towns and rural areas seem to be excluded from women's 
empowerment programmes and initiatives ; 
- 
There is a lack of information sharing at the grass roots level 
leading to feelings of frustration, discrimination and 
marginalization of rural communities. In Tabagne, for example, 
women say they are forgotten and feel that their situation has 
worsened ov er the past five years, despite initiatives for women . 
What is the typical participation (or 
lack) of women in decision- making 
processes at the local government level? How many women are part of 
the local government decision-
making committee?  • 
Based on data in the National Commission for Human Rights in Côte 
d'Ivoire (CCNDHCI) Annual Report 2017, and the communiqué from the Council of Ministers on 6 March 2019, women's representation in 
certain decision -making bodies seems to have stagnated belo w 
certain thresholds. The Côte d'Ivoire A
dministration currently 
includes:  
-  7 women out of 41 ministers (17.07 per cent)  
- 29 women out of 255 representatives (11.37 per cent)  
- 8 women out of 66 senators (12.12 per cent)  
- 16 women out of 201 mayors (7.96 per cent)  
- only 1 female president out of 31 regions (3.33 per cent)  
- 26.61 per cent of magistrates


---
*Page 136*
---

- 3.22 per cent of regional prefects  
- 12.32 per cent of prefects  
- 17.16 per cent of sub- prefects  
- 0 presidents of institutions  
(Ministry for Women, 2019).  
 
Have any 
projects/activities/decisions been 
implemented to support women's 
rights and/or empowerment in the 
past in the area of intervention? (by 
the local government)  • Gender -balanced early warning and conflict management committees 
established in all 31 regions of Côte d'Ivoire since 2018  
• Strengthening of the early warning mechanism of the Observatory of 
Solidarity and Social Cohesion (OSCS), with a network of more than 
1,401 male and female monitors responsible for regular collection of 
data on solidarity and social cohesion, covering all the sub- prefectures 
and the 10 communes of Abidjan, and for the publication of weekly reports: 52 reports produced in 2017, compared with 19 reports in 
2016 (Ministry for Women, 2019)
 
• Creation by FIRCA of the Agricultural Gender Platform in August 2018  
• Support for entrepreneurship, including free training from 2017 to 2019 at 15 digital centres for 1,580 vulnerable women entrepreneurs, 
in financial education, digital literacy and information and 
communication technology, and the creation by UN Women of a 
centre dedicated to women's entrepreneurship  
Are there any women’s 
organizations, women’s groups 
and/or gender advocates present in 
the area of intervention? If so, what 
do they focus on? Who is the main 
point of contact? Are they involved 
in local development planning? In 
the implementation and 
maintenance of 
initiatives/infrastructure? What are 
their capacities like?  • National Level:  
- LeadAfricaines (NGO)  
- Centre Féminin pour les droits humains de Côte d’Ivoire (CEFCI) [Women’s Centre for Human Rights in Côte d’Ivoire]  
- Compendium des Compétences Féminines de Côte d’Ivoire 
(COCOFCI) [Compendium of Women's Skills in Côte d'Ivoire]  
 
 
 
 
 
MALI  
 
Summary: Challenges of integrating gender equality into adaptation and resilience programmes in Mali  
Mali's official policies express a political will to mainstream gender issues in combating climate change. 
Mali's Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2018), for example, has a section dedicated to gend er equality. However, there is almost no mention 
of gender in other documents with more practical objectives, such as the Politique Nationale sur les Changements Climatiques [National Climate Change Policy] and the Stratégie Nationale [National Strategy] (2011). The political and legal framework for gender mainstreaming for adaptation and resilience is sometimes difficult to identify due to a proliferation of documents and it is not always clear which ones are still relevant, particularly following the disr uption caused by the conflict since 2012.  
In general, the gap between official policies and their implementation is significant. An emblematic case 
that illustrates this situation is the condemnation of the Malian State by the African Court of Human 
Rights in 2018 for non -compliance with internati onal texts on gender equality, which Mali has officially 
endorsed. In this case, it was civil society associations that sued the State, pointing to the difficulties the


---
*Page 137*
---

State and civil society face when working together on these issues. The case of the African Court of 
Human Rights also reveals the reluctance of the Malian State to transform gender norms, citing the 
priority of maintaining peace and a desire not to fuel tensions in the country by maintaining the gender status quo. The reality experienced by women in Mali is far from the equality enshrined in official documents, as evidenced by national statistics on the scale of gender -based violence (GBV), and there 
is a lack of resources to improve the situation.  
Moreover, gender is treated separately, added to rather than incorporated transversally into adaptation and resilience policies, which could suggest a concern for complying with the expectations of 
international donors rather than a real desire for mainstreaming. Gender is seen as a monolithic 
category, concerning women and girls, with an emphasis on their vulnerability (compared with that of young people and children) rather than their positive participation in resilience and adaptation efforts, or at least the potential for them to do so. These observations must, however, be set against a civil society landscape that has been active for many years and various projects at the regional level.  
 
a- Country gender overall situation: rights and status of women in the country  
 
Guiding questions  Analysis – national level  Data at subnational 
level if available  
What are the national 
policies covering gender 
issues? (include policy 
name, date)  
Programmes/action plans?  • The P rogramme National de lutte contre l’excision  
[National Programme to Combat Female Genital 
Cutting – PNLE] was established in 2002, attached 
to the Ministry for the Advancement of Women, 
Children and the Family (MPFEF).  
• A National Action Committee for the 
Abandonment of Practices Harmful to Women's 
and Children's Health (CNAPN) was created in 
1999 (United Nations Committee on the Rights of 
the Child, 2006).  
• http://bamada.net/lutte -contre -les-pratiques -
nefastes -a-la-sante -de-la-femme -et-de-lenfant -
le-crapn -et-les-clapn -se-reactivent 
• Project to support the strengthening of gender equity, launched in 2009 (MPFEF- United Nations 
Development Programme [UNDP], 2013)  
• Politique Nationale Genre du Mali [Mali National 
Gender Policy] (PNG -Mali) (MPFEF), 2011   
Who is the governmental 
body (Ministry? Agency? 
Office?) in charge of 
gender issues?  • Ministry for the Advancement of Women, 
Children and the Family   
Are gender -disaggregated 
data/statistics available?  • Yes. Mali's National Institute of Statistics (INSTAT) 
conducts the annual Modular and Permanent 
Household Survey (EMOP), which contains data on 
poverty, consumption, health and literacy 
disaggregated by gender  (http://www.instat -
mali.org/contenu/eq/ranuel17_eq.pdf ). 
• Demographic and Health Survey (DHS V – 2013, 
DHS VI – 2018): INSTAT in close collaboration with 
the Planning and Statistics Unit of the Health, 
Social Development and Promotion of the Family 
Sector (CPS/SS -DS-PF). Funding for the Mali


---
*Page 138*
---

Demographic and Health Survey VI (DHS VI) was 
provided by the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID) and the Global 
Fund.  
• This contains information on nutritional status, 
maternal health, fertility, family planning, 
household characteristics, malaria, HIV, female 
genital cutting, the status of women (employment and remuneration, participation in decision-
making and problems o
f access to care) and 
domestic violence 
(https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/SR261/SR261
.pdf). 
• International databases such as the World Bank's 
Gender Data Portal 
(https://genderdata.worldbank.org/countries/ma
li ) also provide gender -disaggregated data on the 
population of Mali. According to the World Bank, 49.5% of the population of Mali is female: this proportion was used to calculate the number of 
female beneficiaries of the project in Mali.  
What is the legal status of women and children in the 
country of intervention 
(existing gender -
responsive policies? 
Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against 
Women (CEDAW)? 
Ratification of international laws?)
 • Article 2 of the Constitution of Mali (1992) 
establishes equality between men and women: 
"All Malians are born and remain free and equal in 
rights and duties. Any discrimination based on 
social origin, colour, language, race, sex, religion 
or political opi nion is prohibited."  
• Mali has ratified the Convention on the 
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women (CEDAW) and the Protocol to the African 
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the 
Rights of Women in Africa.  
• In practice, however, discrimination persists. In 
2018, Mali was condemned by the African Court 
on Human and People’s Rights for non- compliance 
with the Maputo Protocol and CEDAW, first, 
because the legal age of marriage is set by law at 
16 years for women  (compared with 18 years for 
men), and secondly, because verification of the 
spouses' consent is not requested from ministers 
of religion, because of inequalities in inheritance 
(which is governed by religious and customary 
law, discriminating against wome n and natural 
children), and for “violation of the obligation to 
eliminate traditional practices or attitudes that 
undermine the rights of women and children” 
(African Court on Human and People’s Rights, 
2018).   
What are commonly held 
beliefs, perceptions, and 
stereotypes related to 
gender roles and status in 
the project/programme 
footprint area or the 
country?  • Female genital mutilation (FGM): 71.9 per cent of 
women aged 15– 49 years and 79.1 per cent of 
men aged 15 –59 years think that FGM should 
continue (Thomson Reuters Foundation, 2018).  
• There are 11.5 times more male than female 
heads of household (calculated based on data 
from the EMOP survey, 2018).


---
*Page 139*
---

• Women remain largely excluded from leadership 
positions: 8.8 per cent of parliamentary seats in 
Mali are held by women and 7.3 per cent of adult 
women have reached at least secondary 
education compared with 16.2 per cent of their 
male counterparts (UNDP, 2018a).  
• However, according to the International Labour Organization (ILO) (2018), the share of women in 
managerial positions is 40.1 per cent 
(https://www.ilo.org/shinyapps/bulkexplorer2/?l
ang=en&segment=indicator&id=SDG_0552_OCU
_RT_A ). 
• According to CARE, a majority of men believe that 
women should not work outside the home 
because it would prevent them from fulfilling their 
roles as mothers and wives. The report notes, 
however, that in practice many women work, 
particularly in trade or a griculture, and that their 
work contributes significantly to the livelihood of 
many households (CARE, 2013).  
What are the gendered 
health issues (what is the 
maternal mortality rate, 
infant mortality rate, life 
expectancy (disaggregated by sex) in the country of 
intervention and/or the 
project/programme 
footprint area?)  • Infant mortality: 62 per 1,000 live births (United 
Nations Inter -Agency Group for Child Mortality 
Estimation [UN IGME], 2018) 
(https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.IM
RT.IN?locations=ML) . 
• Maternal mortality in 2015: 587 deaths per 
100,000 births (World Health Organization 
(WHO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the 
World Bank Group and the United Nations 
Population Division) (WHO, 2015).  
• Life expectancy – men: 58 years; female: 59 years 
(World Bank, 2017) 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.LE0
0.FE.IN?locations=ML ).  
Do women have equal 
access to education, 
technical knowledge, 
and/or skill training (what is 
the educational status of 
girls and boys? Adult 
literacy rate, disaggregated by sex?)
 Net enrolment ratio (primary school) 2008– 2012, 
boys: 71.6 per cent  
Net enrolment ratio (primary school) 2008– 2012, 
girls: 62.6 per cent  
Net enrolment ratio (secondary school) 2008– 2012, 
boys: 36 per cent  
Net enrolment ratio (secondary school) 2008– 2012, 
girls: 23.1 per cent  
(UNICEF) 
https://www.unicef.org/french/infobycountry/mali_s
tatistics.html   
• Adult literacy rate (people aged over 15 years) in 
2017: 44.8 (men), 24.6 (women) (INSTAT Mali, 
2017– 2018).  
 Strong disparities exist 
between regions, urban and 
rural areas (see Table 3 -6, 
INSTAT, 2017– 2018).  
What is the information in -
country related to gender -
based violence (including • Early -marriage – Mali DHS (2012– 2013): one in 
five (20 per cent) women aged 25 –49 years were 
married before the age of 15. Half of the women With regard to FGM, there 
are wide disparities between 
the south/west and


---
*Page 140*
---

intimate -partner violence, 
early -marriage and FGM)?  (50 per cent) were married before the age of 18. 
Among women aged 25– 49 years, 21 per cent had 
had their first sexual intercourse before the age of 
15, compared with only 5 per cent of men in the 
same age group.  
• FGM: Prevalence is 91.4 per cent among women 
aged 15– 29 years according to the 2012 –2013 
Mali DHS. The most common type of FGM is 
“cutting, with flesh removed” (Thomson Reuters 
Foundation, 2018).  
• Data on domestic violence are subsumed under 
more general data on GBV, with a focus on 
violence related to armed conflict: “In response to 
the question ‘In the past year, have you or any 
female family member been a victim of violence?’ 
44 per cent of respo ndents answered yes in Gao, 
20 per cent in Timbuktu, 16 per cent in Bamako, 10 per cent in Kidal, 8 per cent in Mopti and 2 per 
cent in Ménaka”. The same report noted the 
increase in GBV since 2012 and the use of rape as a weapon. “From January to June 201
8, 1,306 
cases of GBV were reported, including 1,115 cases reported by Gender -Based Violence Information 
Management System (GBVIMS) users. Ten to 11 per cent of the cases reported are cases of denial 
of resources and psychological violence, while 6 –
13 per cent concern cases of forced marriage and physical aggression. Sixty per cent of GBV cases 
are sexual violence; of these, 68 per cent involve 
girls under 18 years old. Ninety -eight per cent of 
the survivors of GBV are women and girls, while 2 
per cent are boys” (Sous -Cluster Violence Basée 
sur le Genre [GBV Sub Cluster], 2018).
 
• In Mali, 96 per cent of women and girls are victims 
or survivors of GBV (DHS IV 2012 –2013). Despite 
the numerous initiatives, 54 per cent of the 
national territory lacks appropriate care services 
in this area. The political and security crisis 
triggered in 2012 and the resulting instability and 
violent extremism have increased the prevalence 
of this type of violence while limiting women’s and 
girls’ access to basic social services (UNDP, 2018a).  
 
 north/east regions. While 
prevalence among women 
aged 15– 49 years is 94.7 per 
cent in the  Kayes  region, it is 
0.9 per cent in the Kidal 
region, 1.8 per cent in Gao 
region and 44 per cent in the 
Timbuktu region (Thomson 
Reuters Foundation, 2018).  
 
The DHS V 2012– 2013 
provides relatively precise 
and recognized data that are 
essential for targeting the 
intervention areas and 
priority populations. 
Nevertheless, the political 
context in Mali has 
hampered data -collection in 
the northern regions (Gao, 
Timbuktu and Kidal, as well 
as three circles in the Mopti 
region): Douentza, Youwarou 
and Tenenkou). Although the 
northern regions are less 
populated than the rest of 
the country and only 10 per 
cent of Mali’s population is 
not represented in the study, 
this lack of evidence makes 
national comparisons of DHS data over time imprecise. 
 
 
A study published in 2014 
examined the existence of 
commercial sexual 
exploitation of children in 
certain at -risk localities in the 
cities of Kayes , Sikasso, 
Ségou , Mopti and the District 
of Bamako. Out of a sample 
of 1,472 children aged 
between 10 and 17 years, 28 
per cent (93.4 per cent of 
whom are girls and 6.5 per cent boys) were identified as 
victims of one of the three 
forms of exploitation chosen: 
prostitutio n (12 per cent, of 
whom 94.7 per cent are girls and 5.2 per cent boys), sex 
tourism (9 per ce nt, of whom 
98.5 per cent are girls and 1.4 
per cent boys), and 
trafficking for sexual 
purposes (7 per cent, of


---
*Page 141*
---

whom 84.9 per cent are girls 
and 15 per cent boys) 
(MPFEF, 2019).  
 
 
What are the main issues 
for accessing justice and 
the barriers that women 
face?  • The GBV Sub Cluster (2018) points out the 
important role of customs, habits, taboos and 
social norms, which means that many cases are 
not reported or dealt with by the authorities, but rather settled “amicably” in order to protect the 
family's image. The S ub Cluster, as well as UNDP 
(2018), also highlight the role of the precarious 
security situation, which makes it difficult to 
access GBV management services despite the 
existence of national pools of trainers on GBV case 
management: 54 per cent of the national territory 
lacks appropriate GBV management services 
(UNDP, 2018a). Another barrier noted by the Sub Cluster and UNDP (2018) is the absence of State 
authority in some places. Finally, the fear of 
reprisals, impunity, the lack of knowledge among 
survivo rs of their rights, and the financial and 
personal cost of legal proceedings are all obstacles to access to justice (GBV Sub Cluster, 2018).
 
• To this, UNDP adds that “the legislative and 
political framework is inadequate because of the 
non- harmonization of national legislation with 
international conventions, the non- insertion of 
ratified texts in the official gazette, and the 
emphasis on the rules of custom to the detriment 
of the law. As a result, Malian law continues to 
discriminate on gender (in texts such as the Family 
Code) and harmful practices such as FGM are still 
not penalized”(UNDP, 2018a), assertions that 
were corroborated by the verdi ct of the African 
Court of Human Rights (2018).   
What are the current 
indicators and trends 
related to poverty and 
development? (Human 
Development Index (HDI)? 
HDI World rank? GDP per capita)
 • Human Development Index: 0.427 ( 1 82nd out of 
188 countries) (UNDP, 2018a)  
• GDP per capita: US$ 830 (World Bank, 2018)  
• Poverty rate:  41.3 per cent (World Bank, 2019)  
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/mali/ove
rview  
• Gendered indicators: Gender Inequality Index (GII) (measures the loss of human development due to 
inequality between female and male 
achievements): 0.689 (156 out of 159 countries in 
the 2015 index). Women make up 52 per cent of 
the rural population and 64 .2 per cent live below 
the poverty line (UNDP, 2018b).   
What do national 
statistics/census say about 
women’s economic 
situation (employment 
rate? Average income? • The unemployment rate for people aged 15 –64 
years was 9.7 per cent for women and 7.5 per cent for men in 2018 (EMOP, 2018).  
• 
Unadjusted compensation differential: 62.5 per 
cent (UN Women, 2015 –2016).


---
*Page 142*
---

Gender pay gap? Any data 
on gender differences in 
the informal sector? And in 
the agricultural sector?)  • Using data from the 2003 Integrated Light 
Household Survey (ELHS), Doumbia Gakou and 
Kuépié (2008) conclude that “Women occupy a 
slightly more disadvantaged position than men, 
with more women in the informal sector. 
However, analyses have shown that when M alian 
women are educated, they have almost the same chances (or even more) than men to find their 
place in the crowded but protective public sector. 
Moreover, while women living in poor households 
are overwhelmingly present in the labour market, 
they are m
uch more likely to be relegated to 
precarious jobs in the informal sector. The same is 
true of mothers with young children who, 
although they are as active in the labour market as 
women with no dependent children under the age 
of five, are more active in t he informal sector.”  
• Agricultural sector: “Men are active in cash crops that provide more income whereas women are 
active in food crops (rice, sesame, maize, 
groundnut, cowpea, okra, etc.) intended primarily 
for family subsistence. However, more or less 
structured groups of women organize themselves in locations, to engage in activities linked to the 
cotton harvest, or in rice transplanting” (Republic 
of Mali, 2014).
 
• Women make up 52 per cent of the rural 
population and 64.2 per cent live below the 
poverty line (UNDP, 2018b).  
 
What is the situation in 
terms of access to financial 
resources for men and 
women in the area (access to 
banking? Microcredit? 
Savings account? Self -help 
group?)  • Women are 20 per cent less likely than men to have a bank account (World Bank Group, 2017).  
• Nine per cent of men have paid bills or bought 
something online in the past year, compared with 
only 3 per cent of women.  
• Twenty -five per cent of men have saved to start or 
expand a farm or business, compared with 19 per cent of women. Eight per cent of men have saved 
in a formal financial institution, compared with 4 
per cent of women. The figures are the same for 
borrowing through formal financial institutions.  
• 
Twenty -four per cent of men received a salary in 
the past year, compared with 11 per cent of 
women (Global Findex Database Data, 2017).  
• The proportion of women benefiting from 
microfinance initiatives varies, but there are some 
that are particularly or exclusively aimed at 
women, such as MIselini, Soro Yiriwaso or the First 
Microfinance Agency of Mali (ILO, 2011, Aga Khan 
Development Netwo rk [AKDN], 2018) 
(https://www.akdn.org/where -we-work/west -
africa/mali/microfinance -mali).  
What is the situation in 
terms of access to land? • Inheritance/differences between national and 
customary law.


---
*Page 143*
---

Property rights?  • Less than 3 per cent of women in Mali own land 
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, 
2011).  
• 3.1 per cent of land is owned by women, 
compared with 96.9 per cent by men (Njobe and 
Kaaria, 2015).  
• Note: Act no. 2017 - 001/ of 11 April 2017 on 
agricultural land states that “at least 15 per cent of the land developments of the State or territorial 
authorities are allocated to groups and 
associations of women and young people located 
in the area concern ed.”  
 
b- Climate  and gender  in the proposed  project/program  footprint  area  
 
 at the national level  
 
Guiding questions  Gender equality – national level  
How are the national 
climate policies and 
strategic plans (NAPs, 
NDCs, other) addressing 
gender issues? (include 
policy name, date)  • Cadre pour la Relance Economique et de Développement Durable du Mali  
[Framework for the Economic Recovery and Sustainable Development of Mali –  
CREDD]: objective: “to promote inclusive and sustainable development for the 
reduction of poverty and inequality in a united and peaceful Mali, based on the 
potential and capacity for resilience in order to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030”. Sub-target 4.1.1: “Promote decentralized 
and participatory management of renewable natural resources.”  It also proposes 
to “put in place measures to improve women's contr ol over productive land” and 
to strengthen “the involvement of local communities, non- governmental 
organizations, professional organizations, women's and youth groups” (CREDD, 2019).  
• National Climate Risk Fund: takes into account the “quality and relevance of 
activities to the problem and the approach proposed in the proposal (for example, 
gender, community involvement in implementation, etc.)” (UNDP, 2012).  
• 
The gender mainstreaming section of Mali's Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2018) mentions a 
National Climate Change Policy accompanied by a National Strategy, both 
developed in 2011.  
• However, the National Strategy makes no mention of gender or women and the 
National Climate Change Policy merely points out that another relevant 
programme (the Programme de développement économique et social  [Economic 
and Social Development Programme – PDES]) aims to "include women and young 
people in productive circuits” (2011).  
• The Programme d’Action National d’Adaptation aux Changements Climatiques 
(NAPA)  [National Action Programme for Climate Change Adaptation –  NAPA] 
(2007)  aims “to strengthen intersectoral concertation by strongly involving 
institutions representing women and young people”.  
• Plans d’Action Nationaux [National Action Plans – NAPs] (under development) 
should take gender aspects into account (Mali’s Third National Communication to 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2018).  
• Plan d’Investissement pour une Economie Verte et Résiliente aux Changements Climatiques pour le Mali  [Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -Resilient 
Economy for Mali] (2018): See next section (highlighted in blue) .


---
*Page 144*
---

• National Gender Policy:  
- This policy is cited in the various environmental policies. The document itself 
does not set out a gender -environment policy but rather an inventory and 
critique of the lack of gender mainstreaming in existing policies (in 2011).  
- “The social option remains global in its conception by considering civil society 
as a homogeneous group enjoying the same prerogatives”.  
- There is no “comprehensive gender mainstreaming" in environmental 
policies, and although they are based on the equality and empowerment of 
actors, the PNG criticizes the lack of “provision for making equal participation 
by women and men functional and prac tical”.  
What are the 
governmental bodies 
(Ministry? Agency? Office?) in charge of the interface 
between these issues?  • Ministry of the Environment, Sanitation and Sustainable Development, Agence de 
l’Environnement et du Développement Durable [Environment and Sustainable 
Development Agency – AEDD], Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children 
and the Family . 
What are the priority 
sectors targeted by climate change -
related NAPs and 
NDCs?  • The priorities identified by Mali's Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) (2016) 
are:  
- Forest management for the restoration of degraded ecosystems and 
strengthening the protection of protected areas  
- The development of intelligent and climate -resilient agriculture (State 
commitment to devote 15 per cent of the national budget to agriculture)  
- Pastoral management that is resilient to climate change  
- Rainwater harvesting and storage to contribute to universal access to drinking 
water and access to water for other uses  
- The development of renewable energies and energy efficiency (objective: to 
reach the target of 10 per cent of the energy mix by 2020, by developing 
photovoltaic, wind, hydroelectric and biomass energy)  
Are there national 
programmes addressing 
each climate change and 
gender inequality 
independently or in an 
integrated manner?  • Project contained in the NAPA for the “Promotion of Income -Generating Activities 
and Development of Mutual Insurance Funds” which provided technical and 
financial support for women and young people to “develop market gardening and 
livestock fattening activities for women.  
• Help to set up mutual insurance funds, savings funds and credit unions, facilitating access to credit for women and young people.  
• Strengthen the economic capabilities of women and young people" (NAPA, 2007). The NAPA also plans to involve the Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children and the Family in the steering committees of various projects covering 
different areas (food security, fisheries, etc.). However, it is difficult to know what 
became of these projects after the conflict.  
• Overall, the gender issue is relegated to a separate, unintegrated section and sets out principles rather than specifying the conditions for their implementation in practice. The statements made in the Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -
Resilient Economy for Mali (2018) speak for themselves in this regard, as the document indicates that the integration of environmental policies in different 
areas and gender policies is a task that remains to be accomplished:  “A number of 
strategic priorities must be de veloped in order to strengthen the livelihoods of 
women’s groups and vulnerable communities to increase their resilience, namely:  
  - improving access to climate -resilient water management systems for vulnerable 
communities, including women, to support their livelihood activities,  
 - 
promoting women's access to adaptation techniques (water and soil 
conservation techniques, use of improved seeds, crop diversification, compost and 
market gardening),


---
*Page 145*
---

- strengthening women's groups in rural communities and supporting their 
participation in the planning and implementation of adaptation measures to 
ensure that their needs and priorities are taken into account; -  promoting active 
participation in community  decision -making,  
- investing in innovative climate -resilient approaches and technologies for women 
and other vulnerable groups to strengthen and secure the production of local 
livelihood systems in the face of climate impacts. Accordingly, adaptation proj ects 
or programmes must be formulated and implemented to enable better gender 
mainstreaming and social inclusion”.  
 
How does the government 
frame both issues?  • The government emphasizes the vulnerability of women: “The results of the field missions indicate that women and young people are the group most vulnerable to 
the effects of climate change” (NAPA, 2007).  
• In the CREDD (2019), women are almost systematically mentioned in tandem with “young people” or children.  
• 
Mali's Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (2018): In practice, the section on gender issues in 
the Communication deals mainly with poverty reduction, without necessarily 
addressing the specific charact eristics of gender issues. The link between women 
and young people is also mentioned in this document.  
• The Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -Resilient Economy for Mali (2018) 
similarly emphasizes vulnerability, and places women and young people in the 
same category: “The main social groups who are vulnerable to climate change are:  
- women and young p eople,  
- the elderly,  
- people with a disability and orphans,  
- widows and affected people”.  
• Women's potential, rather than their vulnerability, is sometimes referred to: “Eight 
out of ten women can neither read nor write, despite the fact that they are the 
essential driving force behind all sustainable human development” (NAPA, 2007).  
• Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -Resilient Economy for Mali (2018): 
“Women play a key role in implementing prevention, adaptation and mitigation 
strategies to address the adverse effects of climate change.”  
Are there any policies 
specifically referring to 
gender equality/social 
inclusion in climate change initiatives (both adaptation 
and mitigation)? Any 
background studies?  • See above. References to specific initiatives are scarce: it is more a matter of 
principles and references to other documents/policies.  
• The Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -Resilient Economy for Mali (2018) 
lists various projects (portfolio of projects and programmes in the country), some of which include references to gender equality or social inclusion:  
- the Mali Femmes [Mali Women] Project, the Project for Scaling -up 
Renewable Energy in Mali (PAPERM)  
- the Promoting Sustainable Electricity in Rural Areas through Hybrid 
Technologies Project  
- the Project for Access to Renewable Energy Services in Kita (PASER- K)  
- the 50 MW Solar Photovoltaic Power Plant Project in Kita  
- the Project for the Implementation of a Pilot Unit for the Production of 
Biomass Fuel Briquettes in Kita ("Kitabricobiom")  
- the project for the transformation of agricultural residues and biomass into 
combustible briquettes and pellets in Mali  
- the project for the production of gum arabic to limit future migration  
- the National Biogas Development Programme in Mali  
- the project for the valorization of bioethanol for sustainable domestic energy 
in Mali


---
*Page 146*
---

- the project for the improvement of ecosystems and ecosystem services and 
the improvement of forest management and land -use  
• Note : many of these programmes are still at the project stage, and only partially 
or not yet funded.  
Are there international 
organizations supporting 
the government on gender and climate initiatives? 
 • The above projects are supported and financed by UNDP, the Least Developed 
Countries Fund, the Green Climate Fund, the French Development Agency (AFD), 
the Global Environment Facility, the European Union, the West African 
Development Bank (BOAD), the Dutch Investment Fund, Green Africa Power and 
the Dutch Development Organization (Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -
Resilient Economy for Mali, 2018).  
• GIZ: development of the Climate Proofing Tool used at the local level and which takes gender aspects into account (Mali’s Third National Communication to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2018) and 
development of a map of climate c hange projects in Mali (2017).  
• Financial support from the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and 
UNDP for the development of the CREDD and specifically “to support the 
Government in strengthening the effective integration of cross -cutting issues such 
as the environment, climate  change and gender in policies, plans and programmes 
in all sectors” (Mali’s Third National Communication to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2018).  
• Women in Agriculture and Sustainable Development (AgriFeD) programme 
initiated by UN Women ( https://africa.unwomen.org/en/news -a nd-
events/stories/2018/07/csa -mali ). 
Are there background 
studies on both adaptation and gender?
 • Least Developed Countries Expert Group (2015): “Strengthening gender 
considerations in adaptation planning and implementation in the least developed countries” (A section is dedicated specifically to Mali, but does not really analyze 
specific gendered needs/responses, instead discussing existing projects and how 
to develop them).
 
• Djoudi, Houria and Brockhaus, Maria (2011). Is adaptation to climate change 
gender -neutral?: Lessons from communities dependent on livestock and forests in 
northern Mali. International Forestry Review, vol. 13, No. 2, p. 123 -135. Available 
at: https://www.cifor.org/library/3524/ . 
• Djoudi, Houria (2016). At the intersection of inequities – Lessons learned from 
CIFOR's work on gender and climate change adaptation in West Africa. Center for 
International Forestry Research (CIFOR).  
What do available studies 
say about the anticipated 
differences in men’s and 
women’s vulnerability and 
adaptive capacity to 
climate change?  • Djoudi, H ouria  and Brockhaus, M aria (2011). “ Women cannot be viewed as a 
homogeneous  category. Variabilities are determined by and depend on wealth, 
class, age  and other social and economic categories. Women's vulnerability is 
mostly linked to natural resource dependency and poverty” (p. 124).  
• “Women and other socially marginalized groups are likely to be most vulnerable to climate change because of the socially and politically driven lack of participation in decision- making and access to power/decision- making” (p. 126).  
• 
“We argue that women are critical and strategic actors in adaptation because of their differentiated views on environmental and social change. Also important are 
their preferences in managing natural resources and their involvement in 
resource- based activi ties to secure livelihoods” (p. 127).  
• “Higher risks are related to increasing workloads without increasing incomes and 
the defeminization of agricultural activities due to the loss of former arable land 
around the lake. This is accentuated by the loss of access to land in the new 
institutional  land allocation and access systems. However, the feminization of the 
use of forest products and services has the potential to minimize the risk of vulnerability. New income -generating activities include charcoal production and 
fodder provision. Women’s wo rkload has clearly been increased by the climate


---
*Page 147*
---

event itself (drought) and by the responses to it. But some climate change -induced 
effects on women are still unclear. Charcoal production, especially based on the 
invasive species Prosopis, offers an opportunity for women to improve their 
income. However,  women are impeded by limitations related to insecure land 
tenure and social restrictions on access to markets. Male migration is increasing 
women’s workload in the short term. But in the long term, it could give women 
the social space to assume leadership in household decision-making. It could also 
allow women to get more involved in activities that were once strictly a male domain. Male and female traditional roles and activities are evolving faster under 
recurrent drought and migration. Women are increasingly undertaking 'male ' 
activities, but without acquiring automatically the same rights. Successful 
adaptation means reconsidering the usual theoretical dichotomies, in classifying 
'male' and 'female' activities. The most important question is the how the  women's 
new roles and responsibilities affect and change power relationships. We argue 
that the emerging new societal roles could empower women to negotiate new 
institutional arrangements to access and control resources. We have seen strong 
differences in  women's and men's preferences for adaptive strategies and their 
vision for adaptation. Women have a long -term perspective focused on 
educational investments and non ecosystem -based strategies. These could release 
pressure on the ecosystem.” (p. 132- 133).  
• Djoudi (2016): Women are limited in their adaptive capacity by social norms (especially with regard to mobility and diversification of livelihood activities). She 
also emphasizes the opportunities presented by the social changes that 
accompany climate chan ge adaptation strategies.  
What do available studies 
say about existing gender 
inequalities that may be 
exacerbated by climate 
change impacts?  • Djoudi, H ouria  and Brockhaus, M aria (2011). Increased workload, without a 
corresponding increase in income (caused first, by climate events themselves, and 
secondly, by the resulting migration of men).  
• Djoudi (2016): Negative effect on the education of children, especially girls.  
• Both studies also stress the possibility of positive transformations for gender 
equality through adaptation strategies.  
 
 
 
 
 
C- Gender -specific challenges for the programme   
 
Guiding questions  Gender (in)equality  
What are the targeted regions or local government to be supported 
by LoCAL? What challenges can we 
anticipate?  • Kayes and Ségou (see some data disaggregated by region in Table A, 
especially regarding GBV).  
What are their capacities in both sectors 
(human, technical and 
financial capacities)?  • For Mali in general:  
- Financing issue (PNG, 2011; many projects are awaiting funding 
Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -Resilient Economy for Mali 
(2018)) . 
- Technical: Many tools have been developed with external support 
(GIZ, UNDP, etc.), which could indicate a lack of capacity in Mali.  
• Human  resources : The Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -Resilient 
Economy for Mali (2018) points to the lack of qualified and competent 
personnel to organize and implement certain programmes, in particular,


---
*Page 148*
---

the low rate of qualified women and/or specialists in the environmental 
field.  
What are local governments’ 
responsibilities and attitudes vis -à-
vis gender equity issues in 
development planning?  • The MPFEF has not been able to fully play its roles of influencing, 
coordinating and providing advice on gender mainstreaming in the wave of 
reforms that Mali has undergone since 2002, in strategic sectors such as 
State reform, poverty reduction, health, education and rural development. 
The initiatives carried out in this direction, as, for example, in the case of 
the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (GPRSP), have met with 
resistance and constraints. It must be acknowledged that the Department was ill-prepared to play these roles of policy influence and advice and that 
its initiatives were not legitimized by a clearly defined mission to do so. 
Neither its action plan nor the configuration of its services were geared in 
this direction. Similarly, s kills in policy analysis and gender analysis were 
under development (PNG, 2011). 
 
• The PNG notes that its own implementation “will face a number of risks 
that need to be understood now so that they can be managed and 
mitigated as effectively as possible. The main risk factors relate to political will, the legal provisions to be put in place, the restructuring of the MPFEF, 
resource mobilization, the support of partners and civil society and 
resistance to change”.  
 
What is the typical participation 
(or lack thereof) of women in 
decision- making processes at the 
local government level? How 
many women are part of the local 
government decision -making 
committee?  • The report of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group 2015 is broadly positive: “In several institutions established by the Government of Mali, 
such as the National Climate Change Committee, the Agency for the 
Environment and Sustainable Development and the National Council of 
Environment, women are well represented among their members.”  
• “At the local level, the Climate Proofing Tool constitutes the main 
development tool of the municipalities. Developed in an inclusive and iterative process, it addresses inequality problems between women and 
men and also takes into account specific aspects  
of women 
empowerment.”  
• The findings of the CREDD are more ambivalent: “Women are present in 
political parties and are the main actors in elections. However, they are 
often overlooked when senior appointments are made. As a result, in most 
parties’ governing bodies, they appear o nly through their C hair or are 
poorly represented in the lists of candidates for the various elections. They 
are also poorly represented in positions appointed by the State. There are 
several women’s associations and organizations such as the Coordination 
des Associations et ONG féminines  [Coordinating Body of Women’s 
Associations and NGOs – CAFO], women economic operators and former 
female parliamentarians and ministers, working to promote gender 
equality” (CREDD, 2018).  
• Similarly: “The issue of gender in governance concerns both the low 
representation of women in the public sphere and the low level of 
responsibility to which women have access in the decision- making process. 
Accordingly, there are higher numbers of men in positions of responsibility 
in public services, in the institutions of the Republic, on the political scene 
(3 women out of 121 political party leaders), in the National Assembly (132 
men compared with 15 women) and in representation at the local level 
(9,847 male municipal council lors compared with 927 women). The judicial 
system is also largely male- dominated” (African Development Bank [AfDB] 
Group, 2011).  
Have any 
projects/activities/decisions been • The Programme Présidentiel d’Urgences Sociales  [Presidential Social 
Emergency Programme] : implementing this programme in 2017


---
*Page 149*
---

implemented by the local 
government to support women’s 
rights and/or empowerment in the 
past in the area of intervention?  contributed to significantly reducing inequalities in access to basic social 
services, including water, energy  and support for students in schools. We 
note the completion of 2,000 drinking water connections to benefit poor urban populations in Kayes, Kita, Koutiala and Sikasso (MPFEF, 2019).
 
• The Projet d’Autonomisation Economique des Femmes dans la Filière Karité  
[Project for the Economic Empowerment of Women in the Shea Subsector]  
(PAEFFK 2018 –2023).  “Implementing this project will contribute to 
strengthening economic empowerment with shea butter and stimulate inclusive growth for rural women. With CFAF 2.7 billion in AfDB funding, the 
expected achievements should help promote equitable access for fema le 
beneficiaries to decision -
making processes, basic infrastructure and 
investment operations  on the one hand, and by increasing the technical 
and organizational capacities of women's groups on the other; the project 
thus plays a strategic role in the development of inclusive growth and 
improvement of women's status. A gender- sensitive communicati on 
strategy will be incorporated into all areas of intervention. A plan is in place to establish a monitoring and evaluation system based on sex-
disaggregated data and gender -related indicators. The programme will 
benefit 400 village locations, directly affecting more than 50,000 rural women, i.e. an indirect beneficiary population of more than 800,000 in the 
production areas of 
Kayes , Koulikoro, Sikasso, Ségou  and Mopti” (MPFEF, 
2019).  
• To support access to Legal Protection, 38 Bureaux d’Assistance Juridique et Judiciaire  [Legal and Judicial Assistance Offices – BAJJ] have been set up 
with the support of the NGO DEME - SO in courts in the regions of Gao, 
Mopti, 
Ségou  and Timbuktu (MPFEF, 2019).  
• Two networks that should be included:  
- Fédération Nationale des Femmes Rurales du Mali (National 
Federation of Rural Women in Mali – FENAFER): comprises nine 
professional associations of rural women in the regions, 46 
associations of rural women in the cercles , and 703 communal 
associations of rural women in prospect. Its overarching objectives are “to increase agricultural production, ensure food security and reduce 
poverty”, and its specific objectives are “to train and inform the 
majority of rural women, equ
ip rural women, control AIDS and 
malaria, develop production chains, build water supply points and 
protect the environment”. Ms Niakaté Goundo Kamissoko (Chair)  
- Réseau des Femmes Opératrices Economiques du Mali (REFOE): the 
Malian branch of the West African Economic and Monetary Union 
(WAEMU) network of Women Economic Operators. The mission of 
REFOE -Mali is to “strengthen the organizational, technical, material 
and financial capacities of women economic operators' organizations 
in Mali”, by acting on several sectors of activity, namely 
entrepreneurship, trade, rural women and production, and 
handicrafts and processing. Faladiè Sokoura – Cités des Coopérants – 
Bâtim ent R10 Phone: +(223) 20 29 20 09 / +(223) 76 04 13 55 / +(223) 
66 75 00 33 E -mail: rfoe -mali@resope -uemoa.org  
Are there any women’s 
organizations, women’s groups 
and/or gender advocates present in the area of intervention? If so, 
what do they focus on? Who is the 
main point of contact? Are they 
involved in local development 
planning? In the implementation • At the national level, see: AfDB's Mali Gender Profile (2016) for a relatively exhaustive list:  
- 
The Gender Profile of the AfDB makes particular mention of CAFO, 
which aims to “ contribute to enhancing the status of women by 
grouping and coordinating members' actions and influencing policies”  
(https://www.cafomali.org/ ) and the Groupe Pivot Droits et 
Citoyenneté des Femmes [Focal Point for Women’s Rights and 
Citizenship – GP/DCF] whose mission is to “influence the definition


---
*Page 150*
---

and maintenance of 
initiatives/infrastructure? What 
are their capacities like?  and implementation of policies, strategies and actions for the 
promotion and defence of women's rights and citizenship in Mali”(  
http://alliancedroitsetsante.equipop.org/gp- dcf/).  Both associations 
are represented and active throughout Mali.  
- Collectif des Femmes du Mali [Malian Women’s Collective – COFEM]: 
created in 1991, this is one of the oldest Malian women's 
organizations, whose objective is “to promote the development of the 
female population by providing civic information with a view to their 
effective participation in political, economic, social and cultural life 
and more generally in the development of the country”. 
Ouolofobougou- Bolibana. BP E2790 Bamako – (+223) 23 13 09. E -
mail: cofem@cefib.com  
- Coordination des femmes entrepreneurs du Mali [Coordinating Body 
of Malian Women Entrepreneurs]: created in 2004, this grouping falls 
under the supervision of the Ministry for the Advancement of 
Women, Children and the Family. Its mission is to strengthen the organizational, technical, material and financial capacities of women’s 
economic operators’ organizations in Mali. 
Head office: Conseil 
National du Patronat du Mali BP 24 45 BAMAKO -MALI Tel: (+223) 221 
63 11 Fax: (+223) 221 90 77  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIGER  
 
Summary: Challenges of integrating gender equality into adaptation and resilience programmes in Niger  
 
Progress in gender mainstreaming in Niger  
Unlike some African countries that have belatedly taken the issue of gender into consideration in 
national policies, Niger seems to have taken the marginalization of women seriously very early on (since 
1996, in particular the Plan d’Intégration Genre et I nclusion Social [Gender and Social Inclusion Plan 
(PIGIS)], Politique Nationale de Genre 2007 [National Gender Policy (PNG) 2007], subsequently revised in 2017). In fact, national policies have existed for about 30 years, with a series of operational progr ammes on the issue and the creation of specific State bodies (Plan décennal 2009 -2018 [Ten -year 
Plan 2009–2018]; Stratégie Sectorielle pour la Promotion de l’Égalité de Genre [Sectoral Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality]; Plan de Développement E conomique et Social [Economic and Social 
Development Plan] (PDES) 2017 –2021; the country’s constitution recognizing gender equality, etc.). 
Gender has become a cross -cutting issue in all the country's development policies. At the outset, this 
reflects an a wareness of gender issues in the country, and also a strong will at very high levels of the


---
*Page 151*
---

State, brought to life through the creation of the First Lady of Niger’s Foundation dedicated to women's 
issues (Fondation Guri Vie Meilleure [Guri Vie Meilleure Foundation]).  
In addition, Niger has acceded to most of the international conventions on African women's issues 
(Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women [CEDAW], Convention on 
the Rights of the Child) and several international institutions are developing programmes to meet the needs of African women in general, and Nigerien women in particular. To this end, the World Bank carried out a study (Disrupting the Gender Divide, 2018) in four countries, including Niger, on climate change- relat ed vulnerabilities, including how these vulnerabilities are expressed in terms of gender 
inequalities. However, there are still significant challenges at the country level.  
The main challenges for the country  
The social norms, attitudes and beliefs of Nigerien communities contrast with the expectations of the 
national initiatives and policies implemented to promote women's rights. Women continue to be 
regarded as second -class citizens, along with children and y oung people. This negatively affects their 
access to basic public services. For example, women have limited access to legal, health and education services, fields vital to physical, social and intellectual development in any society. The literature review also looks at gender inequality in terms of access to land, the main source of socioeconomic development in Niger.  
The above challenges are also reflected in women’s economic situation: they are poorer than men, in other words, poverty has a female face. In 2016, the inequality index was 0.674, putting Niger in 149th place out of the 152 countries assessed. This shows that public policies on gender have not had the desired impact. These figures show that talking about gender means talking about social or societal transformation or revolution. This means it is difficult to achieve tangible results when we know that 
those who need to lead this struggle are both stakeholders and detractors (the institutions are in the 
hands of men, and men must use them to transform societies for the benefit of gender equality).  
Gender equality in Niger will be achieved through a small “cultural revolution”. Men have control of the 
main regulatory institutions (whether modern or traditional). Yet, although there is political will, serious decisions in support of women will not be taken unless there are institutions capable of leading this transformation. This has not yet been addressed. In part, this can be attributed to attitudes and beliefs that prevent some decision makers from implementing different initiatives to support women 's rights, 
or that discourage communities from implementing policies at the local level. Original scientific research is needed to determine the feasibility of this “transition” (Issue 1).  
Secondly, the documents consulted highlight a distinct lack of information on local (subnational) conditions. Niger is cosmopolitan (diverse in terms of languages, cultures, demographic dynamics, etc.). The main trends presented in the various documents do  not allow for an objective assessment of how 
conditions differ at the regional level. Given this, it is essential to plan actions specific to each region (by 
mobilizing those with knowledge of the areas and providing support in terms of capacity -building, etc.) 
(Issue 2) . 
Finally, the indicators related to education (Ministry of Planning, 2017) show women to also be at a 
disadvantage in this respect. Yet, access to decision -making positions in modern institutions, in a 
national or regional context, requires schooling and academic knowledge. Therefore, comprehensive support (Issue 3) to promote women's schooling, both at school and tertiary levels, would bring about major societal changes at the national and regional levels. 
 
a- Country gender overall situation: rights and status of women in the country


---
*Page 152*
---

 
Guiding questions  Analysis – national level  
What are the national 
policies covering gender 
issues? (include name of 
policy name, date)  
Programmes/action plans?  • Politique Nationale de la Promotion de la Femme  [National Policy for the 
Advancement of Women] (adopted by the Government in 1996)  
• Loi sur la santé de la reproduction  (2006) [Reproductive Health Act (2006)]  
• Loi interdisant les Mutilations Génitales Féminines  (MGF) (2003) [Law 
Prohibiting Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) (2003)]  
• Plan d’Intégration Genre et Inclusion Sociale  (PIGIS) [Gender and Social 
Inclusion Integration Plan – PIGIS] MCA -Niger (2017)  
• La Politique Nationale de la Jeunesse  [The National Youth Policy] (ratified in 
2015)  
• Profil de Pauvreté du Niger [Poverty Profile of Niger] (September 2011, last 
modified in 2016)  
• Plan décennal de mise en oeuvre de la politique nationale de genre [Ten -year  
Plan for the Implementation of the National Gender Policy], 2009 –2018 with 
two programmes:  
1. Promotion des Droits pour l’équité de genre et la protection des femmes  
[Promotion of rights to gender equality and the protection of women]  
2.  Promotion des opportunités économique pour les femme [Promotion of 
economic opportunities for women] (Source: Profil Genre Niger  [Gender 
Profile: Niger], November 2016)  
 
Sectoral strategic documents including the promotion of gender equality in their 
actions and objectives:   
 
• The Economic and Social Development Plan 2017 –2021 (PDES): (Source: 
Gender Profile: Niger, November 2016)  
• Programme Décennal de Développement de l’Education  [Ten -year Education 
Development Programme] (PDDE, 2003– 2013): (Source: Gender Profile: Niger, 
November 2016)  
• Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) and Multiple Indicators (MICS) DHS and 
Multiple Indicators (2012)  
• Politique National de Genre  [National Gender Policy  – PNG] (2007, revised in 
2016 and adopted on 10 March 2017) + Cadre National de la politique de Genre  
[National Gender Policy Framework]  
 
The formulation of the National Gender Policy was an opportunity to analyse the 
situation of gender in Niger and to locate the issue of equity and equal access for 
men and women within the different subsystems that organize Nigerien society 
(National Gende r Policy, 2008).  
 
Revised National Gender Policy (2017)  
The National Gender Policy was revised nine years after its implementation to take 
into account the challenges of accelerated population growth, along with peace, 
security and humanitarian emergencies. It is structured around the following four 
strategic a reas:  
1. Improvement of the sociocultural environment in relation to demography, peace and security for greater equity between men and women 
2. Strengthening of the institutional and legal framework conducive to the effective 
implementation of the rights of women and girls, the fight against gender -based 
violence and the equal participation of men and women in power management


---
*Page 153*
---

3. Economic empowerment and inclusive growth in relation to environmental 
sustainability, disaster risk management, migration and humanitarian emergencies  
4. Strengthening of institutional mechanisms and organizational frameworks for coordination, monitoring and evaluation and partnerships  
 
Who is the governmental 
body (Ministry? Agency? 
Office?) in charge of 
gender issues?  • Ministère de la femme et de la protection de l’enfant  [Ministry for the 
Promotion of Women and the Protection of Children]:  
- Observatoire National pour la Promotion de la Femme [National Observatory for 
the Advancement of Women]  
- Direction de la Promotion de la Scolarisation des Filles [Directorate for the 
Promotion of Girls' Education]  
- Direction de la Promotion de la Femme  [Directorate for the Advancement of 
Women]  
Are gender -
disaggregated 
data/statistics available?  • In 2012, the average annual growth rate was 3.9 per cent (the highest in the world, with a tendency to approximately double every 25 years). Women account for roughly 50 per cent of the population, which is also characterized 
by extreme youth; 54 per cent of the population is under 15 years of age and 
70 per cent is under 25 years of age.  
• Niger is committed to mainstreaming gender in all economic, social and 
environmental sectors with the aim of reducing gender -based inequalities and 
increasing women's financial autonomy. This is reflected by certain targets and 
indicators from Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5 being included in the 
PDES 2017 –2021 (Republic of Niger, Ministry of Planning, 2017).  
• International databases such as the World Bank's Gender Data Portal 
(https://genderdata.worldbank.org/countries/niger) also provide gender -
disaggregated data on the population of Niger. According to the World Bank, 49.3% of the population of Niger is female: this proportion was used to calculate the number of female beneficiaries of the project in Niger.  
 
What is the legal status of 
women and children in 
the country of 
intervention? (existing 
gender -responsive 
policies? Convention on 
the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women 
(CEDAW)? Ratification of international laws?)
 • While there has been progress in women's participation in politics, the public sector, trade unions and the private sector, there are still many inequalities when it comes to representation. Yet the texts that make up the legal system 
in Niger are, despite  certain inadequacies, conducive to equality and equity in 
gender relations. They consist of international and national legal instruments.  
• At the international level , Niger has ratified most of the international 
conventions on human rights in general, and those, such as the CEDAW and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which promote equal opportunities 
between men and women in particular. Although these convent ions are now 
part of Niger's internal legal system, they are not well implemented. This is due, on the one hand, to the failure to adopt additional domestic measures to support the implementation of these conventions and, on the other hand, to 
the many reservations made by Niger on acceding to the CEDAW. These 
reservations render this convention meaningless and make adopting measures 
to ensure equality between men and women in all areas challenging.  
• A
t the national level, article 8, paragraph 2, of the Constitution of Niger 
declares “the equality of all persons before the law without distinction as to 
sex, social, racial, ethnic or religious origin”. Respect for the constitutional principle of equality is reinforced by the law on the organization of the 
judiciary. Under this law, the custom is applicable where it is consistent not 
only with the legislative provisions and fundamental rules concerning public 
order and personal freedom, but also with the provisions of the int ernational 
conventions ratified by Niger.


---
*Page 154*
---

• In the main text, the legislation and regulations in force recognize the same 
rights for men and women in terms of access to services and resources. Better 
still, some of these texts devote temporary measures (positive discrimination) 
to accelerating gende r equality, while others include an enforcement 
framework that protects women against certain violations of their rights 
(female genital mutilation (FGM), sexual harassment, rape, slavery, 
prostitution, etc.).  
• However, the coexistence of several types of law, with the effective dominance 
of customary law over modern law, limits the possible effects of enshrining the 
principle of equality in national legislation and international texts ratified by 
Niger.  
What are commonly held 
beliefs, perceptions, and 
stereotypes related to 
gender roles and status in 
the project/programme 
footprint area or the 
country?  • In the majority of these sociocultural environments, once they reach an 
advanced age, women can act as counsellors and mediators within the 
community, in forming matrimonial alliances and resolving family conflicts. 
However, this input does not mean that t hey have full authority in the final 
decisions; only men can make decisions that affect the household or the 
community.  
What are the gendered 
health issues (what is the 
maternal mortality rate, 
infant mortality rate, life expectancy 
(disaggregated by sex) in 
the country of 
intervention and/or the 
project/programme footprint area?)
 • Health problems:  A high prevalence of anaemia in women.  In Niger, more than 
one in every two women (53.3 per cent) is anaemic (Institut National de la 
Statistique [National Institute of Statistics – NIS], 2017).  
• The median age of first marriage/first time living with a partner for women 
aged 25– 49 is 15.7 years, compared with 24.2 years for men (INS, 2012). More 
than three out of four women (77 per cent) were already married/living with a 
partner by the time they were 18 years old.  
• In 2017, 30 per cent of married women between the ages of 15 and 19 were already mothers or were pregnant (Republic of Niger, 2017b). Early -marriage 
results in early pregnancy and the resulting complications, including maternal 
mortality and disabilities s uch as fistula.  
• Although female genital mutilation (FGM) has decreased from 5 per cent in 1998 to 2.2 per cent in 2006, it is still practised by certain ethnic groups. For 
example, among the Gourmantché, 65.9 per cent of women are cut, while among the Peulhs and Arabs, th is stands at 12.8 per cent and 3.4 per cent, 
respectively. The most affected areas are Tillabéri, the urban community of Niamey and Diffa (Agence Nigérienne de Presse [Nigerien Press Agency], 2019).  
• 
The low level of women’s health indicators is largely linked to gender 
inequalities that affect their social situation, limit their level of education and 
information and their power to make decisions about their reproductive 
health. This situation sanctio ns the precariousness of women’s reproductive 
health in Niger, which in turn affects their capacity for development 
intervention. Therefore, correcting gender disparities and discrimination in 
health is an urgent necessity for human development.  
• A very high fertility rate  with a total fertility rate of 7.1 children per woman on 
average. This is the result of early sexual activity and marriage (one in two girls 
is already married before the age of 15), as well as low levels of contraceptive 
use. In 2006, 11 per cent of wome n used contraception, of which only 5 per 
cent used a modern contraceptive.  
• The maternal mortality rate  is also high, although it has declined slightly from 
671 in 1992, to 648 per 100,000 live births in 2006.  
• High infant and child mortality rates , although there has been a marked 
improvement. The infant mortality rate fell from 123.1 per 1,000 in 1998, to 81 
per 1,000 in 2006. Child mortality stood at 198 per 1,000 in 2006, compared with 273.8 per 1,000 in 1998. In each category, male children have a higher risk 
of mortality than female children.


---
*Page 155*
---

 
Do women have equal 
access to education, 
technical knowledge 
and/or skills training 
(what is the educational 
status of girls and boys? 
Adult literacy rate, 
disaggregated by sex?)  • At the activity level:  labour is divided according to sex, with different tasks 
allocated to girls and boys, men and women. This differentiation in the context 
of production and reproduction activities and at the community level makes it 
possible to assign men the highly valued formal production work, and women 
the maintenance and care work that falls within the category of reproduction 
activities and is less valued.  
• Literacy level: less than two in 10 women aged 15 -49 (14 per cent) and just over 
four in 10 men aged 15 –49 (42 per cent) are considered literate. Among 
women, this proportion varies from 7 per cent in rural areas to 45 per cent in 
urban areas, and among men, from 32 per c ent to 70 per cent. In 2012, among 
young women aged 15 –19, 64 per cent had no education, compared with 37 
per cent of men (INS, 2012).  
• Examination of the outcomes by region reveals spatial disparities in literacy, 
with greater disparities for women than for men. Indeed, in the regions, the 
literacy rate among women ranges from a low of 9 per cent in the Tahoua 
region, to a high of 53 per cent in the Niamey region. Among men, literacy rates 
range from a low of 19 per cent in Diffa region to a high of 72 per cent in Niamey 
region, while the rate in Agadez is 59 per cent (INS, 2012).  
What is the information 
in-country related to 
gender -based violence 
(including intimate -
partner violence, early -
marriage and FGM)?  • In the area of violence , the situation is also worrying. Girls and women suffer 
all kinds of violence, including sexual and psychological violence. This type of 
violence is the most noticeable because of the prevalence of early -marriage, 
with its consequences for their physical safety and health (National Gender 
Policy, 2008). The proportion of women and girls who are victims of violence 
(physical, sexual, psychological, economic or cultural) decreased from 60.1 per 
cent in 2015 to 58.3 per cent in 2017 (Mi nistry of Planning, Annual 
Implementation Report 2017, in INS, 2017).  
• Although FGM has decreased from 5 per cent in 1998 to 2.2 per cent in 2006, 
it is still practised by certain ethnic groups. For example, among the 
Gourmantché, 65.9 per cent of women are cut, while among the Peulhs and Arabs, this stands at 12.8 per cent a nd 3.4 per cent, respectively. The areas 
most affected are Tillabéri, the urban community of Niamey and Diffa (National 
Gender Policy, 2008).  
• The strategic focus, the National Gender Policy, intends to work towards 
greater implementation of the rights of women and girls on the one hand, and 
increased participation of women in decision- making bodies on the other hand, 
through the following specif ic objectives:  
1. Contribute to establishing a legal environment that is conducive to equity and equal access for men and women  
2. Ensure the implementation of women's rights in accordance with the 
Constitution and CEDAW  
3. Help reduce gender -based violence  
4. Ensure equal exercise of civil and political rights by women and men at all 
levels  
The strategies proposed to support the achievement of these objectives 
prioritize:  
(i) harmonizing national legislation with the international and regional 
commitments ratified by Niger  
(ii) operationalizing the texts adopted by implementing measures in line 
with the law  
(iii) information/awareness -raising among litigants and judicial actors on 
women's rights and their application


---
*Page 156*
---

(iv) revitalizing the Observatoire National de la Promotion de la Femme 
[National Observatory for the Advancement of Women] as a body for 
monitoring the effectiveness of texts favourable to gender equity and 
equality  
(iv) strengthening the protection of the physical safety of women and girls against gender -based violence  
(v) awareness -raising/social mobilization/advocacy among the various 
stakeholders in society for the effective implementation of the quota law  
(vii) capacity -building of decentralized structures and local authorities on 
gender issues  
(viii) strengthening  of women's leadership (National Gender Policy, 2008).  
 
What are the main issues 
for accessing justice and 
the barriers that women face?  • The most noticeable consequences are at the level of family law and personal status, where the legislator recognizes the application of custom, and of the 
law, depending on the parties involved. While written law or statute law is 
generally egalitarian in its approach to gender, customary law –  which is 
essentially patriarchal in the most common interpretations –  is unequal. In 
customary law, the matrimonial regime, property and the rules of 
intergenerational transmission are always determined by gender and  sanction 
male dominance.  
• This situation leads to confusion about the status of women in the family. 
Under these conditions, women can neither make decisions on motherhood 
(birth spacing) nor exercise the same responsibilities as men during marriage 
or at its dissolution.  
• The difficulty of establishing an effective legal order in a context of legal 
pluralism thrives on the State’s inability to intervene. This is compounded by 
the fact that legal pluralism is experienced as a means of using different 
sources of law according  to the interests at stake or the outcomes sought.  
 
What are the current 
indicators and trends 
related to poverty and 
development? (Human 
Development Index 
(HDI)? HDI world rank? 
Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) per capita)  • A high level of poverty: Economic growth appears insufficient to satisfy the basic needs of Niger’s population given its rapid growth. This translates into a 
high level of poverty affecting 48 per cent of the population as a whole, 18 per 
of urban dwellers  and 55 per cent of rural dwellers.  
• The regions most affected by poverty are Maradi (58 per cent), Tillabéri  (56 per 
cent), Dosso (53 per cent), Tahoua (48 per cent) and Zinder (48 per cent) 
(Enquête Nationale sur les Conditions de Vie des Ménages et l'Agriculture [National Survey on Household Living Conditions and Agriculture –  ECVMA], 
2011) . 
• According to the outcomes of ECVMA (2011), the main determinants of 
poverty are: high household size due to high fertility, low levels of education 
and professional qualifications, lack of availability of productive assets in 
households and limited access to public services.  
• The economy is predominantly informal and the secondary sector is weak. The 
primary sector, which accounts for more than 80 per cent of the working 
population, generates 43 per cent of the national income, while the secondary 
and tertiary sectors contribut e 12 per cent and 37 per cent, respectively (INS, 
2012). The main factors limiting the Nigerien economy’s performance are: a lack of competitiveness, a business climate not conducive to private sector 
development, a predominance of the informal economy and difficult climatic 
conditions. Analysis of public finances also reveals inefficiencies in public 
spending and weak links between national and sectoral strategic priorities, and 
the budget  (Ministry of Planning, Land Use and Community Development, 
2013).


---
*Page 157*
---

• Although there are more women than men in the labour force, analysing this 
according to gender shows that twice as many men work than women. The 
activity rate for men is 60.1 per cent compared with 29.6 per cent for women. 
The bottom line is that women's p articipation in economic activity is very low. 
Indeed, more than seven out of 10 (71 per cent) working women did not work 
in the seven days prior to the survey. On the other hand, the poverty status of 
households does not seem to have a significant impact on the employment rate 
of women compared with men. Gender disparities according to place of 
residence are also significant.  
• While in Niamey and other urban centres, seven and six females, respectively, 
for every 10 males can read and write (73.21 per cent and 56.13 per cent, 
respectively), in rural areas fewer than three females for every 10 males can 
read and write (29.54 per cent).  
• In terms of health, despite the efforts made by the national authorities to improve the availability, accessibility and quality of services, the position of 
women remains critical and unacceptable. This position is characterized by 
alarming indicators highlighting the poor health of women in general, and of 
women of reproductive age in particular. This leads to high maternal mortality 
(648 women die per 100,000 live births in Niger –  DHS-MICS -III 2006). This 
situation is explained by:  
- Low rate of access to health services, including reproductive 
health services.  
- Low health coverage in general and in obstetric care in particular.  
- Low coverage of prenatal consultation (46 per cent – DHS-MICS -
III 2006).  
- Low levels of use of modern family planning methods (5 per cent 
of women who were married/living with a partner –  EDS-MICS -
III 2006).  
- The young age of first sexual experiences. Gross national income 
per capita is estimated at $210. Poverty, which is more 
pronounced in rural areas, affects women more than men. The 
causes of this poverty are high population growth, successive 
droughts lead ing to poor harvests, degradation of productive 
potential and urban migration (Modieli, 2010).  
- According to the Human Development Report published in 2013, 
Niger is ranked 187th out of 187 countries, with an HDI of 0.304 
(United Nations Development Programme [UNDP], 2013).  
- Niger’s economy is characterized by weak and volatile growth. 
The economic performance analysis was carried out as part of 
the development of the Development Policy. The growth rate of 
the Nigerien economy decreased from 11.8 per cent in 2012, to 
5 per cent in 2016, with an average rate of 6.7 per cent. The PDES 
confirms this observation. Estimated at 3.8 per cent on average 
over the period 2007 –2012, the real Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) growth rate varies from 9.6 per cent in 2008 to - 0.7 per 
cent in 2009, 8.4 per cent in 2010 and 2.3 per cent in 2011 
(Ministry of Planning, Land Use and Community Development, 
2013).  
• In summary, the poverty headcount ratio, at 39.8 per cent in 2016, and the 
HDI, at 0.304 in 2013, place Niger last in the world.  
• GDP per capita improved considerably from about $384.6 (CFAF 192,329) in 
2011 to $463 (CFAF 231,508) in 2015. However, this macroeconomic 
performance has not noticeably impacted poverty since the absolute number 
of poor people continues to increase (7,963, 631 in 2011 and 8,400,992 in 
2014) as a result of population growth (Ministry of Planning, 2017).


---
*Page 158*
---

What do national 
statistics/census say 
about women's 
economic situation 
(employment rate? 
Average income? Gender 
pay gap? Any data on 
gender differences in the 
informal sector? And in 
the agricultural sector?)  • The employment rate among the labour force is 41.42 per cent. In other words, 
barely four out of 10 Nigeriens of working age who looked for work in the seven 
days prior to the survey, worked during this period. Analysis by gender shows 
that the employment rate of women (29.03 per cent) is lower than that of men 
(55.82 per cent). Thus, at the national level, there are barely five women for 
every 10 men employed in the labour force (a ratio of 52 per cent). This reflects 
Nigerien women’s very low levels of pa rticipation in economic activity at the 
national level (Genre et Pauvreté, 2007 –2008 [Gender and Poverty, 2007 –
2008]).  
• Rain- fed and irrigated agriculture is the primary occupation for Nigerien 
communities leading sedentary, semi- nomadic and nomadic lives. According to 
the Recensement Général Agricole et du Cheptel (RGAC) 2004/2006  [General 
Census of Agriculture and Livestock 2004/2006], the agricultural sector 
employs 11.3 per cent of agricultural households headed by males, and 7.9 per 
cent of households headed by females in the agricultural sector.  
• In rain- fed agriculture, women are involved in working in the fields but at 
specific stages of the production process. In terms of irrigated agriculture, which takes the form of market gardening or rice cultivation, generally after 
the rainy season, women are much more involved in market gardening, but 
most often on small plots (0.5 ha) (National Gender Policy, 2008).  
• The gender inequality index was 0.674 in 2016, placing the country 149th out 
of the 152 countries ranked. Inequalities experienced by women include access 
to education and reproductive health, and women's participation in the 
economy and in decision -making . 
• In 2015 –2016, the primary school gross enrolment ratio was 70.2 per cent for 
girls and 82 per cent for boys. At secondary school, it was 28.8 per cent for girls 
and 39.6 per cent for boys. The parity index in primary education has remained 
stagnant at 0.85  over the last five years.  
• The analysis of the role of Nigerien women in the economy clearly indicates an 
unequal distribution of roles and responsibilities in the division of labour, as 
well as difficulties in accessing, managing and controlling resources, unequal 
access to economi c opportunities and undervaluing of women's work in the 
household economy. In the area of employment in particular, there is a low 
participation of women in the labour force, with an unemployment rate twice 
as high (25 per cent) as for the male labour forc e (11.8 per cent) (Ministry of 
Planning, 2017).  
What is the situation in 
terms of access to 
financial resources for 
men and women in the area (access to banking? 
Microcredit? Savings 
account? Self- help 
group?)  • At the national level, statistics indicate a low participation of women in the 
labour force and an unemployment rate twice as high (25 per cent) as for the 
male labour force (11.8 per cent). This situation is paradoxical, given that 
women represent 51.14 per cent of the total working population. Women's 
activity rate is underestimated because the reproductive and informal activities 
that women carry out on a daily basis, being unpaid, are not considered as work 
in national accounts. Yet these activities, wh ich also consume time and energy, 
are essential for the renewal of human capital. Promoting women's activities 
as a significant source of income would increase women’s income level and 
improve the annual income parity per capita, which is 0.80 (National Ge nder 
Policy, 2008).  
• Access to funding in the sector is also unequal because of the eligibility criteria 
(yields, productivity, input) which women find difficult to meet. In general, 
loans allocated to women are small sums from informal networks and are most 
often invested in areas other than production. Men, on the other hand, often 
benefit from larger loans (National Gender Policy, 2008). The practice of income -generating activities by women in the region seems very important. 
Indeed, a significant proportion (73.2 per cent) of women are engaged in these 
activities. In addition, women undertake a diverse range of income -generating


---
*Page 159*
---

activities, although trade is relatively dominant (at 27.2 per cent), followed by 
agriculture and livestock (21.1 per cent), catering (19.4 per cent) and 
processing (14.8 per cent) (Ministry of Finance/National Institute of Statistics], 
November 2012).  
What is the situation in 
terms of access to land? 
Property rights?  • Soil and method of accessing land: The entire Department of Aguié  is located 
in an area dominated by sandy dune soils with clay content of less than 2 per cent (Service d'Arrondissement d'Aguié [Aguié Departmental Unit d'Aguié –  
SAA], 2003). In this area, the most common method of accessing land is through inheritance o r purchase, but there are also loans and pledges. In Zabon 
Mousso, it is easy to access agricultural land through purchase, which is why 
producers are perfectly aware of the price of a one hectare plot (100,000 to 
150,000 CFAF). This exacerbates the proble m of insufficient agricultural land in 
an already densely populated area (91.3 inhabitants per km
2). The increase in 
this area’s population has led to the subdivision of plots and a reduction in the 
size of farms. Thus, an average farm has eight (8) inhabitants and about 4.5 
hectares (ha) of cultivable land, or 0.6 ha per person (Services d’appui à 
l’Agriculture d’Aguié [Aguié Agricultural Support Service], 1997). This has been 
confirmed by our surveys. The average farm employs ten (10) people and in 
Aguié has 6.3 hectares, or in Gaya 12.3 hectares, of cultivable land, i.e. 0.63 
and 1.23 hectares per person, respectively.  
• In the Bana area, most agricultural activities are carried out on the flatlands, 
which are made up of a succession of slopes, terraces and lowlands. For all the 
people surveyed, the main method of accessing land is inheritance (90 per 
cent), followed by lo ans and donations. In this area, it is difficult to access land 
by purchasing it. Nevertheless, the surveys reveal cases of renting or “talmey” at a rate of 20,000F per hectare for one season. Producers say they have not 
yet begun to sell off parts of their land, so it would be difficult for them to 
determine a price for farmland.  
 
 
 
 
 
b- Climate  and gender  in the proposed  project/program  footprint  area  
 
 at the national level  
 
Guiding questions  Gender equality – national level  
How are the national climate 
policies and strategic plans (NAPs, 
NDCs, other) addressing gender 
issues? (include policy name, date)  • The Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) is in line with the Economic 
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Regional White Paper and 
recognizes that access to modern energy services significantly contributes to: 
improving access to basic social ser vices (health, education, drinking water); 
increasing household productivity for cooking, lighting and transport; 
stimulating the creation of income -generating economic activities; freeing 
women from the chores of gathering wood, water, husking, etc.  These  points 
are seen as co -benefits in strategies to combat climate change (Republic of 
Niger, 2016a).  
• On the other hand, the document mentions gender only once at the 
monitoring and evaluation level:  
- “The institutional set up for the implementation of the Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) includes the following 
aspects: a gender- aware ‘country monitoring and evaluation’ system, 
measuring, reporting and verification procedures and a reg ister of INDC


---
*Page 160*
---

projects.”  
- “The monitoring and evaluation of the effects and impacts of the INDC 
will be based on relevant criteria and indicators and the definition of 
corrective measures for climatic, environmental, economic and social 
safeguards; the monitoring of risks and chang es in vulnerability to 
climate change at the national level”  (Republic of Niger, 2016a).  
• In terms of the process of the National Action Plan (NAP), the UNDP country 
report that introduces the next steps does not mention gender 
considerations (UNDP, 2016) Nor are these issues raised in the Third National 
Communication of 2016 (Republic of Niger, 2016b).  
• The fisheries sector in Niger has been targeted, as a sector hard hit by the 
effects of climate change: in particular, it was mentioned as part of the 
Programme d’action national pour l’adaptation aux changements climatiques  
(PANA) [National Adaption Programme of Action on climate change – NAPA]. 
Aware of the fact that the development of this sector must take into account 
the worrying phenomenon of climate change, with the financial support of 
Nouveau partenariat pour le déve loppement de l’Afrique [New Part nership 
for Africa's Development – NEPAD ], the Guri Vie Meilleure Foundation has 
initiated the projet de renforcement de la résilience des femmes de la filière 
poisson face aux effets des changements climatiques [project to increase the 
resilience of women in the fisheries sector to the effects of climate change] 
(PROREF) in the region of Tillabéri located in north- western Niger. This project 
is part of the drive for adaptation and prevention measures related to the 
risks of climate change.  
• Women make up a large segment of the agricultural population and are also 
the most susceptible to the impacts of climate change. It has therefore 
become urgent to mainstream gender issues and the concerns of small -scale 
women farmers in the definition and implementation of public policies, so as 
to better understand the effects of climate change.  
• The fundamental objective of the Guri Vie Meilleure Foundation is to support 
the implementation of all intervention projects which advance the 
empowerment of rural women, so that they might better cope with the 
negative impacts of climate change. The First  Lady of Niger, Hadjia Issoufou 
Aïssata, founder of the Guri Vie Meilleure Foundation, supports any 
programme aimed at improving the living conditions of the population in 
general, and of women in particular (Malam Goni, 2016).  
What are the governmental bodies 
(Ministry? Agency? Office?) in 
charge of the interface between 
these issues?  • The Conseil national de l’environnement pour un développent durable  
[National Environment Council for Sustainable Development (CNEDD)], a 
multisectoral deliberative body involving governmental and civil society 
structures, responsible for translating national policy on climate change into 
action.  
• It has seven (7) functional commissions: la Commission Technique Nationale 
sur les Changements et Variabilité Climatiques [the National Technical 
Commission on Climate Change and Variability], created by order No. 
054P/CNEDD/SE of 21 July 1997, and preside d over by the Ministry of 
Transport and Tourism through the National Directorate of Meteorology. This 
order was modified and completed by Decree No. 050 PM/SE/CNEDD of 7 
June 2006 to take into account certain structures holding data on gas 
emissions and the creation of thematic groups:  
- The Technical Commission on Energy and Sustainable Development, 
created by order No. 018PM/SE/CNEDD on 25 April 2002 and chaired by 
the Ministry of Mines and Energy through the Directorate of Renewable 
Energies  
- the Technical Commission on the Urban and Physical Environment, 
created by order No. 078/PM/CNEDD of 1 September 2003 and chaired 
by the Ministry in charge of Urban Planning through the Urban Planning


---
*Page 161*
---

Department  
- the Global Environment Facility (GEF)  
- the Programme National de Référence d’Accès aux Services Energétiques 
[the National Benchmarking Programme for Access to Energy Services]  
- the Technical Commission on Biological Diversity, created by order No. 
053/PM/CNEDD of 21 July 1997 and chaired by the Ministry in charge of 
the Environment through the Department for Wildlife, Fisheries and Fish 
Farming – this order was amended and supple mented by order No. 
46/PM/SE/CNEDD of 23 April 2004  
- the Technical Commission for Combating Desertification and the 
Management of Natural Resources created by order No. 
066/PM/SE/CNEDD of 22 August 1997 and chaired by the Ministry in 
charge of the Environment through the Environment Directorate  
- the Technical Commission on Water and Sustainable Development, 
created by order No. 0045/PM/CNEDD of 23 April 2004 and chaired by 
the Ministry of Water, Environment and Desertification Control through 
the Directorate of Water Resources and the Technical Commission on 
the financing of the National Environmental Plan for Sustainable 
Develop ment, created by order No.093/PM/CNEDD of 5 November 1997 
and chaired by the Ministry of Economy and Finance through the 
Commissariat in charge of Development.  
 (Republic of Niger, National Office for Editing and Publishing,  2019 ).
 
 
• Since 2006, Niger has been engaged in implementing the agenda of the  
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme  because the 
theme is topical and all the more important for the development of Niger's 
agricultural sector (Saratou and Goni, 2016).  
• Niger's report on the implementation of Beijing +25: the Beijing Declaration 
and Platform for Action.  
 
 
 
 
What are the priority sectors 
targeted by climate change -
related NAPs and NDCs?  • For the NAP, the highest priority is desertification control and natural 
resources management.  
• For Niger's INDC, the adaptation options to be prioritized are those that 
provide the best co -benefits in terms of climate change mitigation. In 
particular, this will include scaling up – throughout the country’s eight regions 
– the good adaptation practic es and techniques that enable both carbon 
sequestration and a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.  
• These adaptation options are already well defined by existing strategic 
frameworks, such as the PDES 2012– 2015 and 2016 –2020, which are derived 
from the Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Growth Strategy (SDDCI) – Niger 
2035, the 3N Initiative ("les nigéri ens nourrissent les nigériens” [“Nigeriens 
feed Nigeriens”]), the National Climate Change Policy (NPCC), the Strategic 
Framework for Sustainable Land Management (CS -GDT), and the National 
Strategy and Action Plan on Climate Change and Variability (SNPA -CVC).  
• (United Nations Climate Change Conference [COP 21] , 2015 ). 
Are there national programmes 
addressing each climate change 
and gender inequality 
independently or in an integrated 
manner?  • The First Lady Hadjia Aïssata Issoufou Mahamadou’s Foundation Guri Vie 
Meilleure is stepping up its activities aimed at the advancement of rural 
women. Within this context, the Foundation has initiated a large project 
called ‘’Projet Genre et Pratiques de l’Agriculture Intelligente face aux Effets 
du Changement Climatique dans la Région de Tahoua’’ [Gender and Practices 
of Intelligent Agriculture in the Face of the Effects of Climate Change in the


---
*Page 162*
---

Region of Tahoua], whose activities were officially launched 28 September in 
Illéla commune.  
• This project also aims to combat the extreme poverty of women in rural and 
peri-urban areas, including women from the rural commune of Illéla for the 
pilot phase. This choice is no coincidence, because the women receiving 
support through this project have demonstrated that they play a huge role in 
development. This project also aims to encourage job creation. Indeed, for 
the first phase alone, fifty (50) women will be empowered to conduct this 
pilot phase for four (4) months. The project then aims to improv e the 
resilience of the inhabitants of Illéla and the surrounding area.  
• Through this project, the Guri Vie Meilleure Foundation has developed new 
adaptation strategies, including adaptation and mitigation measures related 
to the impact of climate change on agriculture (Saratou and Goni, 2016).  
How does the government frame 
both issues?  • The gender inequality index was 0.674 in 2016, placing the country 149th out 
of the 152 countries ranked. Inequalities experienced by women include 
access to education and reproductive health, and women's participation in 
the economy and in decision- making . 
• At the same time, Niger is grappling with a vulnerable environmental situation 
due to the extent of land degradation, poor preservation of biodiversity, 
difficulties in sustainable management of land and water resources, and 
limited capacity to meet the em erging challenges posed by the impact of 
climate change. Women are the most vulnerable to climate change -related 
disasters.  
• The Government's support for these two issues involves implementing the 
PDES 2017 –2021), which is based on most of the 17 SDGs. 
• Therefore, in order to combat climate change and its repercussions (SDG 13), 
Niger intends to improve resilience and adaptive capacities in the face of 
climate hazards and climate -related disasters and to improve education, 
awareness -raising and individual  and institutional capacities with regard to 
climate change adaptation, mitigation and early warning systems.  
• The policy of reducing inequalities (SDG 10) involves the steady and rapid 
improvement of the incomes of the poorest 40 per cent of the population, as 
well as the empowerment of all vulnerable people and their social, economic 
and political integration (Ministry of Planning, 2017).  
 
Are there any policies specifically 
referring to gender equality/social 
inclusion in climate change 
initiatives (both adaptation and 
mitigation)? Any background 
studies?  • According to the latest census, conducted in 2012, women represent 50.6 per 
cent of the country’s 17,129,076 inhabitants.  
• Unfortunately, women are also the most exposed to the effects of climate 
change, especially those living in rural areas and whose main activities are 
farming and domestic livestock production.  
• Therefore, as a result of recurrent cycles of drought, and the resulting 
agricultural and fodder shortfalls, many rural women live in a state of extreme poverty (IIla, 2015).
 
• Niger has an NPCC, a Cadre Stratégique de Gestion Durable des Terres   
[Strategic Framework for Sustainable Land Management] (CS- GDT), and a 
Stratégie Nationale et Plan d’Action en matière de Changement et Variabilité 
Climatiques (SNPA -CVC) [National Strategy and Action Plan on Climate 
Change and Variability]. The first NAPA was prepared in 2006.  
• A National Gender Policy (NGP) was adopted in 2008, with a ten- year plan for 
2009– 2018 and an institutional framework for implementation developing 
two areas of focus (promotion of rights and promotion of economic 
opportunities). The NGP does not mention g ender mainstreaming in climate 
policies. With regard to natural resources, a lack of access is highlighted in 
the areas of water, energy and sanitation, noting however "changes in roles, 
with a greater involvement of men in supplying and financing water. S imilarly,


---
*Page 163*
---

we see a greater involvement of women in the management of water points 
where they are part of the management committees.” The Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) for September 2015 indicates 
that its implementation involves establishing a " country monitoring and 
evaluation" system that mainstreams gender. The mitigation component 
mentions "women" in the area of lightening domestic chores: "freeing 
women from chores related to wood, water, husking, etc." and lightening the 
load of women's dom estic tasks is one of the co -benefits of the energy sector 
(Nicolas, 2017)  
Are there international 
organizations supporting the 
government on gender and 
climate initiatives?  • UNDP helps its partners, including Niger, to engage women in climate change 
and disaster resilience efforts, and to ensure their equal access to the 
resources they need, including clean energy, water, shelter and to alternative 
livelihoods.  
• Within this framework, UNDP supports 10 countries in mainstreaming gender 
equality in their NDCs, which define the methods for achieving the goals of 
the Paris Agreement.  
Are there background studies on 
both adaptation and gender?  • The World Bank has produced a study on gender inequality but not related to 
climate change.  
 
What do available studies say 
about the anticipated differences 
in men’s and women’s 
vulnerability and adaptive capacity 
to climate change?  • In Niger, more than three out of four girls are married before they turn 18. 
When an adolescent girl has to leave school to get married, her low level of 
education will have a significant impact throughout her life, especially on her 
income and her childre n’s education. She also faces increased risks to her 
health and that of her children due to the consequences of early and 
repeated pregnancies.  
• Based on the study, adolescence is therefore a crucial period during which all 
four countries need to put in place complementary public policies to keep 
girls in school.  
• At the community level, the involvement of men, women and community 
leaders is critical for reducing gender disparities  (World Bank, 2018).  
 
What do available studies say 
about existing gender inequalities 
that may be exacerbated by 
climate change impacts?  • The Principes Directeurs de la Politique de Développement Rural pour le Niger  
[Guiding Principles of Rural Development Policy for Niger], in article 4 of the 
Code Rural [Rural Code], mentions: “Rural natural resources are part of the 
common heritage of the Nation. All Nigeriens have an equal aim to access it 
without discrimination on the basis of sex or social origin”. Therefore, 
women, like men, also have a right of access to natural resources, including 
land, water and other resources. However, in Niger, the land- tenure system 
is still largely dependent on customary institutions and, in this traditional 
environment, women's access to land remains problematic and varies from 
one locality to another.  
• Série des Evaluations Genre des Pays, Profil national genre des secteurs de 
l’agriculture et du développement rural  [Country Gender Assessment Series, 
National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods] (Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO], 2018).  
• According to field surveys in, for example, the Dosso region, in the villages 
covered by the FAO study (Gender Country Assessment Series, Niger) the 
empowerment of women in agriculture is estimated at 45 per cent. The main obstacles to women's empowerment are weak decision -
making, lack of 
control over resources and an uneven distribution of time.  
 
C- Gender -specific challenges for the programme   
 
Guiding questions  Gender (in)equality  Climate adaptation


---
*Page 164*
---

What are the targeted 
regions or local 
government to be 
supported by LoCAL? What 
challenges can we 
anticipate?  • The Tillabéri region  
• The region of Tillabéri (or Tillabéry) is located in the south-
west of the Republic of Niger. It is bordered to the south by 
the Dosso region, to the north- east by the Tahoua region 
and the Republic of Mali, and to the west by Burkina Faso. 
It covers an area of 97,251 km². It is divided into 13 
departments, whic h are themselves subdivided into 45 
urban and rural communes. In 2012, it had a population of 
2,715,186.  
• In 2012, Niger’s Total Fertility Rate level was very high (7.6 
children per woman) but it was even higher in the Tillabéri 
region (7.9 children per woman). Explanatory factors 
include, among others: (i) early marriage; (ii) low level of 
education; (iii) the population’s pro -birth attitude; (iv) low 
levels of family planning practised.  
• Unfortunately, in terms of poverty, the region of Tillabéri is 
the most affected by multidimensional poverty, with a rate 
of 88.32 per cent, compared with 23.13 per cent in Niamey, 
for example. The group most affected by poverty is the rural 
population, es pecially women.  
• In addition, there are security threats linked to incursions 
by armed groups, which constitutes another major 
challenge for the region’s inhabitants in general, and for 
women and children in particular (Ministry of Planning, 
2017).  The Tillabéri region, like 
most of Niger’s other 
regions, faces a precarious 
environmental situation 
due to the extent of land 
degradation, poor 
preservation of 
biodiversity, difficulties in 
sustainable management 
of land and water 
resources, and limited 
capacity to meet the 
emerging challenges of 
climate change impact  
(Ministry of Planning, 
2017).  
 
What are their capacities in 
both sectors (human, 
technical and financial 
capacities)?  • In Programme 6 of the PDES relating to “food security and 
sustainable agricultural development”, there is a 
subprogramme (6.5) specifically on “empowerment of rural 
women” which affects the region of Tillabéri the most, as 
the poorest in the country.  
• This subprogramme aims to improve rural women’s 
income. The aim is to significantly increase women's 
productivity and productive capacity. To this end, 
interventions are envisaged to reduce the burden of 
domestic chores, increase yields and the productivit y and 
quality of production by women, and increase women’s 
economic power (Ministry of Planning, 2017).  
 The region benefits from 
the following:  
Huge mining potential, 
mainly in Liptako Gourma 
and other areas: gold, 
coal, iron, phosphate, etc.  
 
Large areas of irrigated 
land to ensure food 
security in the region: 31 
hydro -agricultural 
schemes (AHAs) thirty (30) 
of which are for rice 
production. 
 
The W Regional Park, 
forest reserves and the 
Niger River valley 
containing a diversity of 
flora and fauna  
Niger's largest cattle herd 
in the north and south  
(Ministry of Planning, 
2017).  
What are local 
governments’ 
responsibilities and 
attitudes vis-à-vis gender 
equity issues in 
development planning?  • In 2016, the constituency of Tillabéri was represented in the 
Assembly by 24 deputies, out of a total of 171 for the entire 
country. The issue of gender equity is national in scope and 
is also discussed at the parliamentary level, including the 
case of Til labéri region ( Subdivisions administratives  
[Administrative Subdivisions], Ministry of the Interior, The 45 communes in the 
region have communal 
management bodies that 
deal with various issues, 
including climate 
adaptation.


---
*Page 165*
---

Public Security, Decentralization and Customary and 
Religious Affairs and General Directorate of 
Decentralization and Local Authorities [DGD/CT], 2015).  
 
What is the typical 
participation (or lack 
thereof) of women in 
decision- making processes 
at the local government 
level? How many women 
are part of the local 
government decision -
making committee?  • Today, the challenge of participation is first of all that of 
increasing women's access to decision -making, but above 
all, enabling men and women to come together to manage 
and control decision -making as full partners; indeed, 
women's participation at the decision -making level is 
extremely low  (Ministry of Planning, 2017).  
• The gender inequality index is 0.713 in Niger. It is higher 
than the average for sub -Saharan Africa, which is 0.537. 
This indicator shows that Niger still has much to do in the 
area of gender equality (FAO, 2018).  
 The Belgian Technical 
Cooperation, in its 
interventions in 19 
departments of the Dosso 
region, has set up 
Committees for the 
Advancement of Women 
in each commune to 
check whether the issue 
of gender equality is being 
mainstreamed. These 
Committees are atta ched 
to the Ministry for the 
Advancement of Women 
and Child Protection –  
they are supposed to be 
disseminated regionally 
and nationally by the 
Ministry in charge of 
gender issues.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3- RECOMMENDED ACTIONS  
The information and data collected via the gender assessment s allow to identify a set of equity -related 
issues and trends that are closely related to the intervention areas of the LoCAL + West Africa 
Programme and which the Programme can and intends to contribute to address, by mainstreaming 
equity consideration throughout its design and implementation.  
In particular, the following specific measures and actions are recommended to be undertaken to ensure 
a thorough integration of equity -related considerations as well as a gender -responsive Programme 
implementation:  
1) Institutionalize gender assessments at the local level prior to the disbursement of any project 
funding and to the design of any project activity.  
2) Ensure that funding allocations also enable women to play a role in the design and maintenance of the initiatives supported via project funding. In so doing, the Programme intends to act as a 
good practice to enhance gender equality in public governance an d decision -making, including 
in access to finance matters.


---
*Page 166*
---

3) Ensure that gender considerations are embedded across all policy and institutional frameworks 
that govern the Programme design and its implementation, with adequate capacity and 
understanding across all stakeholders. In so doing, the Programme intends to s erve as a best 
practice to improve gaps in policies and institutional frameworks to address gender -specific 
vulnerabilities.  
4) Ensure that women are represented in all project activities and are provided with a comfortable 
space and time to participate in and contribute to all activities. Holding women -only project 
activities will also be taken into consideration when prescribed b y local cultural sensitivities and 
based on women’s feedback about preferred engagement modalities.  
5) By providing women with equal access to information and active and safe engagement 
opportunities during the design and implementation of project activities, the Programme 
supports women’s capacity to become champions of climate change awareness and adaptat ion 
within their communities.  
6) Ensure that all Programme communications channels and products are tailored to women’s 
unique needs, availability and cultural sensitivities, to ensure that Programme information 
reaches all the intended target audiences and is adequately understood.  
7) Pursue gender -disaggregated data whenever conducting analysis and research, to ensure to 
capture gender -specific nuances, needs and perspectives in relation to any researched and 
studied topic.  
These recommendations will be used to guide the Programme Gender Action Plan with a view to embed 
them in as many project activities as possible.  
While the Programme explicitly targets men and women, in its design and implementation it will integrate the different perspectives, needs and voices of all stakeholders across its design and delivery, 
so as to optimize  opportunities for, in particular, social inclusion and gender equality in economic 
growth, climate resilience, public governance and also to ensure that, unintentionally, no project activity 
generates any unintended negative social impact.  
Social inclusion will be implemented by ( a) ensuring at all times a transparent and open implementation 
approach based on a wide and user -friendly outreach to and engagement of different stakeholders to 
be consulted in the roll out of the program; (b) promoting a participatory approach during dec ision -
making, to foster a more inclusive public governance modality. If and as needed, this will also imply 
conducting stakeholder -specific consultations, to ensure each stakeholder has a safe venue and 
convenient t ime window to participate and share their input; (c) collecting stakeholder -specific 
information and data (including disaggregated by age group).  
The continuous monitoring of equity -related matters throughout the Programme implementation is 
also intended as a vehicle to identify in a timely manner any new or unforeseen equity -related issue 
that may surface during implementation and that may require adjustments in the design and/or delivery 
of project activities.  
As such, the measures listed above are not intended to be an exhaustive list but rather an initial 
compilation of recommended measures, to be further strengthened and complemented as needed 
during the Programme roll -out.


---
*Page 167*
---

4- PROGRAMME CONTRIBUTION TO ENHANCED GENDER  SENSITIVITY , EQUALITY AND 
WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT  
 
Based on the above, it was decided that a ll activities identified in the programme are going to be 
designed and implemented with a gender -sensitive  approach and accounting for local, cultural 
sensitivities. Zero tolerance against gender -based discrimination and violence is a core principle of the 
programme, which foresees a grievance mechanism, including for offences about sexual exploitation, 
sexual  abuse,  and sexual harassment . 
The LoCAL + Programme expects to be conducive to advance gender sensitivity , equality  and women’s 
empowerment in the four countries , both directly and indirectly, in several ways, starting from women's 
participation in its roll-out and local economic development :  
 Adaptation responses will account for gender -specific vulnerabilities to climate change as 
identified by the CRA implemented –  which account for the distribution of adverse impacts on 
diverse social groups but also positive impacts as results of adaptation  options proposed.  
 Awareness and capacity building are sensible to vulnerable groups’ voice and needs, including 
women, to contribute to create an inclusive and gender -sensitive civic space that accounts for 
broader social inclusion.  
 The LoCAL mechanism incentivizes participatory and gender sensitive planning processes that 
lead to the identification of investments that are able to respond to the needs of the most 
vulnerable, in a view of distributing adaptation benefits to advance gen der equality. LoCAL does 
that thanks to specific design features that account for gender equality considerations. In brief 
few highlights:  
 
o A climate risk assessment methodology that accounts for local stakeholder groups’ 
specificities and respective vulnerabilities.  
o Capacity building and TA that account for gender mainstreaming aspects along the PBCRG deployment cycle (adaptation planning, implementation of investments, M&E and 
reporting), aiming at contributing to create a change in the civic tissue in favour  of more 
gender sensitive local governance for climate action.  
o A menu of eligible investments that account for gender sensitive and responsive 
investments (e.g., sectors or domains where women participation is particularly relevant and/or where women are expected to suffer the most from the effects of climate change).  
o Specific performance measures (against which local governments are annually assessed) 
that accounts for gender mainstreaming aspects along the PBCRG deployment cycle, 
incentivizing local governments to perform better on gender  sensitive and responsive 
adaptation action and contributing to institutionalize these processes in the long run.  
o The ACCAF (M&E methodology of LoCAL) helps identify and track distribution of adaptation 
benefits of the PBCRG portfolio, providing a M&E tool that can help assess improvements on gender  sensitive and responsive adaptation at the local level.  
o In collaboration with UN Women and UNDP, UNCDF has developed the Women Economic Empowerment Index (WEEI) to assess the viability of an investment from the point of view of the economic empowerment of women. As part of the LoCAL mechanism, WEEI 
indicators w ill be used to support local authorities in assessing the extent to which public 
adaptation investment projects contribute to women’s empowerment and gender equality.  
 
 These established tools will also benefit the deployment of the Blended Finance Facilities, that 
will develop their own investment policy and criteria to ensure resulting investments contribute 
to gender equality and women empowerment, in addition to BOAD own tools and policy to 
ensure gender considerations are integrated in all the processes for project origination and 
financing.


---
*Page 168*
---

 Investments are screened against a climate rationale that should also account for impacts on 
the most vulnerable populations, including women, and a quota is set on investments (in the 
framework of the programme) that should explicitly target women (through women’s groups, associations, etc.).  
 Safeguarding on Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH) are integrated in the ESS checklist (see Annex 6) and will be applied to GCF -financed activities – 
which will comply with relevant GCF SEAH policies , procedures and recommendations  in its 
operations. These internationally accepted levels of safeguards will be implemented throughout the execution of the programme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPH Y 
 
 Burkina Faso  
 
Agence Française de Développement [French Development Agency] (2016). Profil Genre Burkina Faso 
[Gender Profile Burkina Faso]. Available at: https://plateforme- elsa.org/wp -
content/uploads/2017/10/Profil -Genre-Burkina-Faso.pdf . 
Alice Albright (Global Partnership for Education) and Ulla Tornæs (2019) . Burkina Faso : éliminer les 
obstacles à une éducation de qualité pour les filles [Burkina Faso: removing obstacles to quality 
education for girls].  Available at:  https://www.globalpartnership.org/fr/blog/burkina-faso -eliminer -les-
obstacles -une-education-de-qualite -pour-les -filles . 
Burkina Faso (2015). Contribution Prévue Déterminée au Niveau National (CPDN) au Burkina Faso [Planned Contribution Determined at the National Level in Burkina Faso]. Available at 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Burkina%20Faso%20First/INDC%20B
URKINA%20FASO%20280915.pdf .


---
*Page 169*
---

Burkina Faso (2019). Beijing+25 National Report. Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/ -
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-
reviews/burkina_faso.pdf?la=en&vs=2349 . 
Burkina Faso, Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries (2007). Politique Nationale de 
Sécurisation Foncière en Milieu Rural [National Rural Land Security Policy]. Available at: 
http://www.inter -reseaux.org/IMG/pdf_PNSFMR- _francais_facile -pdf_version_finale_consolidee.pdf . 
Burkina Faso, Ministry of Economy and Finance (2011). Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de 
Développement Durable [Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development Strategy] 2011-2015 
(SCADD). Available at: 
https://www.unpei.org/sites/default/files/e_library_documents/Burkina_Faso_PRSP_2011.pdf . 
Burkina Faso, Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (2017). Tableau de Bord Social du Burkina 
Faso [Social Dashboard of Burkina Faso]. Available at: 
http://www.insd.bf/n/contenu/pub_periodiques/tableaux_de_bord/TBS/TBS_2017.pdf .  
Burkina Faso, Ministry of the Environment and Fisheries (2015). Plan National d’Adaptation aux Changements Climatiques (PNA) du Burkina Faso [Burkina Faso's National Climate Change Adaptation 
Plan (NAP)].   
Burkina Faso, Ministry of Health (2011). Plan National de Développement Sanitaire [National Health Development Plan] (2011-2020).  Available at: 
https://www.uhc2030.org/fileadmin/uploads/ihp/Documents/Country_Pages/Burkina_Faso/Burkina_F
aso_National_Health_Strategy_2011 -2020_French.pdf . 
Burkina Faso, Ministry of National Education, Literacy and Promotion of National Languages (2011). Programme National d’Accélération de l’Alphabétisation [National Accelerated Literacy Programme] 
2011–2015 (PRONAA). 
Burkina Faso, Ministry of National Education, Literacy and Promotion of National Languages (2012). 
Stratégie Nationale d’Accélération de l’Education des Filles [National Strategy for Accelerating Girls' 
Education].  
Burkina Faso, Ministry of Public Health (2010). Plan Stratégique de Sécurisation des Produits de Santé 
de la Reproduction [Strategic Plan for Reproductive Health Commodity Security].  
Burkina Faso, Ministry of Women, National Solidarity and the Family (1991). Stratégies nationales pour 
le renforcement du rôle des femmes dans le processus de développement [National strategies for 
strengthening the role of women in the development process]. Available at: 
https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_isn=93574&p_country=BFA&p_count=5
82 . 
Burkina Faso, Ministry of Women, National Solidarity and the Family (2009). Politique Nationale Genre 
[National Gender Policy]. Available at: https://burkinafaso.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub -
pdf/PolitiqueNationaleGenre2009. pdf. 
Centre d’Information et de Formation en matière de Droits Humains en Afrique [Centre for Information and Training on Human Rights in Africa], Amnesty  International  Burkina Faso and Association Maïa Bobo


---
*Page 170*
---

(2017). Rapport Parallèle sur le Burkina Faso au Comité pour l’élimination de la discrimination à l’égard 
des femmes [Shadow Report on Burkina Faso for the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
Against Women]. Available at:  https://ciddhu.uqam.ca/ . 
Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (2014). Participatory vulnerability assessment and 
planning of adaptation to climate change in the Yatenga, Burkina Faso. 
Frances Crowley, Chesney McOmber, Camilla Audia, Alexander Ritchie, Mark Pelling, Emma Visman (2017). Building resilience by challenging social norms: Towards a gender transformative approach in 
BRACED. 
Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/BRACED%2BLearning%2BPaper%2B5%2B -
%2BBuilding%2Bresilience%2Bby%2Bchallenging%2Bsocial%2Bnorms.pdf . 
Green Climate Fund (2018). FP074: Africa Hydromet Program – Strengthening Climate Resilience in Sub-
Saharan Africa: Burkina Faso Country Project Available at: https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp074
  
Institut National de la Statistique et de la Démographie [National Institute of Statistics and Demography] 
(2009). Annuaire statistique des indicateurs sociodémographiques désagrégés selon le sexe et/ou 
sensibles au genre [Statistical Yearbook of Sociodemographic Indicators Disaggregated by Sex and/or 
Gender Sensitive]. Available at: 
http://www.insd.bf/n/contenu/autres_publications/Annuaire%20complet.pdf .  
Institut National de la Statistique et de la Démographie [National Institute of Statistics and Demography] (2014). Livret Genre [Gender Booklet].  Available at: 
http://www.insd.bf/n/contenu/pub_periodiques/Livret_genre/Livret_Genre_BF_2014.pdf
.  
 
Institut National de la Statistique et de la Démographie [National Institute of Statistics and Demography] 
(2014). Livret Genre de la Région du Centre -Est [Centre -Est Region Gender Booklet].  Available at: 
http://www.insd.bf/n/contenu/pub_periodiques/Livret_genre/Livret_genre_regions/LIVRET_GENRE_C
entre- Est_2014.pdf . 
Institut National de la Statistique et de la Démographie [National Institute of Statistics and Demography] (2014). Livret Genre de la Région du Centre -Sud [Centre-Sud Region Gender Booklet]. Available at: 
http://www.insd.bf/n/contenu/pub_periodiques/Livret_genre/Livret_genre_regions/LIVRET_GENRE_C
entre-Sud_2014.pdf.  
Institut National de la Statistique et de la Démographie [National Institute of Statistics and Demography] (2014). Livret Genre de la Région de l’Est [Est Region Gender Booklet]. Available at: 
http://www.insd.bf/n/contenu/pub_periodiques/Livret_genre/Livret_genre_regions/LIVRET_GENRE_E
st_2014.pdf .  
 Konrad Adenauer Stiftung (2016). Etude de Base sur la Situation des Droits d’Accès des Femmes à la 
Terre dans les Provinces du Seno, du Gourma et de la Tapoa au Burkina Faso [Baseline Study on the 
Situation of Women's Land Access Rights in the Provinces of Seno, Gourma and Tapoa in Burkina Faso].  
Available at:


---
*Page 171*
---

https://www.kas.de/documents/252038/253252/7_dokument_dok_pdf_49309_3.pdf/5cbe1abc-
2c4e -d8ea-f59c-1530d1b118e6?version=1.0&t=1539648964022 .  
Organization for Economic Co- operation and Development (2018). Etude Pays SIGI – Burkina Faso 
[Burkina Faso Social Institutions and Gender Index]. Available at: 
http://www.oecd.org/development/development -gender/ETUDE -PAYS -SIGI -BURKINA -FASO.pdf .  
Oxfam (2011). Climate Change and Women Farmers in Burkina Faso. Impact and Adaptation Policies and 
Practices. Available at: https://www-cdn.oxfam.org/s3fs-public/file_attachments/rr -climate-change-
women -farmers-burkina-130711-en_4.pdf . 
Sophie Rigg, Emma Lovell, Florence Pichon (2016). Assessing gender in resilience programming: Burkina Faso. Available at: 
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi- assets/publications -opinion-
files/10216.pdf .  
United Nations Development Programme (2016). Gender Equality in National Climate Action: Planning for Gender-Responsive Nationally Determined Contributions. Available at: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/gender/Gender%20and%20Environment/Gender_E
quality_in_National_Climate_Action.pdf .  
United Nations Development Programme (2018). Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 
Statistical Update. Briefing note for countries on the 2018 Statistical Update: Burkina Faso. 
United Nations International Organization for Migration (2019). Rapport sur les Déplacements 1 
[Displacement Report].  Available at: https://dtm.iom.int/reports/burkina-faso -%E2%80%94 -rapport-
sur-les -d%C3%A9placements -1-6%E2%80%9418-ao%C3%BBt -2019  .  
World Bank Group (2017). The Global Findex Database: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution.  
World Economic Forum (2011). Global Gender Gap Report. Country Profiles: Burkina Faso.  
World Economic Forum (2015). Global Gender Gap Report. Insight Report. Available at: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GGGR2015/cover.pdf .


---
*Page 172*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Ivory Coast  
Abbott, Philip C. (2013). Cocoa and cotton commodity chains in West Africa: Policy and institutional 
roles for smallholder market participation. In A. Elbehri (ed.), Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential . 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/International Fund for Agricultural Development.  
Abdulai, Awudu (2018). Simon Brand Memorial Address: The challenges and adaptation to climate change by farmers in Sub -Saharan Africa. Agrekon – Agricultural Economics Research, Policy and Practice 
in Southern Africa, vol. 57, No. 1. Available at: 
https://doi-
org.ezproxy.library.wur.nl/10.1080/03031853.2018.1440246 . 
African Development Bank (2015). Profil Genre Pays. République de la Côte d’Ivoire  [Country Gender 
Profile, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire]. Abidjan.  
African Development Bank (2017). Les Indicateurs sur le genre, la pauvreté, l’environnement et progrès vers les objectifs de développement durable dans les pays africains [Gender, poverty, environment 
indicators and progress towards sustainable development goals in African countries]. Vol. XVIII. 
Economic and Social Statistics Division, Statistics Department, Abidjan.


---
*Page 173*
---

African Development Bank (2018). Cote D’ivoire Document De Stratégie Pays (DSP 2018 –2022) Combine 
Avec La Revue De La Performance Du Portefeuille Pays 2018 [Cote D'Ivoire Country Strategy Paper (CSP 
2018–2022) combined with 2018 Country Portfolio Performance Review]. Directorate General, West 
Africa.  
Agriculture Sector Support Project in Côte d'Ivoire (2016). Rapport consolidé d'audit financier. Rapport pays [Consolidated financial audit report. Country report ].  
Ahossane, Kadio et al. (2012). Agriculture Ouest Africaine et changement climatique : analyse exhaustive – Côte d’Ivoire  [West African Agriculture and Climate Change: Comprehensive Analysis – Côte d’Ivoire].  
Airport, Aeronautical and Meteorological Operations and Development Company (2016). Plan d’actions de la côte d’ivoire 2016 – 2020 pour la mise en place du Cadre National pour les Services Climatiques 
(CNSC) . Projet de mise en place du Cadre National pour les Services Climatiques (CNSC) [ Côte d'Ivoire 
Action Plan 2016 –2020 for implementation of the National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS). 
Project for the implementation of the National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS)]. National 
Directorate of Meteorology.  
Akindès, Francis (2001). Dynamique de la politique sociale en Côte d’Ivoire. Politique sociale et 
développement.  [Dynamics of social policy in Côte d'Ivoire. Social Policy and Development]. Paper No. 
8, July 2001, United Nations Research Institute for Social Development.  
Akpaka, Odile (2007). Analyse Genre Du Programme de Cooperation Cote D’ivoire – UNICEF (2003-2007)  
[Cote D'Ivoire: Gender Analysis of the Cote d'Ivoire Cooperation Program (2003 –2007)]. UNICEF.  
Allah-Kouadio, Rémi., Cissé, Babacar and Grégoire, L- J. (2015). Développement durable et émergence de 
l'Afrique [Sustainable development and the emergence of Africa].  
Bertelsmann Stiftung (2018). Côte d'Ivoire Country Report. Available at: https://www.ecoi.net/en/file/local/1427389/488289_en.pdf
.  
Bih, Emile and Acka -Douabele, Cynthia (2003). Etude sur l’Egalité des sexes dans le domaine de 
l’Education en Côte d’Ivoire [Study into gender equality in education in Côte d'Ivoire]. Educational Research Network for West and Central Africa (ERNWACA) and UNICEF.  
Brou, Yao Télesphore (2005). Climat, mutations socio -économiques et paysages en Côte d’Ivoire  
[Climate, Socio -Economic Changes and Landscapes in Côte d’Ivoire ]. Rapport d’activités scientifique, 
pédagogique, administrative et publications en appui au mémoire de synthèse présentés en vue de l’obtention de l’Habilitation à Diriger des Recherches [ Report on scientific, pedagogical and 
administrative activities and publications in support of the synthesis paper presented with a view to obtaining authorization to conduct research].  
Brou, Yao Télesphore, Akindès, Francis and Bigot, Sylvain (2005). La variabilité climatique en Côte d'Ivoire : entre perceptions sociales et réponses agricoles [ Climate variability in Côte d'Ivoire: between social 
perceptions and agricultural responses ]. Cahiers Agricultures, vol.14, No.6, pp. 533– 540. 
Caucus FEMPACI (2014). Plan Stratégique 2014-2016 [ Strategic Plan 2014-2016].  
Comoé, Fiédin Élise (2006). Relations de genre et migration en Côte d’Ivoire: De la décision de migrer à l’insertion dans le marché du travail. Thèse présentée à la Faculté des études supérieures en vue de l’obtention du grade de Philosophie Doctor (Ph. D.) en Démographie [ Gender relations and migration in 
Côte d'Ivoire: From the decision to migrate to labour market integration. Thesis presented to the Faculty


---
*Page 174*
---

of Graduate Studies with a view to obtaining a Doctorate in Philosophy (PhD) in Demography ]. 
Demography Department, Faculty of Arts and Science, University of Montreal.  
Diomandé, M.I. et al. (2013). Vers un changement du calendrier culture dans l'écotone forest -savane de 
la Côte d'Ivoire [ Changing the cropping calendar in the forest -savanna ecotone in Côte d’Ivoire], cited in 
the National Climate Change Programme.  
Djé, Kouakou Bernard (2007). Impacts des phénomènes ENSO sur la pluviométrie et leurs incidences sur 
la production cacaoyère en Côte d’Ivoire [Impacts of ENSO phenomena on rainfall and their effects on 
cocoa production in Côte d'Ivoire ].  
Dongo, Kouassi. et al. (2008). Analyse de la situation de l’environnement sanitaire des quartiers défavorisés dans le tissu urbain de Yopougon a Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire [Analysis of the situation of the health environment of disadvantaged neighbourhoods in the urban fabric of Yopougon in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire]. VertigO vol. 8, No. 3. Available at: https://journals.openedition.org/vertigo/6252 . 
ECOWAS (n.d.). ECOWAS Draft Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access. 
French Development Agency (2013). Note de Communication publique, Côte d'Ivoire, C2D/Conservation 
des Ressources Naturelles [Public Disclosure, Côte d’Ivoire, C2D/Conservation of Natural Resources].  
French Development Agency (2014). Profil Genre Cote D’ivoire  [Gender Profile Cote D'Ivoire] (updated 
2015). Available at: 
http://www.observatoiresdugenre.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/CotedIvoire_ProfilGenre_VR_Agence_GeA.pdf . 
Food and Agriculture Organization (2010). Climate Smart Agriculture:  Policies, Practices and Financing 
for Food Security, Adaptation and Mitigation. Rome, Italy.  
GCCA+ (2012). Renforcement des capacités dans la réalisation d’inventaires des gaz à effet de serre (GES) et d’études de vulnérabilité [Capacity building in conducting greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories and vulnerability studies ].  
Guehi, Goroza (2000). Impacts des changements climatiques dans les différentes zones climatiques de l’Afrique de l’Ouest en zone sub-humide : Cas de la Côte d'Ivoire  [Impacts of climate change in the 
different climatic zones in the sub-humid zone of West Africa: Côte d’Ivoire]. National Meteorological Office.  
Halle, Birgit and Bruzon, Véronique (2006). Profil Environnemental de la Côte d’Ivoire [Rapport Final Environmental Profile of Côte d'Ivoire, Final Report]. In Stratégie Programme National  [National Climate 
Change Strategy ]. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Working Group II (2014). Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability , Chapter 22: Africa. Available at: 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap22_FINAL.pdf
 
Kablan, N’Guessan and Pottier, Patrick (2008). La problématique de la gestion intégrée des zones côtières (GIZC) en Côte d’Ivoire [The issue of Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) in Côte 
d'Ivoire]. In Pottier, Patrick and Anoh Kouassi, Paul (eds.), Géographie du littoral de Côte d'Ivoire : 
éléments de réflexion pour une politique de gestion intégrée [ Geography of Côte d'Ivoire's coastline: 
food for thought for an integrated management policy ]. Coopération interuniversitaire Cocody -Abidjan, 
Côte d'Ivoire/Nantes, France, pp. 249 –274.


---
*Page 175*
---

Kaman, Paul (2013). Analyse des vulnérabilités aux catastrophes et des capacités de réponse en Côte 
d’Ivoire [Analysis of disaster vulnerabilities and response capacities in Côte d'Ivoire].  
Koissy -Kpein, Sandrine (2007). Education, genre et pouvoir de décision: Les mères "négocient -elles" en 
faveur des filles ?  [Education, gender and decision- making power: Do mothers "bargain" for daughters? ]. 
Laboratory of Economics and Management, Nantes – Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Nantes.  
Konan, Aya Josiane Irma Fabienne (2017). Genre et éducation en Côte d’Ivoire : étude de l’inégalité de performance à l’Université Félix Houphouët -Boigny [Gender and education in Côte d'Ivoire: study into 
inequality in performance at University of Félix Houphouët -Boigny ]. Single thesis for Doctorate in 
Sociology. University of Félix Houphouët -Boigny, Abidjan-Cocody.  
Koné, B. (2012). Communication pour le développement de la scolarisation des filles dans le nord de la Côte d’Ivoire [Communication for development of girls' schooling in northern Côte d'Ivoire]. Thesis for 
Doctorate in Information and Communication. Single thesis in Sociological Sciences. University of Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Abidjan -Cocody.  
Koné, Koko Siaka (2002). Pauvreté, genre et stratégies de survie des ménages en Côte d'Ivoire [Poverty, 
gender and survival strategies for households in Côte d’Ivoire]. Centre for Development Economics, University  Montesquieu -Bordeaux IV.  
Kouassi, Amani Michel (2010). 
Analysis of climate variability and of its influences on seasonal rainfall 
regimes in West Africa: Case of the Nazi (Bandama) watershed in Ivory Coast. CyberGeo: European Journal of Geography
. Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/288691358_Analysis_of_climate_variability_and_of_its_inf
luences_on_seasonal_rainfall_regimes_in_West_Africa_Case_of_the_N'zi_Bandama_watershed_in_Iv
ory_Coast .  
Le Masson, V., Benoudji, C., Reyes, S. S., & Bernard, G. (2019). How violence against women and girls undermines resilience to climate risks in Chad. Disasters, 43, S245-S270. 
Mul, Marloes L., Williams, Timothy O. and Cofie, Olufunke (2015). Le secteur des ressources en eau 
[Water resources sector]. In Zougmoré, Robert B., Traoré, Alain S. and Mbodj, Yamar (eds.) Overview of the Scientific, Political and Financial Landscape of Climate -Smart Agriculture in West Africa, p. 47. 
N'Dede, Bosoma Florence and Aka, Adou (2012). Causes des inégalités de sexe dans l’enseignement 
secondaire en Côte d’Ivoire [ Causes of gender inequalities in secondary education in Côte d'Ivoire ]. 
Single Thesis for Doctorate in Social Sciences in Human Capital Development. University of Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Abidjan -Cocody.  
Noufé, Dabissi et al. (2015). Climate change impact on agricultural production: the case of Comoe River basin in Ivory Coast. Hydrological Sciences Journal, vol. 60, No.11 (African Hydrology Research). 
Nyong, Anthony, Adesina, Francis and Osman-Elasha, B. (2007). The value of indigenous knowledge in climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies in the African Sahel. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, vol. 12, No. 5, pp. 787– 797. 
OECD Development Centre (2017). Youth Well -being Policy Review Côte d'Ivoire , EU -OECD Youth 
Inclusion project, Paris.  
Oka-Balima, Madeleine (2015). Développement durable et genre : priorités et orientations pour 
l'adaptation aux changements environnementaux en Afrique [Sustainable development and gender: 
priorities and approaches for adaptation to environmental changes in  Africa]. In Allah -Kouadio, R et al.


---
*Page 176*
---

(2015). Développement durable et é mergence de l'Afrique [Sustainable development and the 
emergence of Africa].  
Omitoyin, Bamidele O., Zougmoré, Robert B. and Jalloh, Abdulai (2016). Fishing sector. In Zougmoré, Robert 
B., Traoré, Alain S. and Mbodj, Yamar (eds.). Overview of the Scientific, Political and Financial Landscape of Climate -Smart Agriculture in West Africa , p. 37.  
Perry, Allison et al. (2009). Vulnerability of national economies to the impacts of climate change on 
fisheries. Fish and Fisheries, vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 173– 196. 
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2009a). Document De Politique Nationale Sur L’égalité Des Chances, L’équité 
Et Le Genre [National Policy Paper on Equal Opportunities, Equity and Gender (2009 –2013) ].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2009b). Résumé du document De Politique Nationale Sur L’égalité Des 
Chances, L’équité Et Le Genre (2009-2013) [Summary of the National Policy Paper on Equal 
Opportunities, Equity and Gender (2009 –2013)].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2010). Programme National d’Investissement Agricole 2010-2015 (PNIA) [National Agricultural Investment Programme 2010– 2015 (PNIA)].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2011a). Stratégie Nationale de Développement Durable : Engager la transition vers une société plus viable [National Sustainable Development Strategy: beginning the transition to a more sustainable society ]. 
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2011b). Stratégie Nationale de Développement Durable et Plan d’Actions (2012– 2015) [National Sustainable Development Strategy and Action Plan (2012 –2015)].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2011c). Stratégie Nationale de Gestion des Risques de Catastrophes & Plan d’Action Côte D’Ivoire [ National Disaster Risk Management Strategy and Action Plan for Côte D'Ivoire].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2012a). Stratégie Nationale du Développement Durable en Côte d’Ivoire dans la perspective de Rio+20 [National Sustainable Development in Côte d'Ivoire 20 years after the Rio 
Declaration].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2012b). Proposition de Stratégie d’adaptation au CC pour le littoral de Côte d’Ivoire, 2012 [ Proposal for a Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for the Coastal Zone of Côte d'Ivoire, 
2012]. Available at: 
http://www.gcca.eu/sites/default/files/ACP/workorders/wo6_ -_cote_divoire_ -
_coastal_adaptation_strategy.pdf .  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2012c). Stratégie Nationale de Développement Cultures Vivrières autres que le riz 2013–2020 (SNDCV) [National Strategy for the Development of Food Crops other than Rice, 2013 –
2020 (SNDCV)].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2012d). Stratégie Nationale révisée de Développement de la filière Riz (SNDR) 2012–2020 [Revised National Strategy for Development of the Rice Sector (SNDR) 2012– 2020]. National 
Rice Development Office, 40 pp.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2013). Indicateurs sectoriels relatifs au Développement Durable en Côte 
d’Ivoire [Sectoral Indicators for Sustainable Development in Côte d'Ivoire]. Document adopted at a 
national workshop on 26 and 27 September 2013 at Manhattan Suites Hotel in Riviera Attoban, Abidjan.


---
*Page 177*
---

Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2014a). Document de stratégie du Programme National Changement 
Climatique (2015–2020) [Strategy Document for the National Climate Change Programme (2015–
2020)].  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2014b). Etat des initiatives dans le domaine du changement climatique et le 
niveau d’intégration du changement climatique dans les stratégies et politiques nationales de développement : Cas de la Côte d’Ivoire [Status of climate change initiatives and level of integration of 
climate change into national development strategies and policies: Côte d'Ivoire]. Study Report (draft).  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2014c). L’agriculture intelligente face au climat en Côte d’Ivoire : état des lieux et besoins d’appui pour mieux intégrer l’agriculture intelligente face au climat (AIC) dans le PNIA . 
[Climate-smart agriculture in Côte d'Ivoire: status and support needs for better integrating climate-
smart agriculture (CSA) into the PNIA]. Available at: http://www.environnement.gouv.ci/pollutec/CTS3%20LD/CTS%203.2.pdf
.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2014d). National Strategy to Combat Gender-based Violence . Executive 
Summary . Available at: http://stoprapenow.org/uploads/docs/CDI_-_Exec_Summary_English.pdf .  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2014e). Plan Stratégique de Développement de l'Elevage, de la Pêche et de l'Aquaculture en Côte d'Ivoire (PSDEPA 2014– 2020) [ Strategic Development Plan for Livestock, Fisheries 
and Aquaculture in Côte d’Ivoire  (PSDEPA 2014– 2020)]. Vol. 1: Diagnostic – Stratégie de développement 
– Orientations [Diagnosis; Development strategy; Approaches]. 102 pp.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2014f). Rapport de la Côte d’Ivoire sur la mise en œuvre du Programme d’Action de Beijing vingt ans après [ Report from Côte d'Ivoire on Implementation of the Beijing Platform 
for Action, 20 years after its adoption ]. 
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2015a). Contributions Prévues Déterminées au niveau National de la Côte d’Ivoire [Nationally Determined Contributions for Côte d’Ivoire ]. 17 pp. Available at: . 
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2015b). Politique Nationale de Nutrition [ National Nutrition Policy ]. 35 pp.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2015c). Programme National Changement Climatique 2015– 2020 (PNCC) 
[National Climate Change Programme 2015 –2020 (NCCP )]. 
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2016a). Plan National de Développement (PND) 2016–2020. Matrice d’Actions Prioritaires. [National Development Plan (NDP) 2016 –2020. Priority Actions Matrix ]. Vol. 3.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2016b). Plan National de Développement (PND): Résumé [National 
Development Plan (NDP) 2016 -2020: Summary ]. Advisory Group.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2016c). Plan National de Développement Sanitaire (PNDS) 2016– 2020 
[National Health Development Plan (PNDS) 2016 –2020]. Consolidated draft. 88 pp.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2016d). Etude nationale prospective Côte d’Ivoire 2040 [ National Outlook 
Study ]. 162 pp. 
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2017a). Third National Communication of Cote d'Ivoire to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  
Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2017b). West African Coastal Areas (WACA) Resilience Investment Project (Côte d'Ivoire): Environmental and Social Management Framework.


---
*Page 178*
---

Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (2000). Mise en 
œuvre du Programme d’Action de Beijing (1995) et des textes issus de la vingt -troisième session 
extraordinaire de l’assemblée générale (2000) : Bilan et défis à relever. [Implementation of the Beijing 
Platform for Action (1995) and the outcome of the 23rd special session of the General Assembly (2000): 
Assessment and challenges ahead ]. 
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (2013). Etude de 
Vulnérabilité du Secteur Agricole face aux Changements Climatiques En Côte d’Ivoire [ Vulnerability Study 
of the Agricultural Sector to Climate Change in Côte d'Ivoire ]. Final Report, 118 pp.  
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, Ministry of Health and AIDS Control and National Institute of Statistics (2013). Demographic and Health Survey and Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (DHS -MICS) 2011–2012, Report . 
Available at: http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/1635
.  
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, Ministry for Women, Family and Social Affairs and United Nations Population Fund (2008). Crise et Violences Basées sur le Genre en Côte d'Ivoire: résultats des études et principaux défis [The Crisis 
and Gender -based Violence in Côte d’Ivoire: study findings and major challenges]. Abidjan. Available at: 
http://www.genreenaction.net/IMG/pdf/UNFPACRISEETVIOLENCESBASEESSURLEGENREENCI_FRENCH.pdf
.  
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, Ministry for Women, the Family and Children (2019). Rapport d’évaluation de la mise en œuvre de La Déclaration et du Programme D’actions De Beijing Vingt cinq ans après son adoption [ Evaluation 
Report on Implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 25 Years after its Adoption (Beijing+25)]. Available at: 
https://www.unwomen.org/ -
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-reviews/cote_divoire.pdf?la=en&vs=822.  
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, National Institute of Statistics (2012). Enquête démographique et de santé aux 
indicateurs multiples (EDSIM) [Multiple Indicator Demographic and Health Survey (MI -DHS)].  
Rhodes, Edward R., Jalloh, Abdulai and Diouf, Aliou (2014). Africa Interact: Enabling research-to -policy 
dialogue for adaptation to climate change in Africa. Review of research and policies for climate change 
adaptation in the agriculture sector in West Africa. Working paper 090. 52 pp.  
Robin, Marc et al. (2018). Les risques côtiers en Côte d’Ivoire [Coastal hazards in Ivory Coast].  In Bulletin 
de l'Association de géographes français, 81e année, 2004-3 (septembre): Aménagement des littoraux et 
conséquences géomorphologiques / Les littoraux sableux et dunaires [Bulletin of the Association of 
French Geographers, 81st year, 2004-3 (September): Shoreline development and geomorphological consequences/Sandy and dune coastlines]. pp. 298-314. 
SalvaTerra (2013). Cost-benefit Analysis of REDD+ for Ivory Coast and Initiation of Discussions with the 
Agricultural and Forestry Sectors.  
Savadogo, Patrice and Zougmoré, Robert B. (2016). Forestry and agroforestry sector. In Zougmoré, 
Robert B., Traoré, Alain S. and Mbodj, Yamar (eds.). Overview of the Scientific, Political and Financial Landscape of Climate -Smart Agriculture in West Africa , p. 61.  
Sehi Bi, Tra Jamal (2012). Emancipation économique de la femme et dynamique des rapports de pouvoir en pays Gouro (Côte d’Ivoire) [Economic emancipation of women and dynamics of power relations in Gouro countries (Côte d'Ivoire)]. Single thesis for Doctorate in Sociology. University of Félix Houphouët -
Boigny, Abidjan-Cocody.  
United States, Central Intelligence Agency (2018). Africa: Cote d’Ivoire. Accessed on 10 December 2019 Available at: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -world -factbook/geos/iv.html
.


---
*Page 179*
---

United Nations Development Programme (2016). Human Development Report 2016. Available at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2016_human_development_report.pdf . 
United Nations Development Programme (2017). Egalité des Sexes en Côte d’Ivoire, le rôle du PNUD 2010-2017 [Gender Equality in Côte d'Ivoire, the role of UNDP 2010 -2017].  
World Bank (2013). Being a woman in Cote d'Ivoire:  empowerment challenges . Gender Consultations 
Report Summary . World Bank Regional Office, Côte d'Ivoire.  
World Bank (2017). Are Women the Key to Unlocking Economic Emergence in Côte d’Ivoire? 5th edition.  
World Bank Group.  
World Bank (2018a). Cote d'Ivoire. Accessed on 10 December 2019. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/country/cote -divoire.  
World Bank (2018b). So Tomorrow Never Dies:  Côte d'Ivoire and climate change . 7th Edition. World Bank 
Group.  
World Meteorological Organization (2007). Conférence Internationale pour la Réduction de la Vulnérabilité des Systèmes Naturels Economiques et Sociaux en Afrique de l’Ouest face aux 
changements climatiques, Ouagadougou du 24 au 27 janvier 2007. [International Conference on the 
Reduction of Vulnerability of Natural, Economic and Social Systems to Climate Change in West Africa, 
Ouagadougou, 24-27 January 2007].  
Yao N’Guettia, René, Oule Anicet, Fortune and N'goran Kouadio, Désiré (2013). Étude de vulnérabilité 
du secteur agricole face aux changements climatiques en côte d'ivoire [Vulnerability Study of the Agricultural Sector to Climate Change in Côte d'Ivoire]. Final report.  
Yeo et al. (2016). Vulnerability and adaptation to climate change in the Comoe River Basin (West Africa). 
Springerplus, vol. 5, No.1, p. 847. 
Zougmoré, Robert B., Traoré, Alain S. and Mbodj, Yamar (2015). Overview of the Scientific, Political and 
Financial Landscape of Climate -Smart Agriculture in West Africa. Available at: 
https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/67103/http://CCAFS_WP118_English_web.pdf .


---
*Page 180*
---

 
 
   
 
    
 
    
 
 Mali  
 
African Court of Human and Peoples' Rights (2018). Case Association pour le Progrès et la Défense des 
Droits des Femmes Maliennes [Association for the Progress and Defence  of the Rights of Malian Women 
– APDF] and Institute for Human Rights and Development in Africa (IHRDA) vs. Republic of Mali. 
Application no. 04612016.  Available at: http://fr.african-court.org/images/Cases/Judgment/046%20-
%202016%20 -
%20Association%20Pour%20le%20Progr%C3%A8s%20et%20la%20Defense%20Des%20Droits%20Des
%20Femmes%20Maliennes%20 -%20APDF%20c.%20Mali%20-
%20Arr%C3%AAt%20du%2011%20Mai%202018-%20Optimized.pdf . 
African Development Bank Group (2011). Mali: Profil Genre du Pays [Mali: Country Gender Profile].  
Available at: https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project -and-
Operations/Mali_ -_2012_ -_Profil_du_genre_pays.pdf . 
CARE (2013). Men, Gender Equality and Gender Relations in Mali Findings from the International Men 
and Gender Equality Survey. Available at: https://www.care.org/sites/default/files/documents/CARE -
IMAGES -Mali -Summary -Report- FINAL.pdf . 
Djoudi, Houria (2016). Brief for GSDR - 2016 Update. At the intersection of inequities – Lessons learned 
from CIFOR's work on gender and climate change adaptation in West Africa.  Available at: 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/978042_Djoudi_At%20the%20intersectio


---
*Page 181*
---

n%20of%20inequities%20 -
%20Lessons%20learned%20from%20CIFORs%20work%20on%20gender%20and%20climate%20chang
e%20adaptation%20in%20West%20Africa.pdf . 
Djoudi, Houria and Brockhaus, Maria (2011). Is adaptation to climate change gender neutral? Lessons 
from communities dependent on livestock and forests in northern Mali. International Forestry Review , 
vol.13, No.2, p. 123–135.  
Doumbia Gakou, Assa and Kuépié, Mathias (2008). Niveau et déterminants de l’insertion des femmes 
sur le marché du travail au Mali [Level and determinants of insertion of women in the labour market in Mali].  STATECO,  vol. 103, p. 61–75. 
French Development Agency (2016). Profil Genre Mali  [Mali Gender Profile ]. Available at: 
https://plateforme -elsa.org/wp -content/uploads/2014/02/Profil-Genre-Mali.pdf
.  
GIZ (2017). Rapport de Cartographie des Projets Changements Climatiques au Mali (Période 2014– 2017) 
[Mapping Report of Climate Change Projects in Mali (2014– 2017)]. Available at: https://wash-
alliance.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/60/2018/07/201710_Cartographie -des -projet -CC_-VF.pdf . 
International Labour Office (2011). Walking on a tightrope: Balancing MF financial sustainability and poverty orientation in Mali Working Paper No. 54.  
Least Developed Countries Expert Group (2015). Strengthening gender considerations in adaptation planning and implementation in the least developed countries. Available at: https://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/application/pdf/21673_unfccc_leg_gender_low_v5.pdf
.  
The Netherlands, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2011). Women's economic empowerment to foster food 
security. Case studies from developing countries. Available at: https://www.enterprise-
development.org/wp-content/uploads/Womens_Economic_Empowerment_Food_Security.pdf .  
  
Njobe, Bongiwe and Kaaria, Susan (2015). Les Femmes et l’Agriculture. Le Potentiel Inexploité dans la 
Vague de Transformation [Women and Agriculture. The Untapped Potential in the Transformation 
Wave]. Available at:  
https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Events/DakAgri2015/Les_femmes_dans_l_
agriculture.pdf .  
Republic of Mali (2007). Programme d’Action National d’Adaptation aux Changements Climatiques 
[National Action Programme for Climate Change Adaptation]. Available at: 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/mli01f.pdf .  
Republic of Mali (2011a). Politique Nationale sur les Changements Climatiques [National Climate Change 
Policy].  Available at: 
http://www.gcca.eu/sites/default/files/catherine.paul/mali_pncc_rapport_final_2011-08-05.pdf .  
Republic of Mali (2011b). Stratégie Nationale Changements Climatiques –  Mali (SNCC) [National Climate 
Change Strategy – Mali (NCCS)].  
Republic of Mali (2014). Mise en œuvre de la Déclaration et du Programme d’action de Beijing (1995) et 
des textes issus de la vingt -troisième session extraordinaire de l’Assemblée générale (2000) dans le 
contexte du vingtième anniversaire de la quatrième Conférence mondiale sur les femmes et de l’adoption 
de la Déclaration et du Programme d’action de Beijing en 2015 [Implementati on of the Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for Action (1995) and the outcome of the twenty -third special session of the 
General Assembly (2000) in the context of the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on


---
*Page 182*
---

Women and the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action in 2015]. Available at: 
https://www.uneca.org/sites/default/files/uploaded-
documents/Beijing20/NationalReviews/mali_beijing_review_report.pdf . 
Republic of Mali (2016a). Contribution Déterminée au Niveau National (CDN) [Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC)].  
Republic of Mali (2016b).  Plan d’Investissement pour une Economie Verte et Résiliente aux Changements 
Climatiques pour le Mali [Investment Plan for a Green and Climate -Resilient Economy for Mali].  Available 
at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/1688867/Republic_of_Mali_Country_Programme.
pdf/bfb09316-0d0d -6685-40e6-dfaf6d9b459a .  
Republic of Mali (2017). LOI N°2017- 001/ Du 11 avril 2017 portant sur le foncier agricole. [Act no. 2017-
001/ of 11 April, 2017 on agricultural land]. Available at: https://www.droit-afrique.com/uploads/Mali-
Loi-2017-01-foncier -agricole.pdf . 
Republic of Mali (2018). Enquête Démographique et de Santé 2018 (EDS) : Rapport de Synthèse 
[Demographic and Health Survey 2018 (DHS): Summary report]. Available at: 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/SR261/SR261.pdf . 
Republic of Mali, Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children and the Family (2007). Etude sur la 
Situation de la Femme au Mali  [Study on the Situation of Women in Mali ].  
Republic of Mali, Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children and the Family (2011). Politique Nationale Genre du Mali [Mali National Gender Policy] (PNG-Mali)].  Available at: 
http://www.passip.org/passip_intranet/pdf-intranet/Politique/9 -
41%20Politique%20Nationale%20Genre_2011.pdf . 
 
Republic of Mali, Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children and the Family and United Nations 
Development Programme (2013). Evaluation Finale du Projet d’ «Appui au Renforcement de l’Equité Hommes -Femmes pour la Réduction des Disparités Economiques et Sociopolitiques (PAREHF3) [Final 
Evaluation of the Project Support for the Strengthening of Gender Equality for the Reduction of  Economic 
and Sociopolitical Disparities (PAREHF3)]. 
 Republic of Mali, Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children and the Family (2019). Cinquième 
Rapport National du Mali de Suivi de la mise en œuvre de la Déclaration et du Programme d’Action de 
Beijing de 1995 RAPPORT BEIJING+25  
[Mali’s Fifth National Review of Implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 1995 
BEIJING+25 REPORT]. Available at: 
https://www.unwomen.org/ -
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-reviews/mali.pdf?la=en&vs=2345.  
Republic of Mali, Ministry of Economy and Finance (2019). Cadre Stratégique pour la Relance 
Economique et le Développement Durable [Framework for the Economic Recovery and Sustainable 
Development of Mali ] (CREDD). Available at: https://www.maliapd.org/wp -
content/uploads/2019/07/Version-Finale -CREDD -2019-2023.pdf .  
Republic of Mali, Ministry of the Environment, Sanitation and Sustainable Development (2018). Troisième Communication Nationale du Mali à la Convention Cadre des Nations Unies sur les 
Changements Climatiques. [Mali’s Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change ]. Available at:


---
*Page 183*
---

https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/SubmissionsStaging/NationalReports/Documents/01532_Mali -NC3-1-
Rapport%20TCN%20%202018%20-%20copie.pdf .  
Republic of Mali, National Institute of Statistics (2018). Enquête Modulaire et Permanente Auprès des 
Ménages. Rapport d’Analyse. [ Permanent Modular Household Survey ] (EMOP). Analysis report . Available 
at: http://www.instat-mali.org/contenu/eq/rana18pas1_eq.pdf . 
Sous -Cluster Violence Basée sur le Genre (2018). Bulletin VBG à Baana [GBV in Baana bulletin].  Available 
at: 
https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.info/files/documents/files/
draft-bulletin_sc_vbg_jav -juin_2018finale_2.pdf .  
Thomson Reuters Foundation (2018). Mali : La loi et les MGF . [Mali: The law and FGM].Available at: 
https://www.28toomany.org/static/media/uploads/Law%20Reports/mali_law_report_v1_(september
_2018)_french.pdf  . 
United Nations Development Programme (2012). Le Fonds National Climat du Mali [Mali National Climate Fund]. 
 United Nations Development Programme (2018a).  Stratégie Genre du PNUD Mali [UNDP Mali's Gender 
Strategy]. Available at: 
https://www.ml.undp.org/content/dam/rba/docs/Reports/undp -rba-
Strat%C3%A9gie%20Genre%20du%20PNUD%20Mali%202018-2020-july%202018.pdf . 
United Nations Development Programme (2018b). Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 
Statistical Update. United Nations Population Fund (2017). Santé et Droits Sexuels et de la Procréation des Adolescentes au 
Mali [Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights in Mali]. Available at: 
http://equipop.org/publications/Rapport%20-ados -Mali- UNFPA.pdf
.  
UN Women (2015). Le Progrès des Femmes dans le Monde 2015-2016 [Progress of the World's Women 
2015–2016]. 
 UN Women (2017). Gender Analysis of Labour Market Outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa: Recent Evidence 
from Cameroon and Mali . Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital -
library/publications/2017/8/gender- analysis -of-labour -market -outcomes -in-sub-saharan-africa .  
World Bank Group (2017). The Global Findex Database: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech 
Revolution.  
World Health Organization (2015). Tendances de la mortalité maternelle : 1990-2015 [Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990– 2015].


---
*Page 184*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Niger  
 
Amadou, Mahamadou Laouali (2004).  Impact de la variabilité climatique sur les systèmes de production 
au Niger : Cas des zones de Gaya et d’Agui  ; Mémoire de DESS [Impact of climatic variability on 
production systems in Niger: the case of the Gaya and Agui areas; Specialized Postgraduate Diploma 
Dissertation].  
 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2018). Série des Evaluations Genre des Pays, 
Profil national genre des secteurs de l’agriculture et du développement rural  [Country Gender 
Assessment Series, National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods].  Niamey, Niger. 
 French Development Agency (2016). Profil Genre Niger [Gender Profile: Niger].  
 
Illa, Kané (2015). L’embouche ovine comme stratégie d’adaptation des femmes au changement 
climatique au Niger [Sheep fattening as a strategy for women's adaptation to climate change in Niger], 
17 May. Available at: https://climatereporters.com/2015/05/lembouche- ov ine-comme -strategie -
dadaptation -des-femmes -au-changement-climatique -au-niger/ . 
Modieli, Amadou Djibrilla (2010).  Analyse des données de l’Enquête Nationale Budget/Consommation  
(ENBC_2007/2008): Genre et Pauvreté  [Analysis of data from the National Budget/Consumption Survey 
(ENBC_2007/2008): Gender and Poverty ]. Available at: http://www.stat -
niger.org/statistique/file/omd/Genre_Pauvrete.pdf .


---
*Page 185*
---

 
Nicolas, Yveline (2017).  Intégration de la dimension Genre dans les politiques et programmes 
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques et de gestion des ressources naturelles dans la zone sahélo -
saharienne [Mainstreaming Gender into policies and climate change adaption plans and natural 
resource management in the Sahelo -Saharan region]. Available at:  http://www.oss-online.org/rep -
sahel/images/Docs -2017/Annexe -12-Etude -DimensionGenre-au -Sahel-REPSAHEL.pdf . 
 
Nigerien Press Agency (2019). Mutilations Génitales Féminines (MGF) en baisse au Niger, 2% en 2012 contre 5% en 1998 [Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) decreases in Niger, 2% in 2012 versus 5% in 1998], 6 February. Available at: http://www.anp.ne/?q=article/ mutilations -genitales -feminines -mgf- en-baisse -
au-niger-2%25 -en-2012-contre-5%25 -en-1998. 
 Republic of Niger (2016a). “Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC)” of Niger. Available at: 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Niger%20First/Niger-INDC-
final_Eng.pdf . 
 
Republic of Niger (2016b). Troisieme Communication Nationale A La Conference Des Parties De La 
Conventioncadre Des Nations Unies Sur Les Changements Climatiques [Third National Communication 
to the Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change].  
Available at: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/nernc3_0.pdf.  
Republic of Niger (2017a). Plan d’Intégration Genre et Inclusion Sociale  (PIGIS) [Gender and Social 
Inclusion Integration Plan – PIGIS] MCA -Niger.  
 
Republic of Niger (2017b). Politique Nationale Genre  (Juillet 2017) [ National Gender Policy (July 2017)].  
 
Republic of Niger (2018). Revue nationale volontaire sur les objectifs de developpement durable au Niger 
[Voluntary National Review on the Sustainable Development Goals]. 
Available at: 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/19886Niger_Revue_national_volontaire_
ODD_Niger_Final40718.pdf . 
 Republic of Niger, Ministry of Finance and National Institute of Statistics (2012). Contribution des 
femmes aux dépenses des ménages et à la réduction de la pauvreté à Maradi [Women's Contribution to 
Household Expenditure and Poverty Reduction in Maradi ]. 
Available at: 
http://www.undp.org/content/dam/niger/docs/Publications/UNDP- NE-
RapportContributionFemmesManages.pdf . 
Republic of Niger, Ministry of Planning (2017).  Plan de Développement Economique et Social (2017–
2021) [ Economic and Social Development Plan (2017– 2021)]. Available at:  
http://www.fao.org/faolex/results/details/en/c/LEX -FAOC176028/ . 
Republic of Niger, Ministry of Planning, Land Use and Community Development (2013). Analyse situation 
enfant et femme selon équité au Niger [Analysis of women’s and children’s equality in Niger]. Available 
at: http://www.stat-niger.org/statistique/file/DSEDS/Rapport - analyse -situation -enfants -femmes -selon -
equite-Niger.pdf   
 
Republic of Niger, Ministry of the Interior, Public Security, Decentralization and Customary and Religious Affairs and General Directorate of Decentralization and Local Authorities (2015). Subdivisions 
administratives [Administrative Subdivisions]. Available at: https://www.decentralisation -
niger.org/images/publications/decentralisation/brochure_information_decentralisation.pdf.


---
*Page 186*
---

Republic of Niger, National Institute of Statistics and ICF International (2013). Enquête Démographique 
et de Santé et à Indicateurs Multiples du Niger 2012 [Niger Demographic and Health Survey and Multiple 
Indicators 2012]. Calverton, Maryland, USA. Available at: 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR277/FR277.pdf.  
Republic of Niger, National Office for Editing and Publishing (2019). octobre 2019  Dr Kamayé Maazou, 
Secrétaire Exécutif Du CNEDD :«Le Niger a placé la lutte contre la désertification au cœur de ses priorités 
nationales de développement»  Invité de Sahel dimanche  [Dr Kamayé Maazou, Executive Secretary of 
CNEDD: "Niger has placed the fight against desertification at the heart of its national development 
priorities.  Guest of the Sahel Dimanche newspaper], 18 October. Available at: 
http://www.lesahel.org/index.php/2019/10/18/dr-kamaye -maazou -secretaire -executif -du-cnedd- le-
niger -a-place- la-lutte -contre -la-desertification-au -coeur -de-ses -priorites -nationales -de-
developpement/ . 
 
Republic of Niger, National Institute of Statistics (2017).  Enquête Démographique et de Santé du Niger 
EDSN -V 2017 [ Niger Demographic and Health Survey ]. Available at: http://www.stat -
niger.org/statistique/file/EDSN_MICSIV2012/EDSNV_Resultats_Preliminaires.pdf . 
Toudjani Saratou Malam Goni (2016).  Femme, Agriculture et changement climatique au Niger  [Women, 
Agriculture and Climate Change in Niger]. Available at: https://jean -jaures.org/blog/niger -femmes -
agriculture- et-changement-climatique  
 
United Nations Climate Change Conference  (2015). Le Niger présente son plan d'action climat pour 
l'accord de Paris 2015 Niger presents its climate action plan for the Paris 2015 agreement], 9 October. 
Available at:   https://www.mediaterre.org/actu,20151009150951,1.html . 
United Nations Development Programme (2016). Niger: Rapport de Pays – PNA [Niger: Country Report 
– NAP]. Available at: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/Climate%20and%20Disaster%20Resilience/Climate
%20Change/Niger_NAP_country_briefing_FRE.pdf.  
 UN Women (2019). Rapport du Niger sur la mise en œuvre de la Déclaration et du Programme d’Action 
de Beijing +25 [Niger's  Report on the Implementation of the Beijing +25: the Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action ]. Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/ -
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-reviews/niger.pdf?la=en&vs=5249. 
 World Bank (2018). Disrupting the Gender Divide in Mali, Chad, Niger, and Guinea. Available at:
 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2018/12/10/rapport -reduire-les -inegalites -de-
genre-au-mali -tchad-niger -et-guinee .


---
*Page 187*
---

Activities Indicators  and Targets Timelines   Responsibilities Costs  (USD)
Impact Statement:  The programme  aims at promoting  climate‐resilient communities  and the local economies  in the 
four target countries  (Fund‐level Impact), by empowering  local governments  and stakeholders  with improved  access 
to adaptation  finance, knowledge  and know‐how to deliver climate‐resilient investments  that ensure the resilience  of 
local livelihoods  and systems, thereby contributing  to the alignment  of the targeted countries  with Paris Agreement  
objectives,  national sectoral targets, and specific SDG targets. The enhanced  institutional,  technical and financial 
capacity of local governments  and stakeholders  will increase the share of climate‐compatible  investments  in the key 
sectors of intervention,  especially  in climate resilient and diversified  livelihoods  options (ARA 1.0), health and 
wellbeing,  water and food security (ARA 2.0), infrastructure  and built environment  (ARA 3.0), ecosystems  and eco‐
system services (ARA 4.0).
This programme  has been designed to ensure gender responsiveness.  The programme  is intended to lead to greater 
resilience  and adaptive capacity of women and girls living particularly  in relation to health, wellbeing,  food security, 
infrastructure,  and ecosystems ‐related services. It targets the attainment  of three main impacts:
‐ Women and girls empowerment  to promote autonomy  and enable them to become agents of change via increased  
engagement  in community  activity and decision‐making;
‐ Better health outcomes  and improved  physical and emotional  safety of women and girls;
‐ Expanded  employment  opportunities  and more sustainable  livelihoods  for women and girls.A1.2 Number of males and females benefiting  from the adoption of 
diversified,  climate resilient livelihood  options (including  fisheries, 
agriculture,  tourism, etc.)
A2.3 Number of males and females with more climate‐resilient water 
securityA3.1 Changes in expected losses of economic  assets due to the impact of 
extreme‐climate‐related disasters in the geographic  area of the GCF 
interventionA4.1 Hectares of terrestrial  forest, terrestrial  non‐forest, freshwater  and 
coastal marine areas brought under restoration  and/or improved  
ecosystems
Baseline: 0
Target: at least 50% of 
female beneficiaries.  Indicators  are sex 
disaggregated  where applicable  as per GCF’s Results Framework.Throughout  the 5 years of the 
programme.  Annual reports available 
each Q4.AE (BOAD) and EEs (FIE, ANFICT, ANICT, 
DGDDL, UEMOA CCT), UNCDF TA.22,449,356.33 $                                   
Activity 1.1. Assessments  of local stakeholders’  needs for tailored awareness ‐raising and capacity building, including 
on use of and access to climate data and information,  climate risk‐informed  local planning and budgeting,  
participatory  and gender‐sensitive decision‐making process, execution,  monitoring  and reporting  of resilience  
building initiatives,  are undertaken.  Promotion  of local processes  that are sensitive to gender differences  and 
inequalities  that influence  perceptions  of risk.Number of gender specific analysis integrated  in the awareness  and 
capacity building assessments  performed  ‐ baseline 0 ‐ Targeted ‐ All (100%
assessments  performed  to integrate gender analysis.         
Gender expertise  will be mobilized  through consultants  recruitment  with 
support from national gender specialised  staff.  One (1) in Q1 and Q2 of year 1 and one 
(1) in Q1 and Q2 of year 3.UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 1.2. Sensitization  activities are organized  with key local stakeholders,  especially  including vulnerable  groups 
such as women and youth, and delivered  according  to the identified  needs. Increase of vulnerable  groups awareness  
of climate change, while enhancing  their civic engagement.  Percentage  of women and girls invited for the awareness  and capacity 
building sessions organized  as part of Activity 1.2                        Baseline 0 ;  
Target at least 50% for all sessions under 1.2                                        All 
reporting  for activity 1.2 shall present the list of participants  using gender 
disaggregated  data. Gender expertise  will be mobilized  through consultant s
recruitment  to propose relevant messaging  for women and girls 
empowerments  in the context of local governance.  with support from 
national gender specialised  staff.  Dedicated  sessions will be organized  for 
women and girls to ensure their voices are captured in the decision making 
processes.   1 awareness  raising event per targeted 
commune  every year.UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 1.3. A local outreach and communication  strategy is developed  and implemented.  Widely reach out to 
communities  about gender‐sensitive,  inclusive and resilient local development.Percentage  of women and girls invited for the outreach and sensibilization  
strategy (Activity 1.3)                     
Baseline 0 ;  Target at least 50% for all activity under 1.3                                   
All reporting  for activity 1.3  shall present the list of participants  using 
gender disaggregated  data. Gender expertise  will be mobilized  through 
consultants'  recruitment  to propose relevant messaging  for women and 
girls empowerments  in the context of local governance,  with support from 
national gender specialised  staff.  Dedicated  sessions will be organized  for 
women and girls to ensure their voices are captured in the implementation  
of the strategy.  1 during year 2. UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs).
Percentage  of women scientists involved in the climate risk assessment  ‐ 
Target : on equal competence  priority to be given to women scientists as 
the result of the procurement  process. On the best level of effort 30% 
target.
Dedicated  budget to collect data disaggregated  information  (Percentage  of 
women included in the assessment  samples)
Baseline 0 Target 30% ‐  
All samples for V&A framework  to include gender disaggregated  
information.
Activity 2.2. Local Information  Systems for Adaptation  (LISA), in complement  of existing early warning systems and 
climate information  services, are set up in each target local government.  Climate information  is more accessible  for 
all, including women and youth. Percentage  of women trained to set and / or use the LISA platforms  
Baseline 0% Target 50%. 
Available Q1 of year 2UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 3.1 Capacities  of local authorities  for participatory  and gender‐sensitive adaptation  planning is strengthened.  
Understanding  by local authorities  of gender specific issues on resilience  building. 
A gender expert will be hired as consultant  to propose relevant messaging  in responses  to the capacity and technical 
gaps identified.  A necessary  efforts will be made to invite women leaders to these events.Percentage  of women and girls invited for the annual workshops.                 
Baseline 0 ;  Target at least 50% for all annual  workshops  under 3.1.
Number of women champions  included in the decision making process. 
Baseline 0. Target: 3 per commune.  All reporting  for activity 3.1 shall 
present the list of participants  using gender disaggregated  data.One (1) every year, after APA.
UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 3.2. Annual Investment  Plans (AIPs) for adaptation  are developed  and/or integrated  into local development  
plans and adaptation  investments  budgeted  in line with local planning cycles. The AIPs integrate gender‐sensitive and 
gender‐responsive  adaptation  investments.  400 Annual investment  plans, to be developed  using gender sensitive and 
responsive   approaches.Support throughout  the year. Annual 
investment  plans for each local 
governments  ready each year by Q4. UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs).Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan
Local Climate Adaptative Living Facility - Benin 
The following Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GAP) is based on the Gender Policy and Action Plan guidance from the GCF  : https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-policy. 
The GAP presents:
- Work undertaken to address gender issues in the project/programme;
- Targets and design features, included in the project/programme, to address gender concerns and ensure tangible benefits to wo men and men, especially for vulnerable communities;
- Mechanisms to ensure implementation of the gender design elements;
- Gender-sensitive monitoring and evaluation indicators.
Component  1: The awareness  and response  capacities  of local governments,  local actors and communities  are strengthened  and promote local adaptation  responses
 $                                                       606,930.22  Outcome  Statement  1: Local climate governance  is strengthened  and enables the systemic integration  of appropriate  local adaptation  responses  into local development  processes,  in a gender‐responsive  manner including (a) the empowerment  of women through their active inclusion in consultation  processes  and 
positions of leadership,  (b) explicit consideration  of gender disaggregated ‐needs in sub‐project design, (c) capacity building of women and girls to enable greater roles in adaptation.
Outcome  Statement  2: Access to climate finance at the local is enhanced  and increases  the share of resilience  building investments  in priority sectors, while also increasing   gender equity in the allocation  of finance, mandatory  project safeguards  and gender‐ responsive  project consultation  framework.
Output Statement  1:  Awareness  of climate change risks and impacts is enhanced  at the local level.
Output statement  2: Climate data availability  and access are improved  for risk informed  local decision making
Output statement  3: Capacities  of local governments  to plan, budget, implement  and monitor for effective locally led adaptation  are enhancedActivity 2.1. Localized analyses of climatic risks, looking at local hazards, exposure and vulnerabilities  are conducted.  
Vulnerability  analyses are based on gender analyses and highlighting  women specific vulnerabilities.  
Available Q1 of year 2UNCDF (TA) and National Agencies (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT, DGDDL as EEs).
552,788.04 $


---
*Page 188*
---

Activity 3.3. Local government  capacities  to execute  and manage adaptation  investments are  strengthened and  
mechanisms  for community ‐ based contracting  (especially  for women's groups)  strengthened.Percentage  of the adaptation  investments implemented through  
community  based contracting  which target with women's groups.  Target : 
50% of community  based contracts.Support throughout  the year.  Every 
year.UNCDF (TA)  and National Agencies  (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT,  DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 3.4.  Local M&E to track  adaptation  investments are  established  and used by local  governments  to assess 
adaptation  benefits.  These work  on gender disaggregated  data. Percentage  of women trained for management  and monitoring  capacity  
Baseline 0% Target  50%. Workshops  every year, Q.3
UNCDF (TA) and  National Agencies  (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT,  DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 3.5. Target local governments  are sensitized  and trained on  the LoCAL  standard  and PBCRG features. PBCRG 
features, e.g., menu of investments and  performance  measures,  are gender sensitive thus  contributing  to establish  
system for gender ‐responsive planning.  Percentage  of women and  girls invited  to training  sessions.                 
Baseline 0 ;  Target  at least  50% for all  workshops  under 3.5.   
Number of women champions  included in the decision  making process. 
Baseline 0. Target  3 per commune.  All reporting for activity 3.1 shall  
present the list  of participants  using gender disaggregated  data.Support throughout  the year.  Every 
year.
UNCDF (TA) and  National Agencies  (incl. 
National gender specialised staff in  FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT,  DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 4.1.  Sensitization  with relevant local stakeholders on  access modalities  to the Facilities  is undertaken.  Focus 
on gender‐responsive and  gender sensitive communication  for encouraging women groups/SME ‐ sponsored  
pipelines .Percentage  of women and  girls participating  in the awareness  and capacity 
building sessions organized as part of Activity 4.1                        Baseline 0 ;  
Target at least 50%  for all sessions under 4.1  
All reporting for activity 4.1 shall  present the list  of participants  using 
gender disaggregated  data. Gender expertise  will be mobilized  through 
consultants'  recruitment  to propose  relevant messaging for women and  
girls empowerments  in the context of local  governance.  Dedicated sessions  
will be organized  for women and  girls to ensure their voices are  captured in  
the decision  making processes.  Support throughout  the year.  Every 
year.
BOAD (AE) and  CCT UEMOA (EE).
Activity 4.2. Tailored capacity building  support in climate smart  production  and processing  processes is  delivered to 
the eligible  stakeholders.  Ensuring women and  men equally  benefit from capacity building  activities.  Percentage  of women and  girls participating  in the sessions.                 
Baseline 0 ;  Target  at least 50%  for all sessions under 4.3. All  reporting  for 
activity 4.3 shall  present the list  of participants  using gender disaggregated  
data. Support throughout  the year.  Every 
year.
BOAD (AE) and  CCT UEMOA (EE).
Activity 4.3. TA to eligible  local private sector  actors is delivered to develop compliant  and bankable  investments 
proposals.  Ensuring women and  men equally  benefit from capacity building  activities, while  mainstreaming gender  
into investment proposals.Percentage  of women’s groups  targeted/  involved in the TA activities, 
advancing  gender equality.
Baseline: 0,  Target: 50%Support throughout  the year. Every 
year.
BOAD (AE) and  CCT UEMOA (EE).
Activity 5.1.  PBCRG allocations  are transferred  to target  local governments  and investments are  implemented in  line 
with the menu of eligible  adaptation  investments.  Investments  are gender sensitive and  contribute  to address 
interest groups  specific vulnerability,  including  for women and  youth. Percentage  of investments implemented explicitly  targeting  gender 
dimension.   Baseline  0,  Target 50%Every year, preferably  Q‐1/Q2
UNCDF (TA) and  National Agencies  (FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT,  DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 5.2. Annual Performance  Assessments  (APAs) are undertaken in  target local governments  on an early basis ‐ 
based on a gender ‐responsive approach  ‐ to assess effectiveness  and efficiency on  PBCRG use and  adaptation  
investments implementationPercentage  of APA undertaken through  a gender  lens using gender specific 
indicators  for the assessment.  Baseline  0, Target 100%. Gender expertise  
will be mobilized  through consultants'  recruitment,  with support from 
national gender specialised  staff. Every year, preferably  Q4
UNCDF (TA) and  National Agencies  (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT,  DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 6.1. Institutions  are supported  for the systematic  adoption  and operationalization  of the mechanism.  
Specific gender‐sensitive features  are integrated into  national systems for subnational  climate finance.   Evidence of the institutionalization  of the PBCRG system  ‐ taking into  
account gender‐sensitivity  in participating  countries  through policy, 
regulatory  or institutional  reforms.
Baseline: 0
Target: 4 case studies. Throughout  the 5 years  of the 
programme.  Annual reports available  
each Q4.
UNCDF (TA) and  National Agencies  (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT,  DGDDL as EEs).
Activity 6.2. Institutional  actors receive  support for the mobilization  of complementary  financing  (e.g. bilateral  
funding from bilateral  and multilateral  partners,  and domestic resources)  and direct access  to international  climate 
finance. Evidence of involvement of Women ministries  and/or relevant department s
in  climate finance  mobilisation  efforts (ex. proposal  development), TA 
activities, peer  learning and experience  sharing.  Baseline  0 
Target 4 case studies.  Throughout  the 5 years  of the 
programme.  Annual reports available  
each Q4.UNCDF (TA) and  National Agencies  (incl. 
National gender specialised  staff in FIE, 
ANFICT, ANICT,  DGDDL as EEs).
Percentage  of women involved  in Blended Finance Facilities governance  
bodies. 
Baseline: 0Target: 50%
Policy and  investments criteria of the BBF reflect  the need for gender  
sensitive and  responsive measures  on origination,  selection  and screening,  
monitoring  of the BBF operations.  
Percentage  of investments implemented explicitely  targeting  gender 
dimension.   Baseline  0,  Target 50%
Percentage  of investments implemented through  women’s groups ‐
sponsored  proposals  financed with the BBF.
Baseline 0,  Target 50%Component  2:  Country ‐based financing  mechanisms to  access and channel climate finance at  the local  level are established  and enable locally led climate resilience building  investments  in priority sectors.Output 4:
 Local actors are  supported  to access  blended financing  instruments  and to prepare  bankable  adaptation  investments proposals  in each target  country. 
Output 5: The PBCRG are  deployed, allocations  are transferred  to local governments,  and investments are  implemented according  to a pre‐determined menu of eligible  adaptation  investments. 
Output 6: The PBCRG system  is progressively  institutionalised  and attracts additional  finance for the further scale up  of the Facility
Output 7: Blended  Finance Facilities are established  and revenue generating  adaptation  investments are  financed in line with the menu of eligible  investments in  each target  country.431,968.50 $    
2,843,750.00 $    
7,721,784.41 $  
 $ 1,292,135.16  
 $ 9,000,000.00  Activity 7.1.  The Blended  Finance Facilities are set up and governance  bodies established  and operational.  
Appropriate policy  and investment criteria ensuring  gender sensitivity  and responsiveness of the BFF.From year  one BOAD (AE) and  CCT UEMOA (EE)
Activity 7.2.  Private sector‐led adaptation  projects are  awarded and  implemented in  target local areas. Financial  
support in the form of (i)  reimbursable and  non‐reimbursable grants and/or  (ii) concessional  loans and guarantees  
(provided  by the partner financial  organisations  in a parallel  form, and not financed by the GCF), will  be delivered to  
local private sector  actors over  the lifespan  of the programme.  Appropriate policy  and investment criteria ensuring  
gender sensitivity  and responsiveness of investments financed  by the BBF.From year  one BOAD (AE) and  CCT UEMOA (EE)
______________________