=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20240928002708+09'00'
/Creator: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
/ModDate: D:20240928002708+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.3.20112
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
21 – 24 October 2024  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 10 GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
30 September  2024  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum  VIII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 246 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia (Ugbaad) "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.40/02 /Add.08  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Content  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  79 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  80 
Secretariat’s assessment  84 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   99 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  106 
Gender documentation  108


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia (Ugbaad ) 
Country(ies):  Somalia  
Accredited Entity:  FAO  
Date of first submission:  2024/05/12   
Date of current submission  2024/ 08/08 
Version number  V.06


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that ma Uy not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme   Project  
 A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  Not applicable  
A.4. Result area (s)  
Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co -financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Energy generation and access  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Low-emission transport  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Forestry and land use  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  30 % 30 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  40 % 40 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment  10 % 30 % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  20 % 0 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced,  avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  N/A A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)   
Direct:  
1,152,142 
(50% women)  Indirect:  
972,689   
(50% women)  
6.2% of total 
population  5.2% of total 
population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  94,901,497  USD   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Up  to USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  79,707,268  USD  
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity ) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 2 
 A.10 . Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒  Grant    
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  7 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
5/1/2024  
 A.14. ESS category   B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF  
support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒    No ☐  
A.20. Executing Entity 
information   The project will be executed by FAO and the Government of Somalia acting through (i) 
the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MoECC) and (ii) the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI) in a co -execution modality . More details are provided 
in Section B.4 and in the Annex 2.  
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
Somalia is one of the most fragile countries in the world from various points of view, including security, inequality, 
displacement, conflicts over natural resources , and economic development, which are exacerbated due to climate 
change.  Many households are food -insecure and 49% of the population is undernourished. The latest integrated Food 
Security Phase (IPC) classification notes that 1.7 million children below the age of 5 face acute malnutrition3. The 
domestic production only meets 22% of per capita cereal needs on average and the country is dependent on food 
imports and food aid4. The agricultural sector in Somalia accounts for approximately 75% of gross domestic product 
(GDP)5, with 65% of population relying on the livestock subsector, mainly nomadic pastoralism and agro -pastoralism 
that depends on natural pastures on the country’s vast rangelands. Agricultural productivity is very low due to high 
dependency on rain -fed agricul ture for major crops including maize and sorghum under its arid and semi -arid climate 
where the average annual rainfall is about 200 mm in most parts of the country. The northern coastline receives 
significantly less annual rainfall (only up to 50 mm) whil st the south receives approximately 400 mm (Somalia NAPA, 
2013).  
 
3 IPC info  dated April 2024  
4 International Monetary Fund (IMF), Somalia: Selected Issues (2022)  
5 SOMALIA: Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture , International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank and 
FAO (2018)


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 3 
 There have been significant changes in the climate and extreme climatic events in Somalia since the baseline period 
(1981 –2010) and climate change is increasing the likelihood of compounding and cascading impacts for communities 
and ecosystems. Climate scenarios project that both mean maximum and minimum temperatures are expected to rise 
in the near, mid, and far futures under different scenarios (RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5). Coastal areas may see increased 
precipitation, particularly under RCP 8.5, whi le inland regions might experience decreases. The frequency of heavy 
rainfall events is projected to increase across the country. The fre quency and intensity of drought s have been rising 
and are expected to continue increasing, with projections indicating shifts in affected areas during different seasons. 
Floods during the Gu season are also expected to increase in certain regions, posing risks to populations due to lack 
of preparedness.  
Depleted technical capacity in government institutions due to years of conflict, low investment in agriculture, and 
inadequate access to climate information among last -mile users are significant barriers that must be lifted for local 
communities to be able  to leverage climate resilient livelihoods. The project proposes a multi -faceted approach to 
address these barriers. It restores productive landscapes so they can sustain resilient livelihoods, promoting 
sustainable agricultural practices and increasing access to water , enhancing access to climate -resilient inputs  (seeds, 
feed, fodder) , improving market access for smallholders, and strengthening institutional frameworks  and coordination  
for sustainable landscape management and climate -resilient agriculture.  
The project is premised on the following theory of change : If local communities’ capacity is strengthened to implement 
sustainable landscape management and climate resilient agriculture and an institutional enabling environment is 
improved, then the resilience of local communities and ecosystems to climate change will be enhanced, because 
livelihoods will be derived from sustainably managed landscapes and adapted climate resilient agriculture and 
supported by adequate enabling environment.  
The project aims to achieve three outcomes that work together to create a context in which, on the one hand, 
communities participate in the restoration of the productive landscape, and, on the other hand, they are supported by 
a stronger government extensi on services , governance and climate information systems. The three outcomes support 
the transition from unsustainable, unproductive and maladapted production systems  with low productivity  to more 
resilient productive agricultural practices. Pastoral systems have declined because of rangeland degradation and the 
project will support transition from pastoralism to agro -pastoralism.  The project  build s on best practices and lessons 
learned from recent projects and programs and are closely coordinated with other efforts to r ebuild the country following 
years of conflict.  
The project will benefit a total of 2,124,831  people ( 1,152,142  direct beneficiaries and 972,689 indirect beneficiaries) . 
The project will directly contribute to the following targeted results in alignment with the GCF’s Updated Strategic Plan 
(USP -2); T1 ( by supporting the Country’s adaptation and mitigation goals ), T4 Food (85,932  beneficiaries adopting 
climate -resilient agricultural practices) and T5 Ecosystems ( 41,800 hectares to be conserved, restored and sustainably 
managed) through T9 locally -led adaptation approach.  The Project will also support dissemination of climate information 
to communities, directly contributing to T3 CIEWS.  The Project also aligns with T10 (by supporting resilient market 
chains).  
Outcome 1 - Restored landscapes are resilient and sustainably managed.  
Activities under this Outcome are designed to restore productive landscapes and facilitate  ecological resilience , 
supporting  ecosystem adaptation to climate change so that they can provide crucial ecosystem services and sustain 
the agricultural livelihoods  of local communities . This requires both the creation and strengthening of local planning 
systems and the deployment of urgent landscape restoration interventions. Given the importance of water as a limiting 
factor in development in Somalia, the project h as opted to adopt the sub -watershed as a planning unit.  
Outcome 2 Local livelihoods are resilient to climate change.  
Activities under this outcome are designed to ensure that local communities derive increased and improved climate 
resilient livelihoods from agriculture. The project targets existing key value chains (maize, sesame, sorghum) which are 
climate vulnerable staple crops, as well as livestock production.  In these value chains , the project also supports the 
transition from extensive to intensive cropping and from pastoralism to agro -pastoralism. Given that a significant 
limitation is posed by water scarcity in S omalia, the project also focuses on securing resilient water supply for 
agricultural production through combinations of Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA)  (outcome 1) , green and grey 
infrastructure solutions at both landscape and farm level.   
Outcome 3 An improved institutional enabling environment for sustainable landscape management and 
climate resilient agriculture is in place at State and Federal Levels  
Activities under Outcome 3 form part of the project’s sustainability and upscaling strategy.  The aim is to create 
conditions and an enabling environment for the achievement, replication and broader adoption of project results.  Given 
the fragile conditions of the Government of Somalia , strengthening of capacity is required to ensure that Federal 
Member States  can implement new norms for sustainable landscape management and climate resilient agriculture.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 4 
 The activities support the institutional capacity of the Government of Somalia at various levels. Output 3.1 considers 
legal frameworks , implementation monitoring  modalities and coordination (the normative elements of institutional 
capacity), while output 3.2 strengthens the informational capacity of the Government of Somalia, in particular its 
capacity to generate and disseminate useful, relevant and timely climate information to last mile us ers.  
The project will be executed by FAO and the Government of Somalia acting through (i) the Ministry of Environment and 
Climate Change (MoECC) and (ii) the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI)  in a co -execution modality to deliver 
the project activities.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 5 
 
  
6 Fragile States Index of Somalia is 111.9 out of 120, ranked 1st out of 179 countries  in 2023 . 
7 The ND -GAIN Index summarizes a country's vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges in combination with its readine ss 
to improve resilience.  
8 IPC info  dated April 2024  
9 International Monetary Fund (IMF), Somalia: Selected Issues (2022)  
10 SOMALIA: Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture , International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
and FAO (2018)  
11 The Federal Republic of Somalia, Land Degradation Neutrality Target Setting Process in Somalia; Country Report (2020)  
12 SOMALIA: Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture , International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
and FAO (2018)  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
B1.1 Climate context  
Development problem of Somalia: High vulnerability and food insecurity  
1. Somalia is the most fragile countries in the world6 from various points of view, including security, inequality, 
displacement, conflicts over natural resources and economic development, which will be exacerbated due to climate 
change . Somalia has already experienced impacts  of climate change  on people’s  livelihoods due to limited adaptive 
capacity and preparedness.  Somalia , ranked 172 out of 182 countries by the ND -GAIN Country Index7, is one of the 
most climate vulnerable countries in the world and one of the least ready to face the climate crisis . 
2. 6.6 million people or 39% of the total population currently have  high levels of acute food insecurity  according to the 
2024 Global Report on Food Crises . Of them, 2.5 million are Internally Displaced Persons (IDP). This figure is the 
highest in GRFC history and includes roughly 1.9  million  in Emergency (IPC Phase 4), although the population in 
Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) declined since 2022.  The latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification  (IPC)  
notes that 1.7 million children below the age of 5 face acute malnutrition8. Domestic production meets  only 22% of 
average per capita cereal needs and the country is dependent on food imports and food aid9.  
3. The agricultural sector in Somalia accounts for approximately 75% of gross domestic product (GDP)10, with 65% of 
the population relying on the livestock subsector, mainly nomadic pastoralism and agro -pastoralism that depends on 
natural pastures on the country’s vast rangelands. The rural population consists largely of nomadic pastoralists and 
agro- pastoralists and population density follows th e distribution of natural resources: over two thirds reside in the 
southern regions while the rest are in the northern and the central regions respectively. The agricultural productivity 
is very low due to high dependency on rain -fed agriculture for major crops including maize and sorghum under its 
arid and semi -arid climate where t he average annual rainfall is about 200 mm in most parts of the country. The 
northern coastline receives significantly less annual rainfall (only up to 50 mm) whilst the south receives 
approximately 400 mm (Somalia NAPA, 2013).  
4. Environmental degradation in Somalia is both a cause and consequence of extreme weather events , impairing the 
environment's capacity to meet societal and ecological needs . Approximately 27.5% of the land area in Somalia is 
considered degraded 11, which is higher than the regional average.  Due to the civil war, changes in governance and 
changes in land use patterns have changed considerably. These changes have contributed to the present state of 
land degradation and include expansion of cultivation agriculture into the rangelands without su itable land 
management activities, non -regulated charcoal production for local consumption and for export, uncontrolled grazing 
of livestock, and individual land ownership for urban and agricultural development. In addition, lack of good land 
management an d lack of conservation measures have accelerated environmental degradation in some areas 
(SWALIM,  LADA , 2009).  
5. Degradation of vegetation and native species negatively impact s the social and economic resilience to climate 
shocks and livelihoods of displaced and host communities.  In place of healthy biodiversity, Prosopis spp . (Prosopis) 
and other invasive species, i.e. Siam weed ( Chromolaena odorata ) and Parthenium weed ( Parthenium 
hysterophorus ) are colonizing rangelands and forest areas and are one of the problems causing decreased 
availability of natural pastures, biodiversity loss and habitat alteration. These in vasive species compete with crops 
including in riverine areas by invading arable land and thereby reducing the area available for cropping use and 
decreasing water availability for people, crops and animals,  well as disrupting other ecosystem processes.  
6. Insufficient water management is one of the biggest challenges for communities to stabilize agricultural productivity 
and adapt to increased frequency and intensity of drought and flood events. As a result of the prolonged civil war 
and the weakness  of communities’ organization, most of the infrastructure for flood control and irrigation that was 
developed prior to the civil war is not currently functioning adequately12.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 6 
 
  
13 PROGRESS TOWARDS THE 2030 AGENDA IN SOMALIA: A Companion to the United Nations Common Country Analysis 2020. UNDP 
Somalia CCA Companion 2020.pdf (un.org)  
14 Funk, C., Michaelsen, J., & Marshall, M. T. (2012). Mapping recent decadal climate variations in precipitation and temperatur e across 
eastern Africa. Remote sensing of drought: innovative monitoring approaches, 331(7), 331 -355. 
15 FAO. 2024. Climate and Agriculture Risk Visualization and Assessment (CAVA). Available online at:  https://risk -
team.github.io/CAVAanalytics/articles/CAVA.html   
16 Ogallo et al. 2018. ‘Climate Change Projections and the Associated Potential Impacts for Somalia’. American Journal of Climat e Change 
07 (January): 153 –70. https://doi.org/10.4236/ajcc.2018.72011  7. Nearly 70 % of Somalis live on less than USD 1.90 per day, the sixth -highest poverty rate in the region.  Almost 90 % 
of Somali households are deprived in at least one dimension: monetary, electricity, education, or water and 
sanitation, with nearly 70 % of households suffering two or more dimensions13. Poverty hampers adap tation action  
to cope with extreme weather events  and compounded by social  inequalit ies. Environmental shocks are identified 
as a key contributor to poverty, alongside  other significant factors. Among the top four drivers of poverty,  natural 
hazards  stand out prominently. Additionally, shifting migration trends , escalating inequality and political instability all 
play crucial roles in escalating poverty rates in Somalia. These factors collectively exacerbate vulnerabilities, 
particularly for marginalized communities by disrupting livelihoods, displacing p opulations, and straining already 
limited resources. These compounded vulnerabilities exacerbate systemic risks of food security in Somalia  as 
illustrated below .  
 
Figure B.1.1. Compound & cascading impacts for communities & ecosystems  
 
Climate -Development Nexus : Climate Drivers and Climate Change Impacts  
8. There have been significant changes in the climate and extreme climatic events in Somalia during the baseline 
period (1981 –2010) and climate change is increasing the likelihood of compounding and cascading impacts for 
communities and ecosystems.  Maximum temperatures have shown significant yearly increase at the rate of 0.005 
to 0.055°C/year, equivalent to 0.15 -1.65°C. The total annual rainfall trends vary across the country 14. Middle and 
Lower Juba, Lower Shebelle, and Bay regions, which receive higher annual precipitation, have experienced a 25% 
reduction with increased interannual variability. Changes in the frequency of days with heavy rainfall conditions 
(≥20mm/day) is spa tially variable; a significant increase is observed in the Bari, Lower Juba, and Gedo regions. 
There is a significant increase in days with maximum temperature above 35ºC in most of the country, at the rate of 
0.25-2 days a year. An increase in the number of very hot days (40°C) is significant in coastal areas of Somaliland, 
Lower Juba, Gedo, Bakool, and Bari regions. Somalia has experienced a general increase in the number of tropical 
nights (days when minimum temperatures are above 20°C). This increase is  significant in Gedo, Bakool, and Bay, 
Nugaal and Bari regions (an increase between 0.2 and 1.2days/year)15, 16 . 
9. These climatic changes are projected to continue. Both mean maximum and minimum temperatures are projected 
to increase under both RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 in the near (2010 –2039), mid (2040 –2069) and far (2070 –2099) futures 
(between <1ºC and 1.5ºC). The highest mean annual maximum temperature increase compared  to the baseline 
period is reached in the far future (2070 –2099) in RCP 8.5 (4ºC). The number of days with maximum temperatures


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 7 
 
  
17 Niang I, Ruppel OC, Abdrabo MA, Essel A, Lennard C, Padgham J, Urquhart P (2014) Africa. In: Climate  change 2014: impacts, 
adaptation, and vulnerability. Part B: regional aspects. Contribution of Working  Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros VR,  Field CB, Dokken DJ, Mastrandrea MD, Mach KJ, Bilir TE, Chatterjee M, Ebi KL, 
Estrada YO, Genova  RC, Girma B, Kissel ES, Levy AN, MacCracken S, Mastrandrea PR, White LL (eds.)]. Cambridge  University Pr ess, 
Cambridge, pp. 1199 –1265  
18 Bichet, A., Diedhiou, A., Hingray, B., Evin, G., Touré, N. D. E., Browne, K. N. A., & Kouadio, K. (2020). Assessing uncertain ties in the 
regional projections of precipitation in CORDEX -AFRICA. Climatic Change, 162, 583 -601. 
19 Funk, C., Fink, A. H., Harrison, L., Segele, Z., Endris, H. S., Galu, G., ... & Nicholson, S. (2023). Frequent but predictabl e droughts in East 
Africa driven by a Walker circulation intensification. Earth's Future, 11(11), e2022EF003454.  
20 There is however high uncertainty in these projections due to the high intermodel variability (see Annex 2)  
21 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/339531516991002333/pdf/122990 -Revised -PUBLIC -Somalia -Executive -Brief-180111 -
Digital.pdf   
22 UNDP, Somalia Drought Impact and Needs Assessment (2018)  
23 UNOCHA, “Humanitarian Needs Overview Somalia,” January 2021.  
24 IFAD, Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD) Assessment Tool, Version v2.0rc3 - February 2021 , FAO (2024) Climate impact 
potential assessment (Annex 2)  above 35°C is projected to increase up to 200 days per year compared to the baseline in the far future (2070 –2099) 
under RCP 8.5, particularly along the Ethiopian border areas. Under RCP 2.6, coastal areas are expected to 
experience small diurnal variation s compared to the historical period. While the increase in precipitation is projected 
along the coastline of the country with the coastlines of Mudug, Middle and Lower Shebelle regions projected to 
receive up to 300 mm under RCP 8.5 by the end of the centu ry, an annual precipitation decrease is projected in the 
inland areas under RCP 2.6. There will be an increase (1 to 4 days) in the frequency of heavy rainfall events 
compared to the baseline period across the country. While there is a projected decrease i n the frequency of dry days 
(days with daily precipitation below 1 mm) along the coastline by between 6 and 15 days, the inland areas are 
projected to have an increase in the number of dry days (between 5 and 15 days) in both RCP 2.6 and 8.5 across 
all fut ures 17,18. 
10. The frequency of agricultural drought events has been increasing and is projected to further increase. The drought 
frequency (determined by the percentage of cropland and number of people affected) has increased over the years. 
The frequency during the Gu season (March -June) has increased since the mid -2000s, while in the Deyr  season 
(October to December) this shift happened around 2009. Under climate change, the area of cropland affected by 
agricultural drought during the September -December season is proje cted to remain relatively similar under both RCP 
2.6 and RCP 8.5. During the March -May season, the area of cropland affected by drought is projected to decrease 
in middle and lower Shebelle but increase in Mudug, Lower Juba and Togdheer. The high intermoda l variability 
points to high uncertainty in the projections19. 
11. Floods during the Gu season are projected to generally increase in Lower Juba, Mudug, Middle and lower Shebelle 
under both RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.520. These floods bring destruction , causing significant casualties, displacement, 
and property damage due to the region's increasing population and lack of effective preparedness.  
12. Somalia’s agriculture and livelihoods suffer from frequent droughts and floods (Ekolu et al. 2022). These two hazards 
cause severe impacts and risks. Somalia has experienced at least one major climate extreme event per decade 
between 1960 and 2011 (NAPA, 2013). Somalia has experienced some level of drought conditions and flooding 
every year since 2000 (UNCCD 2020, EMDAT). Floods are the most frequent events experienced in Somalia. 
Seventy -one percent of disasters between 2000 and 2023 were caused by  floods, while drought constituted 18% 
and storms constituted the remaining 11%. Most o f the flooding is due to overflow of the Shebelle and Juba rivers 
because of heavy rainfall in their catchments in the Ethiopian highlands.  Following the  El Niño -associated 
widespread floods in 2023 , there w as an upsurge of reported open breakages along the Juba and Shabelle rivers.   
13. The economic cost of droughts and floods in Somalia is high. For example, the 2010 –2011 drought, which triggered 
a famine, resulted in the loss of 258,000 human lives . The 2016 -17 drought resulted in losses and damages 
estimated at USD 2.23 billion  and USD 1.02 billion respectively21. Loss associated with four main staple crops  
(maize, sorghum, sesame, cowpeas ) were USD 71.2 million22 and approximately 4 million animals died causing USD 
875 million in income lost for pastoralists and agro-pastoralists. Over 2.2 million people were internally displaced 
with 1 million individuals transitioning away from their traditional pastoral lifestyle  and 6.2 million people faced food 
insecurity.  Flooding in July 2020 resulted in the displacement of nearly 342,000 people, inundating 294 villages and 
destroying up to 20,000 ha of crops, mainly along the Juba and Shebelle River valleys23. The recent flood event 
during Deyr (October -December) 2023 season, at least 1.5 million ha of farmland was swamped causing 20% loss 
of the harvest in south -central Somalia. As a result, 1.5 million children are projected to face acute malnutrition 
between August 2023 and July 2024. Stored f ood was either inundated or washed away leading to food losses and 
contamination. There was massive destruction of irrigation infrastructure and death of livestock by drowning.  
14. Crop yields , which are already low,  are likely to further decline under climate change. Under climate change, maize 
yields under rainfed conditions are projected to decline by 20 –40% with the greatest decline in Lower Juba, middle 
Shebelle and lower Shebelle regions by 2050 under RCP 8.524. Projected sorghum yields under rainfed conditions


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 8 
 
  
25 Otte et al. 2023. Impact of the 2016/17 drought on Somali livestock keepers. FAO Statistics Working Paper Series, No. 23 -37. Rome, 
FAO 
26 Beyene, Fekadu (2017). Natural Resource Conflict Analysis Among Pastoralists in Southern Ethiopia. Journal of Peacebuilding &  
Development, 12(1), 19 –33. doi:10.1080/15423166.2017.1284605    
27 Andre Le Sage; Nisar Majid (2002). The Livelihoods Gap: Responding to the Economic Dynamics of Vulnerability in Somalia. , 26(1), 10 –
27. doi:10.1111/1467 -7717.00188  
28 UNDP, Somalia Drought Impact and Needs Assessment (2018)  
29 World Bank. 2022. Somalia Economic Update, Seventh Edition: Investing in Social Protection to Boost Resilience for Economic G rowth  
30 World Bank Group, 2019, Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment   
31 Musei, Sylus & Nyaga, Justine & Zeila, Abdi.  (2021). Remote Sensing Based Quantification of Forest Cover Change in Somalia for the 
Period 2000 to 2019. 10.5772/intechopen.99365.  
32 The Federal Republic of Somalia, Land Degradation Neutrality Target Setting Process in Somalia; Country Report (2020)  under RCP 2.6 are uncertain in all the project sites except the middle and Lower Shebelle regions that show a decline 
of up to 10% near, mid and far future. Under RCP 8.5, the yield  of Sorghum  in middle Shebelle and lower Shebelle 
regions are projected to decline by 5%, 15% and 20% in the near, mid, and far future respectively. Maize and 
Sorghum  are staple cereals and play a major role in human food security in Somalia.  Stover from the two crops 
used as fodder for the animals. The stalks are either baled i nto hay or fed fresh to animals.  
15. The average annual Temperature Humidity Index (THI), which is an indicator of heat stress on livestock, is already 
in the severe to emergency levels and is expected to further increase due to the increasing temperature . Heat stress 
has a direct impact on the productivity of livestock and leads to higher mortality among young and birthing livestock. 
Changes in pests, vectors, and pathogens' abundance and distribution will affect livestock health and pose  a 
challenge to the export market due to increase in Tr ansboundary Animal Diseases (TADs) and quarantine diseases 
such as Rift Valley Fever. Increase in temperatures will affect the quality and shelf life of milk, affecting their 
availability and safety. (Details in the CIPA.)  
16. Climate change will cause increased pressure on the already scarce feed and water resources, which could amplify 
conflicts over natural resources among communities.  Drought affects the quantity, quality and availability of feed and 
water resources available for livestock, affecting communities in multiple ways. During droughts, the productivity of 
herds drops due to high mortality, decrease in production of milk and loss of animal body conditions, which leads to 
distress sales. The reducti on of productivity and distress sales lead to the deterioration of terms of trade by increasing 
prices of grain and milk and reducing livestock prices. Poor herd productivity and deterioration in terms of trade in 
turn affect livelihoods by eroding communi ty’s productive assets, reducing their income, food security, health status 
and increasing their debts and liabilities25.   
17. The Somali society is clan -oriented and competition among clans underpins natural resource management between 
farmers and pastoralists26. Mobility is one of the coping strategies employed by pastoralists during times of feed and 
water scarcity. However , these movements give rise to compe tition between clans leading to conflict s.  It also allow s 
for interaction between livestock, which ultimately leads to transmission of livestock diseases  and deaths . Livelihood 
losses usually lead to pastoral dropouts who in turn move to urban areas in search of other livelihood options 27.  
Capacity to anticipate and respond to climate change.  
18. The adaptive capacity of the Somalia population is very low and the current coping strategies in response to extreme 
weather events rely on short -term solution s such as selling of assets28. The limited adaptive capacity is due to  a 
combination of structural and individual factors . Structural factors include  low literacy rate, limited access to 
information, markets, and services . In large part these drive individual factors , includ ing low adoption of climate  
technology , limited awareness and knowledge of climate resilient agriculture , low access to climate information and 
advisories29, and other livelihoods practices  such as land use methods, especially among women and other 
vulnerable groups. The literacy rate of the general population is 50% (lower rate for women than men)30, which limits 
access to information. There is also limited access to extension services and appropriate technologies to address 
climate change negative impacts (such as drought -tolerant varieties and water -saving technologies ).  
19. Climate resilient landscape management is not well planned and implemented to address e nvironmental 
degradation, loss of indigenous species and increase of invasive species which negatively affect the social , 
economic and ecological resilience to climate shocks and livelihoods of communities . Approximately 23% forest 
cover loss occurred between 2000 and 201931. Biological degradation is the highest type of land degradation (3 8%) 
followed by soil erosion by water (34%)32. Changed soil quality from erosion also facilitates the appearance of 
invasive  species. The Shebelle and Juba basins, vital areas for productivity, face heightened degradation risks due 
to deforestation, overgrazing, and poor agricultural methods such as improper irrigation, monoculture, and excessive 
tillage. These drivers are encouraged by the prevailing co mmunal land tenure practices, poor governance, and civil 
war (Omuto et al. 2014). Population growth  as well as vulnerability  also intensifies resource pressure, and 
consumption, exacerbating deforestation rates due to cha rcoal and wood fuel demands , considering forests and 
trees are the main source of fuel for household cooking .


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 9 
 
  
33 Busby, J.W., Cook, K.H., Vizy, E.K. et al. Identifying hot spots of security vulnerability associated with climate change in Africa. Climatic 
Change 124, 717 –731 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584 -014-1142 -z 
34 FSIN and Global Network Against Food Crises. 2022. 2022 Global Report on Food Crises  
35 VSLA approach creates self -managed and self -capitalised savings groups that use members' savings to lend to each other . 
36 Dashboard: Somalia Climate TimeSeries Data (faoswalim.org)  
37 USAID Economics of Resilience to Drought: Somalia Analysis; Somalia_Economics_of_Resilience_Final_Jan_4_2018_BRANDED.pdf 
(usaid.gov)  
38 FAO 2023, The Impact of Disasters on Agriculture and Food Security 2023. Avoiding and reducing losses through investment in 
resilience , Rome.  
39 The climate risk analysis has been done by using FAO Climate Risk Toolbox – CRTB.  20. Conflict exacerbates existing vulnerabilities within communities and introduces new obstacles that impede their 
ability to manage and rebound from crises. As violent  non-state actors like Al -Shabaab complicate Somalia's 
governance landscape, challenging state authority and controlling significant territories, the political crisis  in Somalia 
has resulted in displacement and livelihood disruptions, causing financial loss, food insecurity, and restricted access 
to vital services. Internally displaced persons ( IDP) add to local pressures on natural resources , and often face 
increased inequalities in access to services. Additionally, critical infrastructure is often destroyed  or/and poorly 
maintained , further limiting access to essential resources. This prolonged conflict has undermined governance and 
the rule of law, fostering insecurity, human rights violations, and reduced access to resources. Somalia is identified 
as one of the countries in Africa  with a high concentration of hotspots of security vulnerability  associated with climate 
change.33 
21. Limited financial capacity is a barrier to the implementation of adaptation and mitigation activities . Economic shocks 
associated COVID -19 pandemic , the desert locust invasion in 2020 -22 and inflation of food and key input  prices34 
have further eroded the adaptive capacity of populations. Communities have inadequate  access to finance and 
credit, limiting their ability to invest in medium -scale water infrastructure or land and soil management infrastructure. 
Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLA) approach35 exists in the country, but members have limited financial 
capacity and groups are subject to external shocks such as conflicts, extreme climate events and increasing food 
prices.  
22. Limited access to timely and accurate climate information further hinders Somalia's ability to anticipate and prepare 
for floods and droughts, hampering early warning and response efforts . The observation network coverage is below 
the recommended WMO requirements. There is limited data collection from other indicators relevant in determining 
drought situation such as pasture/ vegetation , livestock body condition, yields produced, and other ecological and 
climatic related indicators. The FAO Somalia Water and  Land Information Management (SWALIM) project has 
installed and monitors 26 Automated Weather Stations (AWS), 110 manual rainfall stations, 5 synoptic stations and 
7 ground water stations36. SWALIM has developed a digital platform, Diginin, sending early warning messages. But, 
still it needs to be further developed. Efforts are in place to strengthen and expand existing systems, howev er early 
warning mechanisms that reach last-mile communities are still weak : most people do not receive climate information  
and agro -climate advice is not widely disseminated.  Low rates of literacy also prevent many farmers from 
understanding what action to take  during early warnings or on the basis of forecasts.   
23. In the last decade, Somalia has made strides in the establishment of political, social, environmental, and economic 
systems to tackle climate change; however, there are limited concrete operational arrangements and coordination 
between anticipated resilience action planning and humanitarian actions . Somalia has enacted critical natural 
resource management and climate change relevant policies such as the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 
NDC implementation plan and Somalia National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA).  Refer to Annex 2 for more 
details.      
24. The current investment at country level  focuses more on humanitarian actions. USD 5.4 billion has been spent on 
life-saving emergency responses since the 2011 famine. However, it is estimated that building resilience in Somalia 
would save an average of USD 53 million per year in humanitarian  assistance, while investing in early response and 
resilience measures yields average benefits of USD 2.8 for every USD 1 invested37.  Recent FAO reports have 
demonstrated that disaster risk management practices represent a cost -efficient investment that yield resilience 
dividends. For example, f arm-level DRR good practices perform on average 2.2 times better than usual practices 
under hazard conditions. Furthermore, every USD 1 invested in anticipatory action can yield up to USD 7 in benefits 
and avoided agricultural losses.38 
B1.2 Targeted areas  
25. The targeted areas of the project were pre -identified based on the climate risk analysis39, which considered climate 
hazard, exposure, vulnerability and adaptive capacity , and the agro-ecological zones in Somalia (details in Annex 
2). The  project will target six regions in Somalia which include the top three high climate risk regions; (i) Southwest: 
Lower Shebelle region (ii) Hirshabelle: Middle Shebelle region (iii) Jubaland: Lower Juba region, and other three


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 10 
 
  
40 Somalia Livelihood profiles; fsnau.org/downloads/Somalia -Livelihood -Profiles -30-June -2016.pdf  
41 UNFPA, 2021  regions where the agro -pastoral system prevails; (iv) Puntland: Nugal region, (v) Somaliland: Todgheer region, and 
(vi) Galmudug: Mudug region.  
Table  B.1.2 : Key characteristics and climate hazards and challenges in targeted areas  
Region  Key characteristics  Climate hazards and challenges40  
Lower 
Shebelle   Total population: 1.3 million41. 9 % of population in 
crisis, emergency or catastrophe  
 Agropastoral zone, irrigated crops (maize, sesame)   Droughts, Flooding and climate variability  
 Increase in evapotranspiration demand.   
 Animal and crop pests and diseases  
 Environmental degradation  
Middle 
Shebelle   Total population: 0.86 million. 29% of population in 
crisis, emergency or catastrophe  
 Agropastoral zone, irrigated crops (maize, sesame)  
  Flooding and drought.  
 Erratic rainfall and dry spells.  
 Increase in evapotranspiration demand.  
 Livestock and crop pests and diseases  
 Market disruptions  
Lower Juba   Total population: 0.98 million. 13% of population in 
crisis, emergency or catastrophe  
 Agropastoral zone, irrigated crops (maize, sesame)  
  Drought  
 Flooding in coastal areas.  
 Climate variability  
 Livestock and crop pests and diseases  
 Market disruptions  
Nugaal   Total population: 0.53 million. 47 % of population in 
crisis, emergency or catastrophe  
 Pastoral zone and potential Agro pastoral areas   Drought  
 Flooding (coastal areas)  
 Water shortages  
 Significant environmental destruction  
 Livestock diseases  
 Conflict  
Togdheer   Total population: 0.73 million. 32 % of population in 
crisis, emergency or catastrophe  
 Agropastoral zone, rainfed crops (+ flood irrigation 
from highlands)   Drought  
 Lack of pastures and water  
 Environmental degradation  
 Animal diseases  
 Conflict  
Mudug   Total population: 1.2 million. 47% of population in 
crisis, emergency or catastrophe  
 Pastoral and Agro pastoral areas (cow peas), some 
irrigation with underground waters   Drought  
 Low erratic rainfall and dry spells  
 Tropical storms and Flooding (coastal areas)  
 Livestock diseases  
 Environmental degradation  
 Market disruptions  
 
26. These regions were selected in close consultation with the government considering the government’s priority areas 
that have been newly liberated from terrorist groups in Hirshabelle, Galmudug, Jubaland and South -West states 
where no major investment project has been implemented and there are huge needs of rural communities to cope 
with climate change.  A conflict -sensitive programming approach will be mainstreamed during the implementation of 
the project.  
27. There has been a concerted push towards greater inclusivity and dialogue  in Somalia . Inter -regional relations have 
seen positive developments, with Federal Member States ( FMS ) and the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
developing alliances and partnerships to address common challenges. Security enhancements, including successful 
counterterrorism efforts and (relatively) improved governance structures, have contributed to a more stable 
environment. Economic growth and de velopment initiatives have helped all eviate disparities between regions, 
showing a sense of shared prosperity.  This project, with a common  goal to address ongoing and future climate 
challenges , will support this positive movement towards resilience and peace building.  
B.1.3 Related projects and interventions  
28. This project is closely linked and builds on several development projects and programs supported by various 
partners:  
29. The TRANSFORM project is funded by USAID to the tune of 25 million USD  (2024 –2027) . Its focus is to restore and 
rehabilitate major irrigation infrastructure, and in particular, the Sabuun barrage and its dependent primary irrigation 
canals, which are located in Jowhar District and serves 1.5 million people in Afgoye, Merka, and Balcad ( Hirshabelle). 
Through th  TRANSFORM  project , FAO will provide 15.19 million USD in cofinancing to this project.


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 11 
 
 30. Other projects include:  
Project / Program  title and link ages  with project design  
The SWALIM program provides high quality water and land information, crucial to relief, rehabilitation, and development initi atives 
in Somalia, to support sustainable water and land resources development and management. It is particularly linked to Outcome  1 
and Outcome  3. 
The EU funded projects “Climate Adaptation for resilient livelihoods” and “Climate -resilient livelihoods to Boost Food production 
and Nutrition outcomes (CLIMB)” aim to improve food production and contribute to the resilience of food systems in Somalia. 
Linkages exist with activities under Outcome  2. 
The World Bank Funded project entitled “Water for agro -pastoral productivity and resilience “which was approved in 2019 is 
implemented in Galmudug, Puntland, South -West State, and Somaliland. Its objective is to develop water and agriculture services 
among agro -pastoralists. The convergence of approaches will be fostered during implementation. This project is linked to 
Outcome  2.  
The groundwater for resilience project is a regional project funded by the World Bank (WB) including Kenya, Somalia, Ethiopia, 
and an Intergovernmental entity (IGAD). The project costs amount to 455 USD Millions. The development objective of the projec t 
is to increase the sus tainable access and management of groundwater in the Horn of Africa ’s borderlands. The project focuses on 
groundwater supply and infrastructure and operates in some of this project’s targeted regions, with linkages with outcomes  1 and 
2.  
Adaptive Agriculture and Rangeland Rehabilitation Project (A2R2) (2024 –2028) which is financed to 40 million USD through IFAD 
and GEF -7. The objective of the project is to enhance the climate resilience of poor rural households in Somalia through sustainable 
natural resources management on multiple levels: improved water reso urces and rangelands management; eco -agriculture and 
climate -proof livelihoods; forest/habitat rehabilitation; improved governance and information systems for land degradation and 
biodi versity.  This project would serve as parallel financing with linkages with outcomes  1 and 2.  
Linkages to other GCF projects:  
31. The African Development Bank (AfDB) is developing a GCF multi -country projects titled “Program to Build Resilience 
and Food Security in the Horn of Africa ” with Somalia as one of the participating countries. The A fDB project , which 
is under development, will operate in transboundary areas between Somalia and Ethiopia.  There will be no 
geographical duplication between this project and AfDB’s  project and this project will ensure synergies with AfDB’s 
project through close coordination and further discussion with AfDB.  
32. For further detail on these ongoing projects and programs, please refer to Annex  2, FS, Chapter  4. Lessons learned 
from these projects and, in particular from FAO’s programming over the years in Somalia, have informed this project 
design. One key element of value added from this project is its integrated bottom -up approach  that combines targeted 
capacity building at community level with supportive interventions at landscape levels, while supporting the renewal 
of State -executed governance of natural resourc es. If many  of the interventions of the past have supported some of 
the approaches and technologies included in this project, they have done it from a solely socio -economic perspective; 
few have placed climate resilience at the heart of their intervent ions. Furthermore, while many projects attempt to 
address the potential for, or recovery from, conflict, this project postulates  that climate vulnerability is a potential 
driver of conflict, and must be addressed as such.    
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)  
33. This project addresses the impacts of climate change on vulnerable people in 6 regions of Somalia who depend on 
agriculture and natural resources for their livelihoods. The project objective is to reduce the climate vulnerability of 
Somali populations. The key climate hazards that are addressed in this project are the increased temperatures, 
increased frequency and intensity of drought and floods. The project is premised on the following  theory of change:   
34. IF local communities’ capacity is strengthened to implement sustainable landscape management and climate 
resilient agriculture and an institutional enabling environment is improved, THEN  the resilience of local communities 
and ecosystems to climate change will be enhanced, BECAUSE  livelihoods will be derived from sustainably 
managed landscapes and adapted climate resilient agriculture and supported by adequate enabling environment. . 
35. To achieve its objective, however, the project must remove a series of interconnected barriers:  
36. Barrier 1: Lack of p lanning capacity and weak local governance have prevented the implementation of 
climate resilient natural resources management at the landscape level .  
37. Although there is knowledge of the links between environmental degradation, climate vulnerability and poverty, 
efforts have not yet been made to create democratic decentralized management systems that fully consider the role 
played by healthy landscapes in  local development. Prolonged periods of civil conflict have severely disrupted 
governance structures and the rule of law. The lack of stable and effective institutions has made it difficult to 
implement comprehensive land use policies and plans. The focus  thus far has been on restoring basic governance 
and security institutions.


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 12 
 
 38. Effective governance is also hindered by unclear land tenure rights and land ownership, frequent disputes, and the 
absence of a widely recognized and enforced legal system for land registration. There is also  due to the weakness 
of the state, a lack of enforcement of land use and environmental regulations.  
39. Due to the clan -based social structure in Somalia, land use planning must consider local dynamics and conflicts. 
Effective engagement with communities is necessary to ensure that land use plans are acceptable and beneficial to 
local stakeholders, but such engagement is often limited by lack of trust in authorities and insufficient mechanisms 
for public participation.  A patriarchal culture prevails in Somalia, and women are often excluded from political 
decision -making at national and community levels.  At the community level, in rural areas, most decisions are made 
by clan -based committees that are entirely composed of men, excluding women .34 
40. Despite these challenges, there are ongoing efforts to improve land use planning in Somalia. International 
organizations and governmental bodies are working to build local capacities, develop better governance structures, 
and implement projects aimed at sustainable land management and enviro nmental conservation. However, 
significant efforts are still needed to create a robust framework for land use planning that can support Somalia’s 
resilient development and environmental sustainability. As State structures are recovering, developing integra ted 
landscape -level natural resource management approaches will be crucial, both as a way of promoting climate -
resilient sustainable development and as a way of preventing further conflict.  
41. Barrier 2: Local communities do not yet have the  technical or institutional capacity  to fully participate in the 
management and allocation of natural resources, particularly water and land, which are in scarce supply 
already.  Locally, there is limited localized knowledge and data on the impacts of landscape degradation on 
development. Poverty, conflict and food insecurity have led local communities towards short -term, maladapted, 
unsustainable and inefficient  practices that further exacerbate this degradati on. Land management practices are 
predominantly guided by communal ownership and clan -based governance systems, which are integral to the 
pastoral and agro -pastoral ways of life. These practices, deeply rooted in the customary law known as “xeer”, enable 
collective use of land for grazing, farming, and settlement, supporting the mobility essential for pastoral communities. 
For example, clans share access to crucial resources such as water points and grazing areas, which are managed 
through verbal a greements  and respected within the community. This system facilitates the nomadic lifestyle, 
allowing pastoralists to traverse large areas in search of pasture and water following seasonal patterns, which is vital 
in the arid and semi -arid regions of Somalia.  
42. However, these traditional practices are increasingly maladapted to current and future climate conditions. Degraded 
and climate vulnerable landscapes fail to provide the basic ecological services —whether productive or protective, 
and this is even further exacerbated by the destruction —after years of conflict —of main infrastructure assets, 
especially water infrastructure.  Furthermore, e ducational attainment among women is very low. Overall, 75% of 
women aged 15 –49 have not attended any formal schooling. Thi s makes them more likely to be excluded from 
traditional top -down literacy -based  extension services, that tend to be oriented towards men due to land ownership 
and decision -making structures in families and communities .  
43. In response  to these challenges , there is a gradual push to integrate traditional management practices with more 
modern, climate informed, land use planning. However, the transition towards sustainable approaches to 
environmental stewardship that aligns with both traditional and modern management cultures requires long -term 
efforts and capacity at  local level , as well as gradual culture changes to ensure women, who play an oft -disregarded 
role in agriculture, can also become agents of change . 
44. Barrier 3: There has, to date, been insufficient dissemination of technology on climate resilient agriculture 
and livestock production . Local communities do not have access to practices and technologies that could make 
their livelihoods more resilient, and do not have access to climate information services. While it is known that a 
transition from pastoralism to agro -pastoralism  would be more resilient and would provide increased avenues for 
development, there has yet been any significant effort to assist l ocal population in effecting this transition. Most poor 
households continue to rely on subsistence agriculture and pastoralism. The use of rainfed agriculture with minimal 
mechanization and reliance on natural rainfall limits crop yields. Access to modern irrigation systems is scarce. This 
lack of reliable water sources for irrigation directly affects the productivity and sustainability of agricultural practices.  
Additionally, the limited access to agricultural processing facilities and effective post -harve st storage solutions 
exacerbates the loss of produce due to spoilage and pests. Market access is also hindered by poor infrastructure 
and transportation, reducing the ability of farmers to sell their crops at fair prices and further invest in improving the ir 
agricultural practices.  
45. Similarly, pastoralist households face significant challenges due to unsustainable grazing practices and limited 
access to water for their livestock. Overgrazing is common, driven by the need to maximize short -term returns from 
limited land resources, whic h contributes to land degradation and reduces the land ’s long -term viability for supporting 
livestock. The scarcity of water points further exacerbates these challenges, as pastoralists have to travel long


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 13 
 
  
42 https://www.fao.org/policy -support/policy -themes/access -to-finance/en/  distances to access water, putting additional stress on both the animals and the pastoralists. Moreover, there is a 
lack of facilities for processing livestock products, such as milk, which limits the economic benefits pastoralists can 
derive from their he rds. The absence of proper storage facilities for meat and dairy products leads to significant 
losses and reduced profitability. The difficulties in accessing markets, compounded by the lack of preservation 
technologies, mean that pastoralists often cannot  capitalize fully on their livestock ’s economic potential, perpetuating 
a cycle of poverty and unsustainable resource use.  
46. Limited access to technologies is also particularly exacerbated among women, whose  access to agriculture 
extension services is limited due to time and mobility constraints as a result of unpaid care work responsibilities and 
social norms. Women often don’t participate in technical and vocational training as they tend to be organized far  
away from their village. Low levels of education and literacy among women are also a constraint on their participation.  
47. Barrier 4: local communities and producers have very limited access to finance and markets , perpetuating 
the trend in which rural poor bear the brunt of the risk in transitioning towards climate resilient practices. Rural 
Finance Institutions themselves lack the capacity to develop or deploy finance in ways that would support climate 
resilient livelihoods and value chains, which prevents the emergence of an agri -food private sector that could act as 
an engine for socio -economic development locally. Formal f inancial institutions are scarce in rural areas, and where 
available, they often require collateral, formal documentation, and proof of stable income —conditions that many rural 
households cannot meet. According to a report by the FAO42, these requirements, coupled with the inherent risks of 
agriculture in a region plagued by environmental and socio -political instability, severely restrict access to traditional 
banking services. Consequently, many in these communities turn to informal so urces of credit, which can carry 
prohibitively high interest rates, exacerbating the cycle of poverty and limiting investment in sustainable agricultural 
practices.  Furthermore,  women’s entrepreneurship is constrained by low levels of literacy and access to support 
services and networks, limited mobility and free time, as well as limited access to and control over land and other 
assets that might support ac cess to finance. Women also have limited access to financial literacy, vocational, and 
business skills  training. As a result, their main source of capital to start their businesses is remittance. Most women 
entrepreneurs are engaged in petty trading ventures as a survivalist -oriented business activity.  
48. However, there are signs of progress with the introduction of mobile banking and microfinance initiatives aimed at 
increasing financial inclusion. Organizations like IFAD have been active in promoting mobile money solutions, which 
have seen a rise in popul arity among rural populations. Mobile connectivity in Somalia has been increasing. The 
growth in mobile internet users suggests a potential to improve agricultural practices and market access for rural 
communities by providing real -time information on weat her, market prices, and innovative farming techniques. This 
connectivity can play a crucial role in enhancing food security in rural areas, but it has not yet been leveraged for the 
transmission of climate information or market information.  
49. Additionally, village savings and loan associations (VSLAs) have been established, offering a community -based 
approach to savings and lending that provides members with more accessible and flexible financial options. These 
initiatives represent critical st eps towards  broader financial inclusion, offering hope for economic improvement and 
increased resilience against the challenges facing rural Somalia. However, most of the small agri -food businesses 
are micro -enterprises that operate with little capital in the informal market. Adding to this, remoteness and isolation 
prevent the addition of value to most commodities, and the degradation of rural markets and roads prevents the 
circulation of goods that would enable local communities to cope during climate ext remes.  
50. Barrier 5: The government’s support to natural resources planning and climate adaptation is limited by its 
weak technical capacity, and by the bias towards crisis responses of recent years . Somalia struggles with a 
shortage of trained professionals in urban planning and environmental management, as well as a lack of reliable 
data on land characteristics, usage, and ownership. Climate and environmental information services are not yet 
availa ble in all States. The observational network for weather and climate  data is underdeveloped, with insufficient 
coverage of automated weather stations and manual rainfall gauges. There are significant gaps in historical and 
real-time climate data, which hinder accurate forecasting and modelling. As with many government serv ices, there 
is a shortage of trained meteorologists and technicians, which limits the ability to analyze and disseminate climate 
data effectively. Dissemination of climate information to rural and remote communities is challenging, affecting the 
timely del ivery of weather forecasts and advisories.  
51. Records of land ownership and usage are incomplete and often outdated, making it difficult to enforce land use 
policies and resolve disputes. In addition, the legal frameworks governing land registration and property rights are 
weak and not uniformly enfor ced across different regions. There is a significant lack of local expertise in geographic 
information systems (GIS) and land surveying, which are essential for modern land management practices. There 
has been some progress in establishing flood and drough t early warning systems through projects like the FAO -


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 14 
 
 SWALIM (Somalia Water and Land Information Management). These systems help monitor hydrological data but 
need further expansion and enhancement to cover more areas and provide more precise forecasts.  
52. Barrier 6: Lack of Climate Information Services impede climate resilient agriculture. Access to climate 
information services among last mile users is severely limited, posing significant challenges for managing the impacts 
of climate variability and change. Despite the critical need for accurate climate forecasts, early warning systems, and  
agricultural extension services to mitigate these impacts, the infrastructure and systems to provide such services are 
underdeveloped. First, there is a lack of necessar y hydro -agro-climate infrastructure and material capacity to gather, 
analy ze and disseminate climate information effectively. This includes insufficient weather stations, inadequate 
technology for data collection and analysis, and poor telecommunications infrastructure that hampers the flow of 
information. Years of civil conflict  and instability have devastated Somalia ’s institutional capacities. The absence of 
a strong, centralized government for long periods has made it difficult to implement coordinated,  nationwide 
programs including those for climate monitoring and information dissemination. Even where data is available, the 
dissemination tools are often not sophisticated enough to reach all segments of the population, particularly in rural 
or remote are as. Many regions lack access to the internet and other digital communication technologies that could 
facilitate the wider distribution of climate information. Financial resources for climate services have been limited. 
Investments in climate information sy stems are often de -prioritized in favo ur of immediate humanitarian needs arising 
from ongoing conflicts and recurring natural disasters.  
53. In addition, there are barriers to women’s access to information. Ninety -three percent of women in Somalia do not 
access any form of media at least once a week. Media access is especially low among the poorest category of women , 
due to low literacy rates and limited mobility , however opportunities are arising  thanks to mobile connectivity: 67% of rural 
women and 59% of women living in nomadic communities own a mobile phone.  
 
Figure  B.2.1 : Theory of Change  
Proposed Climate Solutions  
54. The proposed project addresses these climate challenges by working directly with crop and livestock producers to 
improve agricultural produ ction and to ensure the resilience of livelihoods. The project adopts an integrated approach 
that seeks to restore the ecological resilience and productivity of degraded landscapes, so that they can support 
stabilized  and increased yields, leading to improved adaptive capacity of the most vulnerable people. Through the


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 15 
 
  
43 Enfors, E., Barron, J., Makurira, H., Rockström, J., & Tumbo, S. (2011). Yield and soil system changes from conservation tillage in 
dryland farming: A case study from North Eastern Tanzania. Agricultural Water Management , 98(11), 1687 -1695.  
44 Mwangi J, N., W. Catherine, M., Shem, K., John, N., & Fergus, S. (2020). Rainfall variability, soil heterogeneity, and role o f trees in 
influencing maize productivity —the case from an on -station agroforestry experiment in semi -arid Kenya. Forests, Trees an d Livelihoods, 
29(1), 34 -52. combined application of Ecosystem -based Adaptation to land degradation, erosion and flood risk, the project can 
also reduce water scarcity, and limit the impacts of increased aridity on livelihoods.  
55. Northern regions of Somalia are under green water scarcity (GWS), that is when the amount and or distribution of 
rainfall is not enough to meet crop water demand. FAO analysis (see Annex 2, FS, Chapter 2) indicates o ptimum 
irrigation, reduction in crop -water demand and water conservation techniques  can improve yields in such area.  
56. The overall yield increase  from the project interventions (see Table B.2.1 below and Annex 2, FS) can be significant, 
ranging broadly from 20 -50% depending on the specific context and effectiveness of the implementation43,44 (see 
Annex 2, FS for details).  These interventions not only enhance yields but also contribute to long -term sustainability, 
resilience to climate change, and improved livelihoods for farming communities. Considering all these elements 
together, the estimated average percentage increase in annual income per household (HH) after proposed 
interventions are implemented ranges from 20 -77% (under RCP 2.6) to18 -66% (under RCP 8.5), depending on the 
indicative mod el (see Annex 3) . Assuming that the increase in income is at least partially spent by HHs on food, 
these results should translate into increased food security for project beneficiaries.     
Table B. 2.1 Key proposed climate solutions  
Drivers / barriers  Key proposed climate solutions/ technologies  
Agriculture & livestock  Ecosystem  
Increasing 
temperatures  Promotion of Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (CRA) (output 2.2): 
Heat -/drought -tolerant varieties, 
timing of planting, agroforestry, 
crop cover, shade netting, IPM, 
improved post -harvest storage, 
improved stock breeds, Provision 
of shade (natural shading material 
from trees, as well as animal 
shelters) , watering, etc . Rehabilitation of 
irrigation 
infrastructure, 
small -scale water 
storage reservoirs/ 
ponds, improved 
water 
management  
(output 2.1)  Deployment of 
Early warning/ 
climate 
information 
services,  
Agriculture 
advisory 
services  (output 
3.2) Land restoration, anti -
erosive measures, soil 
conservation, soil 
moisture conservation, 
Prosopis  removal 
(output 1.2)  
Increased precipitation 
variability  Promotion of CRA (output 2.2): 
Timing of planting, agroforestry, 
crop cover, crop rotation, 
Integrated Pest management 
(IPM) , shift from pastoral to agro -
pastoral system, water harvesting 
and conservation, etc. 
Increase in frequency 
and intensity of 
droughts  Promotion of CRA (output 2.2): 
Heat -/drought -tolerant varieties, 
shift to drought -tolerant crops, 
timing of planting, agroforestry, 
crop cover, shift from pastoral to 
agro-pastoral system, etc.  
Increase in frequency 
and intensity of floods  Promotion of CRA (output 2.2): 
timing of planting, climate -proof 
storage/ processing facilities, etc.  
Lack of planning 
capacity and weak 
local governance  Improved l egal frameworks and 
implementation  modalities  (output 
3.1) Climate -informed 
irrigation planning 
(output 3.1)  Improved l egal frameworks and 
implementation  modalities , improved 
technical capacity of ministries (output 3.1)  
Limited technical or 
institutional capacity  of 
local communities  Deployment of FFS/APFS , training 
for lead farmers  (output 2.2)  
Improved access to climate 
resilient input (output 2.3)  Enhancement of 
WUAC (output 
2.1) Radio 
programme 
(output 3.2)  Climate -resilient 
landscape 
management planning , 
establishment of LMCs  
(output 1.1)  
Insufficient 
dissemination of 
technology  Deployment of Early warning/ climate information services,  
Agriculture advisory services  (output 3.2)


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 16 
 
 Limited access to 
finance and markets  Capacity building for VSLAs, development of 4Ps, improved financial services, improved access to 
market (output 2.3)  
Limited government 
support to natural 
resources planning and 
climate adaptation  Capacity building for government 
staff on CRA  (output 2.2)  Climate -informed 
irrigation planning 
(output 3.1)  Capacity building for government staff, 
improvement of local natural resources 
management systems, increase in data 
collection, sharing and analysis ( output  3.1) 
Lack of climate 
information services  Early warning/ climate information services,  Agriculture advisory services ,  
increased data flows to government and last mile users (output 3.2)  
 
57. In this Project, all outputs act together to leverage multiplied adaptation benefits for local vulnerabl e communities.    
Activities under outcome 1 are designed to restore and increase the natural productivity of ecosystems to ensure 
that they recover their resilience in the face of existing and projected climate change.  Restoring landscapes to a 
point of resilience and balance  (ecosystem -based adaptation)  requires multiple elements: reducing the exposure of 
land and vegetation to extremes such as high heat , strong winds, severe rainfall events and other erosion inducing 
factors; restoring natural soil productivity by increasing land cover and nutrient cycling; and improving soil moisture 
retention and aquifer recharge. The mark of a resilient ecosystem will be  the restoration land productivity dynamics, 
and the slowing or cessation  of land degradation trends.  To support this process and create conditions for upscaling 
and sustainability, the project will set up  participatory climate -informed  and science -driven land use planning and 
management mechanisms that bring together land users, communities and governments towards an optimal use of 
ecosystems for resilience  (activities 1.1.1 and 1.1.2) . Under Output 1.2, the project will implement communit y 
select ed priority ecosystem -based adaptation measures  (activity 1.2.1).  
58. Under outcome 2 , the project ensures that local communities derive increased and qualitatively improved climate 
resilient livelihoods from agriculture, despite prevailing and forthcoming climate conditions. The project targets 
maize, sesame, and sorghum, which are climate vulnerable staple crops, as well as livestock production. In these 
value chains , the project supports the transition from extensive to intensive cropping and from pastoralism to agro -
pastoralism as key adaptation strategies. Given that a s ignificant limitation is posed by water scarcity in Somalia, the 
project also focuses on securing resilient water supply for agricultural production through combinations of 
ecosystem -based adaptation and infrastructure -based solutions at both landscape and  farm level  (activity 2.1.2), 
supported by improved participatory water management mechanisms (activity 2.1.1) . The project disseminates 
improved, climate resilient agricultural practices directly to farmers through Farmer Field Schools (FFS) or 
Agropastoral Field Schools (APFS)  (activity 2.2.1) and by building the government’s capacity to deliver climate -
informed extension support (activity 2.2.2).   In addition, activities under output 2.3 are intended to take farming out 
of the loop of low -productivity, subsistence orientation and into a market -oriented, value -added paradigm. This 
requires providing farmer associations and private sector with increased technical, material and financial capacity to 
scale agri -businesses , first by securing and revitalizing the input supply chains (activity 2.3.1), then by improving 
business capacity of MSME (activities 2.3.2 and 2.3.3.), and finally by ensuring markets are open and reachable 
(activity 2.3.4) . 
59. Finally, Outcome 3 fosters an enabling environment for the replication and broader adoption of project results. Given 
the fragile state of the Government in Somalia, strengthening of capacity is required to ensure that Federal Member 
States can implement new norms for climate resilient agriculture. Output 3.1 considers legal frameworks (activity 
3.1.1), coordination among sectors and levels of government (activity 3.1.2) , monitoring modalities ( activit ies 3.1.3  
and 3.1.4 ), and planning capacity (activity 3. 1.5). Output 3.2 strengthens the informational capacity of the 
Government of Somalia, in particular its capacity to generate and disseminate useful, relevant and timely climate 
information  and early warning  to last mile users  (activity 3 .2.1). 
Scope and Targeting  
60. The project  will work in 1 1 districts located in 6 regions, that represent different agro -ecosystems and are exposed 
to different types of climate impacts. The sites were selected based on a climate risk and vulnerability assessment, 
combined with an analysis of conflict sensitivity .  
61. The ultimate beneficiaries of this project are vulnerable women, children and men living in the targeted districts . Fifty 
percent  of beneficiaries at local level, particularly t hrough the FFS/APFS  will be women.  The first type of  beneficiaries 
are local community members and households, characterized by the following:  
- Very limited access to water and sanitation  
- Limited access to energy from non -lignous sources  
- Extreme  prevalence of food insecurity and malnutrition  
- Large household size (6.2 people on average)  
- Majority aged under 18 .


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 17 
 
 - Low level of access to productive assets  
62. The second type of  beneficiaries include cooperatives (particularly seed growers), community -based associations 
(for example water user association committees), micro and small agricultural enterprises (particularly process ors, 
transformers). The third group of  beneficiaries include government staff at Federal, State and district levels who will 
receive training and capacity building from the project.  
63. The project will reach farmers through their groups and associations, including for example FFS or APFS, 
cooperatives, producer associations, savings groups, and small agro -businesses. In addition, the project also 
reaches government officials at the distr ict, State and Federal levels, and will work with the Ministry of Environment 
and Climate change (MoECC) and the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI) and to build their capacity to 
provide agricultural extension support through their decentralized  offices.  
64. The project, through the Gender Action Plan, will seek to ensure the fullest possible participation of women as 
decision -makers and agents of change, recognizing the limitations and barriers they currently face in accessing land, 
productive assets, educati on, information and finance.  Particular care will be taken to safeguard women against any 
risk of violence or harassment  that could be exacerba ted by their increased access to assets and influence. 
Mechanisms will be in place to analyse, prevent and addre ss any form or risk of SEAH/GBV during the project.  
65. For more information on project sites and beneficiaries, please refer to Annex 2, chapter 5.4. Eligibility criteria for 
participation in each activity are provided in Annex 2, chapter  8.5. 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization . 
 
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 –4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 –4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries , 
appliances  MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2 
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 2  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ 
Outcome 3  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1 : 
Reduced GHG 
emission from 
AFOLU  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Co-benefit 2 : 
Increased 
nutrition security  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
B.3. Project/ program description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)   
66. The project is structured along three main outcomes . The three outcomes work together to create a context in which, 
on the one hand, communities participate in the restoration of the productive landscape, and, on the other hand, 
they are supported by a stronger government extension, governance and climate information systems. The three 
outcomes support the transition  from unsustainable, unproductive, and maladapted production systems to more 
resilient productive agricultural system s. The activities of the p roject build on best practices and lessons learned 
from recent projects and programs and are closely coordinated with other efforts to rebuild the country following 
years of conflict.  
67. For each activity, site and beneficiary eligibility  criteria  are specified in Annex 2, FS, section s 8.4 and 8.5 . The specific 
use of GCF proceeds and cofinancing is specified in Annex 2, FS, section 6  as well as in Annex 4 . 
Outcome 1 —Restored landscapes are resilient and sustainably managed.


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 18 
 
  
45 FAO-SWALIM, Land Degradation Assessment and a Monitoring Framework in Somalia, LD -14, 2009.  
46 International & national safeguards specialists, International Gender, Social Inclusion and IP Specialist , National Conflict and Risk 
Management Specialist , and National Indigenous People and Land Tenure expert , National FPIC consultant  68. Activities under this Outcome are designed to restore the productive landscapes to a state of resilience —where land 
productivity can once again be depended upon to support the livelihoods of local communities. This requires both 
the creation and strengthening of local planning systems and the deployment of urgent landscape restoration 
interventions. Given the  importance of water as a limiting factor in development in Somalia, the project has opted to 
adopt the sub -watershed as a planning unit.    
Output 1.1 Improved participatory landscape and natural resources management and governance are 
established at watershed and village levels.  
69. This output supports the deployment of improved and more adapted governance approaches that are based on 
scientific data, participatory and democratic processes, and climate risk analysis. Currently, local planning is based 
on administrative jurisdictions and does not integrate any form of climate risk. However, land use practices are not 
circumscribed by administrative jurisdiction, and communal lands tend to fall outside the scope of traditional systems. 
Customary law systems have been disrupted by the wa r, displacement, and are further complicated by the 
degradation of natural resources. The project will therefore support the following activity:  
Activity 1.1.1  Strengthen the information base for climate -informed local land use planning.  
70. Most of the available data on the health of watersheds is insufficient or inadequate to support climate -informed land 
use planning. The last study of land cover or areas affected by land degradation is dated (2009) and was conducted 
at a resolution of 500  m45. Furthermore, there are gaps in data where areas were inaccessible during recent years. 
A country -level baseline study at a lower scale is necessary to be able to determine the area’s most at risk, and to 
determine priority interventions both during the project and after. To conduct this study (sub -activity 1.1.1.1), the 
project will mobilize the expertise of the data networks that have been  developed for the SWALIM project, and mix 
satellite data with ground -truthing observation to characterize the following key parameters:  
- Land Cover  
- Soil Types,  
- Level of Land Degradation  
71. The study will relate the land parameters to climate parameters such as mean annual rainfall, temperature, and 
types of soil erosion to provide a comprehensive baseline. This study will also serve as a basis for measuring 
progress in the restoration of lan dscapes (output 1.2) in project sites. In addition, the project will also provide a 
detailed assessment of the invasion of  Prosopis through the combination of remote sensing, GIS, and local ground 
truthing ( sub-activity 1.1.1.2) . This will also serve as a basis for direct intervention under output 1.2 for the removal 
and management of Prosopis from rangelands and agricultural land. Both sub -activities will be delivered by FAO in 
close collaboration with the MoECC, who will also be capacitated to continue th ese exercises in the future (Outcome 
3). Data will be housed in MoECC SWALIM servers and placed at the free access of all relevant stakeholders.  
Activity 1.1.2  Develop climate -informed inclusive landscape management plans  (LMPs).  
72. Based on the data provided above the project will strengthen the capacity of local actors to conduct participatory 
landscape management planning. First, a participatory cartography exercise and conflict -informed Free Prior 
Informed Consent procedure will b e deployed in all project sites in the targeted sub -watersheds (sub -activity 1.1.2.1) 
to ensure that all relevant groups, in particular vulnerable people are included and aware of their rights to participate 
under the project. The process for conducting th e FPIC will follow the FAO  FPIC guidelines and the project ’s 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF, see Annex 6: ESMF) and will be led by the project team46 along 
with relevant government departments . A stakeholder identification mission will help identify stakeholder groups and 
project beneficiaries, including potential Indigenous People s and vulnerable or excluded minorities. Explanations of 
the project, its activities, potential benefits and risks will be provid ed in local language and participatory mapping will 
also take place.  Each group will be invited to express their needs and priorities related to participation in the project, 
in a manner that is also conflict sensitive. Iterative discussions will take place from the start of the project to make 
sure all participants  and their concerns are identified  early on .  
73. The project will bring together stakeholders from all groups (women, men, youth, agricultural producers, livestock 
producers, etc.) to conduct  a climate -oriented participatory assessment of water and land resources and any 
associated conflicts (sub -activity 1.1.2.2), as well as a description (or clarification) of land use rights. This will be 
needed to gradually build momentum for the creation o f locally owned representation -based landscape management 
committees, to ensure that all interests are represented  and understood before engaging in a landscape 
management plan.


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 19 
 
 74. The Landscape Management Planning process will bring together actors’ representative of various groups from 
across the sub -watershed. Each group or subgroup will nominate a representative, for a total of 30 representatives 
in each Landscape Management Comm ittee (LMC), 50% of which will be women (in positions of influence, wherever 
possible). The project will facilitate the nomination process in its first year. Members of the LMC will receive training 
on climate  change and climate -informed landscape manageme nt, ecosystem -based adaptation, environmental and 
social safeguards, and on committee governance, rules, and by -laws (sub -activity 1.1.2.3). Each LMC will then 
undertake the participatory development and validation of climate informed LMPs in their area (sub -activity 1.1.2.4 ). 
Landscape Management Plans  aligned to sub -watersheds (31 in total) will be established for a period of 6 years and 
will include the following elements:  
- Assessment of land and water resources and their degradation using data collected in activity 1.1.1, 
presented in a user -friendly format.  
- Maps of current land use and land users, and an overview of land use rights  
- Land use plans and allocations by use (e.g.  strategic green infrastructure for  water catchment , 
conservation, rangeland, cropland)  
- Selection and characterization of priority landscape restoration  and EbA  activities to be delivered over the 
period . 
- Monitoring and evaluation plan  
- Budget for activities and the maintenance/operations of landscape management  
75. The activities under output 1.1 are delivered through  FAO as EE . By the end of the second year of the project, it is 
expected that 31 LMPs will be validated with a list of priority interventions approved by each committee.  
 
Output 1.2 Agricultural and Agropastoral Landscapes are  restored and sustainably managed.  
76. Activities under output 1.2 pick up the priority  nature -based  landscape restoration interventions that will be contained 
in the LMPs and combine these with the preliminary assessments of land degradation conducted during the feasibility 
study, to implement a series of concrete measures designed to restore the produc tivity of agricultural landscapes in 
12 districts. In total, the project will support the rehabilitation of 41,800  ha of degraded land. Restoration activities 
will be conducted by local non -gover nmental organizations, civil society organizations and private sector firms 
following a set of established terms of reference and technical specifications for each type of work. Each service 
provider will be trained and capacitated for the development and supervision of environmental and social 
management  plans on all areas under restoration, wherever applicable according to the project’s ESMF (refer to 
Annex 6). 
Activity 1.2.1 Conduct landscape restoration through local landscape management committees and community -based 
associations  
77. The project supports two types of ecosystem -based restoration activities according to the specific locations: one 
which is designed to enhance the water -related ecosystem functions (run -off control, erosion control, soil moisture 
control and aquifer recharge) and the second which is designed to restore la nd productivity (restoration of land cover, 
soil organic matter, erosion control, and control of invasive species). The options for  landscape restoration include 
targeted reforestation , construction of Berkads, water pans and semicircular bunds, rock catch ments and the control  
of Prosopis.  The project will procure required material and provide training to LMC members on the functions and 
anticipated benefits of selected techniques (sub -activity 1.2.1.1), in order to facilitate supervision. Details on each 
restoration option can be found in Annex 2, Chapter 6.2. 
Table  B.3.1  Landscape based ecosystem -based adaptation  
Restoration option  Climate problem/ landscape degradation issue  
Half-Moon structures  Aridity, high temperatures, run -off, land degradation  
Contour bunds  Aridity, high temperatures, run -off, land degradation  
Sand dams or 
Subsurface dams  Aridity, high temperatures, run -off, land degradation  
Berkad  Aridity, high temperatures, run -off and evaporation, land degradation  
Riverbank 
rehabilitation  Run-off, soil erosion, flooding  
Hafirs/ Water Pans  Aridity, run -off, land degradation  
Management/ Control 
of Prosopis  Land degradation, soil erosion, loss of arable land.  
Reforestation  Land degradation, reduction in soil organic matter. Low productivity.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 20 
 
  
78. The project will also rehabilitate eroded riverbanks in targeted areas in the South -West and Hirchabelle regions (sub -
activity 1.2.1.2). All activities take place on communal land or public land and are designed to provide resilient 
ecosystem services to t he communities whose livelihoods depend on them. The restoration activities are 
complemented by the on -farm land and water management activities that will be implemented under Outcome 2. For 
technical information on these technologies, please refer to Anne x 2, Chapter 6. 
79. Landscape management  committees (LMCs)  will receive trainings on monitoring on land restoration activities (sub -
activity 1.2.1.3) and , with the support of FAO and the MoECC at FMS level will also undertake regular supervision 
and monitoring on these land restoration activities (sub -activity 1.2.1. 4). Sites will be equipped with hydro -climate 
monitoring equipment and the project will facilitate data collection from various sources to monitor results on a series 
of indicators that inform Land Productivity, directly linked with sub -activity 1.1.1.1  and sub-activity 3.2 .1.1. Each LMC 
will develop an annual progress report on its restoration activities and disseminate the results to their constituents 
through awareness workshops. The hyd ro-climate equipment will be managed by MoAI  during the project execution 
according to current SWALIM arrangements.  In the long -term SWALIM functions will be gradually transferred over 
to the government.  
Outcome 2 Local livelihoods are resilient to climate change.  
80. Activities under this outcome are designed to ensure that local communities derive increased and improved climate 
resilient livelihoods from agriculture. The project  targets existing value chains (maize, sesame, sorghum) which are 
climate vulnerable staple crops, as well as livestock production ( used for meat , dairy) . In these value chains, the 
project also supports the transition from extensive to intensive cropping and facilitate s the transition from pastoralism 
to agro -pastoralism. Given that a significant limitation is posed by water scarcity in Somalia, the project also focuses 
on securing resilient water supply for agricultural production through combinations of Ecosystem -based adaptation  
(outcome 1) , green and grey infrastructure  solutions at both landscape and farm level.   
Output 2.1 Resilient water supply is secured and sustainably managed.  
81. Similarly to the activities under Output 1, participatory governance of water resources will be established as a 
principle to enable local communities to collect, manage and distribute water in a manner that is sustainable and 
climate sensitive. The projec t works with the government to establish data systems and governance mechanisms to 
enable State and district governments to support local water management; and with local communities to help them 
access improved and resilient water supply.  
Activity 2.1.1  Strengthen water management capacity at State and local level.  
82. In the perspective of decentralizing and democratizing natural resources management, the project will support the 
establishment and capacity of water user association committees (WUAC) that will oversee the rehabilitation, 
operation and maintenance of water  infrastructure and resources in all the sub -watersheds (sub -activities 2.1.1.1). 
In all project sites, WUAC will be placed under the overall umbrella of landscape management committees to ensure 
consistency of approach and coordination. The roles and res ponsibilities of WUAC will be to oversee irrigation water 
management, mobilization, allocation, and maintenance. Each WUAC Board will be formed of approximately 50 
people ( target 50 % women) with adequate representation from all vulnerable groups and water users. Committees 
will receive leadership, governance, and management training, as well as training on climate -informed operations 
and management of water in their territory (sub -activity 2.1.1. 2). Each committee will also be endowed with the 
material mean s for conducting supervision and monitoring of water infrastructure.  
83. To support the long -term sustainability of water management activities, and to ensure long -term operationalization 
of water infrastructure, the project will partner with UN Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) support work with the 
WUAC to develop fee -based sy stems  in 1 district for the various  types of infrastructure. The objective being to ensure 
infrastructure is  maintained using communities’ contributions. This will require working with WUAC and their 
constituents to establish the fees, assess their feasibility, and pilot their application during the project’s execution 
phase ( sub-activity 2.1.1. 3). Fees will be established in a participatory manner, based on social acceptability and on 
contractual arrangements between the WUAC and the communities that are using the water infrastructure. The fees 
mechanism might be upscaled in other districts under other financing.  
84. At State level, to support the devolution of water management, the project will support the delivery of a water 
accounting and audit survey which will provide data on existing water availability, withdrawals, and irrigation potential 
under various climate scenarios (sub -activity 2.1.1. 4). The activity will also include training for MoAI staff at State 
and Federal levels on water accounting and water monitoring  (quantity and quality) (sub -activity 2.1.1. 5). Data 
collected during the water accounting exercise  will be combined with data obtained under output 1.1 on land use, as 
well as new crop monitoring data emerging from project sites and other districts under production. It will be housed 
by FAO in an open data system made available to MoAI, MoECC and all S tate actors for improved knowledge and


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 21 
 
 monitoring (sub -activity 2.1.1. 6). After midterm of the project, the MoAI will take over the data system, and continue 
its operationalization. This data and data system also be combined with the information collected on landscape 
restoration (activity 3.1.3) and food/nutrition security ( activity 3.1.4). The resulting systems will be coordinated and 
open access sets of information at high resolution that will enable all State and non -state actors (LMCs, WUACs) to 
manage land and water through a climate lens,  with the view to ensuring long -term sustainability of livelihoods.  
Activity 2.1.2  Increase access to water resources and climate -smart irrigation infrastructure  
85. In order to secure resilient livelihoods for vulnerable communities, access to water for irrigation needs to be upgraded 
and stabilized, particularly in the light of impending climate change, as highlighted in B1.2. All the targeted regions 
have a dearth o f water mobilization and conservation infrastructure, and those in place have either been destroyed 
during the conflict, or degraded due to erosion and lack of maintenance. Water demand is due to increase, and if 
any efforts to stabilize population and ens ure their continued food security are to succeed, water availability must be 
ensured. Therefore, building on data arising from the water accounting audits undertaken in the first year of the 
project, as well as the data from the soil and water baseline stu dy under output 1, the project will upgrade and 
rehabilitate significant water infrastructure. In Jowhar, the project will (through cofinancing), rehabilitate and restore 
the Sabuun Barrage and the primary canal that provides water to 4 districts (Jowhar, Afgoye, Merka and Balcad), 
serving 1.5 million people and irrigating an estimated 50,000 ha of land (sub -activity 2.1.2.1 , co-financed and 
executed by FAO ). The project will upgrade, rehabilitate, and operationalize 16 irrigation canals will (main canals 
approximately 10km long, each with 20km of secondary canals and 40km of tertiary canals)  (sub-activity 2.1.2. 2.).    
86. All rehabilitated infrastructures  along with supplied irrigation equipment (drip irrigation and solar pumping systems)  
will be managed and operated by WUAC established in activity 2.1.1 according to agreed water uses and with a 
focus on equitable access and conflict prevention. In each site, the project will work with WUAC to also deploy water -
saving technologies to farme rs and producers, including drip irrigation kits and solar operated pumping systems 
(sub-activity 2.1.2. 3). This will increase water use efficiency in all c ropping systems and will be supported by training 
at local level for all users.   
87. Details of the infrastructure to be rehabilitated can be found in Annex 2, chapter 6.2. 
Output 2.2 Local  communities practi ce locally specific Climate Resilient Agriculture  
88. Activities under this output are designed to transfer climate resilient agriculture (CRA) technologies, approaches, 
and inputs to producing households in the project sites, and to reinforce the support provided by local extension 
services to the adoption o f climate resilient agricultural practices.  
Activity 2.2.1  Disseminate  CRA practices to farmers.  
89. This will be primarily done through the Farmer Field School ( FFS) and Agropastoral Field School (APFS) model, 
which has been successfully used globally by FAO to rapidly disseminate better food production practices. The 
“menu” of agricultural practices will be tailored to the local conditions, projected climate change,  existing production 
systems and value chains, and priorities of the local community.  Selection of specific technologies and practices 
will also be aligned with the LMP developed under Output 1.1, and the project will support linkages between LMC 
and FFS in the region.  For example, FFS members may be invited to participate in LMC meetings, some may also 
be sitting as representatives in the LMC, or LMC members may visit FFS for information exchange . A list of 
technologies,  approaches and practices that will be promoted through this project is provided in the Annex 2, Chapter 
6.2. A summary of the proposed technologies and their adaptation benefit is included  in Table . 
Table  B.3.2  List of climate adaptation technologies and their benefits  
Technology  Adaptation benefit  Climate Hazards, Drivers of vulnerability and 
Impacts addressed  
Biogas  Production of biogas helps reduce pressure on 
land and reduces deforestation for energy.  Land degradation, Deforestation  
cover crops  Maintenance of soil fertility, reduction of erosion 
due to rainfall and wind. Increased yields and 
access to food.  Soil erosion (wind and rainfall), soil compaction, 
drought, flood, erratic rainfall patterns  
Crop rotation  Increased soil fertility, increased access to food 
and nutrition  Land degradation, flood, erratic rainfall patterns, 
Reduced yields  
Drip irrigation  (Solar)  Increased access to water, increased production, 
and productivity for key crops . Improved water use 
efficiency.  Increased temperature, drought and extended 
dry periods, increased crop water demand,


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 22 
 
 Solar pumping  Continuous and increased access to irrigation 
water. Reduced use of fossil fuel energy  for water 
pumping.  Increased temperature, drought and extended 
dry periods, increased crop water demand,  
Fodder production  Increased livestock production and productivity, 
intensification, reduced rangeland degradation, 
reduced land degradation  Rangeland degradation, reduced animal 
productivity, animal losses  
Improved breeds  Increased livestock productivity and resilience  Rangeland degradation, reduced animal 
productivity, animal losses  
Improved cookstoves  Reduced deforestation and land degradation, 
reduced labo ur burden for women and girls, 
improved indoor air quality.  Land degradation, Deforestation  
Intercropping  Increased land productivity, diversification, 
improved soil fertility and soil moisture  Increased temperature, drought and extended 
dry periods, increased crop water demand and 
evapotranspiration, reduced yields, and crop 
failures  
mechanization of land 
preparation  Increased land under production, removal of 
invasive species (Prosopis), reduced labo ur 
burden,  Soil erosion (wind and rainfall), soil compaction, 
drought, flood, erratic rainfall patterns  
Micro basins, water 
reservoirs and earth 
ponds  Improved water retention, increased access to 
irrigation at farm and household level (house 
gardens) leading to increased production, 
productivity and diversification.  Increased temperature, drought and extended 
dry periods, reduced yields, soil erosion (wind 
and rainfall), rapid run -off and flood during 
severe rainfall.  
Minimum tillage  Reduced land degradation, reduced risk of 
erosion, increased soil fertility,  Soil erosion (wind and rainfall), soil compaction  
Mulching  Reduced land degradation, reduced risk of 
erosion, increased soil fertility, improved 
productivity  Reduced soil fertility, reduced yield, increased 
crop water demand  
Use of nitrogen -fixing 
plants  increased soil fertility, improved productivity  Reduced soil fertility, reduced yields, crop 
losses and crop failure  
Proper use organic 
fertilizer  increased soil fertility, improved productivity  Reduced soil fertility, reduced yields, crop 
losses and crop failure  
Use of resilient seed 
and breeds  Increased productivity of crop and livestock under 
various climate conditions, reduced losses  Reduced yields, crop losses due to drought or 
flood, and crop failure and animal death  
Rainwater harvesting  Improved water retention, increased access to 
irrigation at farm and household level (house 
gardens) leading to increased production, 
productivity and diversification.  Increased temperature, drought and extended 
dry periods, increased crop water demand and 
evapotranspiration, reduced yields and crop 
failures  
Rangeland 
rehabilitation  Increased rangeland productivity, reduced risk of 
erosion and flood, increased livestock production.  Reduced land productivity, land degradation 
and desertification  
Rationing  Increased production in the second season  Reduced soil fertility, reduced yield,  
Rehabilitation and 
construction of grain, 
input and post -harvest 
storage  Reduced post -harvest losses, improved prices, 
improved access to quality food, increased access 
to inputs and resilient seeds and feed.  Harvest losses due to extreme heat or rainfall  
Fallowing  Improved soil fertility, reduction of land 
degradation and risk of erosion  Reduced soil fertility, reduced yield, severe 
rainfall and rapid run -off 
Contour farming  Improved production on sloped land, reduced risk 
of erosion, improved soil moisture and water 
conservation.  Reduced soil fertility, reduced yield, severe 
rainfall and rapid run -off, flooding  
Greenhouses, net 
shading and protected 
cropping  Reduced crop losses from extreme heat, improved 
productivity, reduced pests, improved water use 
efficiency  Increased temperatures, heat extremes, 
drought, increased crop water demand  
Home gardening  Increased production and diversification, improved 
access to nutritious food, increased income  Crop losses or animal losses due to extreme 
events, reduced yields from high temperatures, 
droughts, floods  
Agroforestry  Trees in farms for nutrition and income, and 
sylvopastoral systems for fodder  Heatwaves and other extreme events


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 23 
 
  
90. The project will organize 420 FFS and APFS  in total, grouping 30 people each (men and women).  At the beginning 
of the project, FAO with MoAI will develop a curriculum that will include detailed technical packets on all the proposed 
technologies and practices (sub -activity 2.2.1.1). Trainers and f acilitators  (approx.  3 people per FFS) including lead 
farmers , some of whom may be selected from among existing extension offices in project districts, will receive 
extensive training over 6 weeks on the practices and technologies, and the requirements of facilitating FFS in 
Somalia (sub -activity 2.2.1.2).  
91. Each FFS will receive material and technical support in addition to regular training and exchange visits, over the 
course of two years ( sub-activities 2.2.1. 3). The Government of Somalia, through MoAI and its network of extension 
services, along with FAO, will provide technical and logistical backstopping, supervision and monitoring of the FFS 
throughout the project (sub -activity 2.2.1. 4).  
Activity 2.2.2  Build  the capacity of MoA I at Local, State and Federal level to support communities in the adoption of 
CRA practices.  
92. In parallel, the project will strengthen the technical capacity of MoAI at local, State and Federal level to support 
producers and rural households. The capacity of staff has been depleted during the years of conflict, and the low 
level of investment into extension, agricultural research and agricultural information services, has undermined the 
capacity of the government to serve rural communities. The project will therefore develop and deliver a full public 
service retraining program related to climate res ilient agriculture (sub -activity 2.2.2.1), which will be developed based 
on the findings of a detailed decentralized needs assessment. This program will be delivered to existing staff during 
the project and will also be deployed to all new MoAI recruits at  federal and State levels, through NGOs and with the 
collaboration of academic institutions, particularly universities. It is expected that the program will be adopted by 
MoAI as part of its regular training mandate. Short -term training for technical staff  and extension staff who are 
immediately involved in project implementation will also be developed and deployed in all project districts. The focus 
of these trainings will be the technologies listed in Table 1. The purpose of these trainings is to ensure t hat capacity 
exists at local level to support the FFS and the continued scaling and dissemination of the climate -resilient 
agricultural practices promoted by the project (sub -activity 2.2.2.2).  
Output 2.3 Farmers derive increased income from sustainable natural resource management and climate 
resilient value chains.  
93. Under output 2.3, activities are targeted towards the development of value chains that are more resilient.  Wh ile 
outputs 2.1 and 2.2 were targeted at ensuring livelihoods and production were conducted according to the principles 
of climate  resilience, output 2.3 activities are aimed at actors beyond producing households.  The purpose of these 
activities is to ensure that supply chains, particularly input supply chains, are sustainable and sufficiently organized 
and structured to ensure cont inuity and gradu al upscaling of project outputs and activities.  
Activity 2.3.1  Improve  access to climate resilient inputs for crop and livestock production.  
94. This activity is aimed at strengthening and reorganizing the seed distribution system, in line with MoAI priorities and 
with the needs of local producers. There is an urgent need to secure a stable supply of resilient seed material , to 
ensure that appropriate climate resilient varieties are being used and multiplied locally in all the value chains. This 
includes trees, fodder and crop varieties. As a first element, the project will support a comprehensive seed  market 
dynamics analysis, which will include a mapping of input sources at country and State level, an analysis of 
demand/supply and projections aligned to climate scenarios, and an analysis of prices and storage capacities. This 
study will be used as a basis for policy reform in the area of seed subsi dies by the MoAI (sub -activity 2.3.1.1).  
95. The MoAI will also receive extensive technical support and training on the quality assurance, certification and 
implementation of seed certification norms and standards (sub -activity 2.3.1.2). Based on th is training,  the MoAI  
(through the Somali Agricultural Regulatory and Inspection Services (SARIS)  will conduct seed certification  
according to improved seed testing protocols, including through the establishment of improved test and trial sites 
and laboratory testing facilities  (sub-activity 2.3.1.3) . 
96. The project will aim to strengthen the seed supply system in multiple ways: first, by acquiring appropriate, 
internationally certified foundation seed material through the CGIAR and the private seed companies and distributing  
or selling  it to local farmers’ associations and cooperatives who will act as seed multipliers ( sub-activity 2.3.1. 4). 
These seed multipliers will receive training and material support to conduct seed multiplication with a view to 
becoming autonomous seed providers by the end of the pr oject.  During the project, the project will acquire seed 
from these multipliers for distribution  and sell to project beneficiaries under the FFS and APFS models (sub -activity 
2.3.1. 5). By the end of the project, pricing for the seeds will be established together with the cooperatives and


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 24 
 
 considering issues of equity and the ability to pay of the producers. The project will also contribute to streamline the 
seed supply system among the International Partners, for Somalia to be able to build a Seed Value Chains.  
97. A similar model will be followed for the production of fodder, where the project will purchase foundation seeds and 
create 8 fodder processing facilities in support of agro -pastoral communities in the main livestock producing districts. 
Training in fodder conservation and fodder cropping and material support will be provided to cooperatives (sub -
activity 2.3.1. 6).  
98.  For tree production, which will be required for the establishment of agroforestry in the project sites, the project will 
also work with cooperatives and farmer associations  to establish nurseries. The project will establish 30 nurseries 
which will be run and operated as small businesses by their members (sub -activity 2.3.1. 7). To ensure that waste is 
reduced and that prices are controlled, the project will build climate resilient input storage facilities that will be 
collectively managed (sub -activity 2.3. 1.8). Seed growing and multiplying cooperatives, fodder producing facilities 
and nurseries will become small private sector agri -businesses, thereby contributing to the generation of additional 
income for agricultural households and the revitalization of the input supply chain locally.  
99. For further detail on the seed system and its associated production methods and facilities, please refer to Annex 2, 
chapter 6.2. 
Activity 2.3.2  Build  the capacity of producer groups to develop sustainable climate -informed business plans.  
100. In order to further strengthen the value chains, the producer groups, cooperatives and associations will also be 
strengthened in terms of their business and finance capacity, to ensure the growth and stability of the sub -sector as 
a key element of ensuring  resilient livelihoods can be pursued throughout the region. The project will support 410 
groups among small businesses, seed grower cooperatives  for the 3 major target value chains (Maize, Sorghum, 
Sesame) , nurseries, producers and associations and will p rovide them with training on value addition, processing, 
packaging and marketing ( sub-activity 2.3.2.1) .  The groups will also receive assistance in the development of climate 
informed business plans for selected processing and value addition activities (sub -activity 2.3.2.2).  Where 
necessary, the project may provide initial material investments, such as sm all processing machinery and equipment, 
to support the growth of the agri -food private sector  for the 3 main Value Chains (Sesame, Maize and Sorghum) . 
The project will also support the construction and rehabilitation of climate resilient food storage facilities (including 
solar powered cooling and climate control) at district level (sub -activity 2.3.2.3). This will facilitate access to market, 
price contr ol, and importantly, reduce wastes and losses for value -added commodities.  
Activity 2.3.3  Increase  MSME, cooperatives and farming group access to agricultural finance  
101. The groups above and the FFS and APFS convened under output 2.2 will also receive support in accessing 
agricultural credit and rural finance, also as a way to strengthen the sustainability of value chains, and to ensure 
long-term financial autonomy and sel f-replication of the production systems. In this activity the project will work both 
on the demand and supply of rural finance. First, a subset of the FFS and APFS groups will be supported in 
establishing Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLA). VSLA will be supported through formal registration, 
governance, financial literacy and bookkeeping, and loan making (sub -activity 2.3.3.1).  The purpose of VSLA will 
be to support the financial activities of the group or its individual members according to specific lending criteria, 
including climate resilience requirements. As part of sub-activity 2.3.3.1, the project will also use the Gender Action 
Learning System (GALS) approach  to address the power relationships  and facilitate behavi oral changes in 
households . These groups, cooperatives and small businesses ( including seed multipliers, fodder producers and 
nurseries) will also be supported in accessing microfinance institutions that will also be capacitated to support climate 
resilience investments (sub -activity 2.3.3.2).  
102. One promising model, which has been tested  in Somalia and provides unique advantages in terms of 
consolidating value chains is the Producer - Public -Private -Partnership model (4Ps).  The model creates a system 
resembling contract farming and secures income for vulnerable producer households whose p roduction is 
guaranteed to be purchased at a fair price, under certain production conditions, by large buyers and bulkers.  The 
project will develop  4Ps between farmer cooperatives, microfinance institutions, Somal i Bankers Association and 
lead wholesalers, for example the Sesame exporters platform (sub -activity 2.3.3. 3). 
103. Working on the supply side of the rural finance continuum, the project will also provide technical support to 
financial institutions themselves (MFI, bankers associations) to develop innovative financial products that are 
responsive to the needs of the sesame, sorghum and maize value chains in a context of climate change and climate 
variability (sub -activity 2.3.3. 4).  These could include concessional loans, subsidies, equity, insurance, lines of credit 
or other forms of accessible finance for small produce rs and small groups.  
104. Additional details on key stakeholders, existing  institutions and potential partners are found in Annex 2, Chapter 
6.2.


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 25 
 
 Activity 2.3.4  Increase  all-season access to market for smallholder producers, cooperatives and farmer groups.  
105. Finally, the project will invest in rehabilitating key rural infrastructure that has been degraded either due to conflict 
or natural causes in order to ensure that producers can access markets to both acquire inputs and sell products.  
Functioning markets,  regardless of climate conditions, particularly in times of flooding or other climate extremes, 
offer important coping strategies on multiple levels.  From an economic perspective, access to markets allows the 
creation of value and breaks the cycle of subs istence farming; from a social perspective, particularly in a fragile 
context functioning and accessible markets create poles where households can access social services and safety 
nets, as well as social networks.  Input supply chains cannot function with out accessible markets.  Therefore, the 
project will rehabilitate rural roads and upgrade them to withstand harsher climate conditions, including heat and 
severe rainfall ( sub-activity 2.3.4.1 ). Similarly, given the importance of livestock in the local eco nomy and culture, 
the project will also rehabilitate cattle corridors and create intermediary  markets at district level or regrouping points 
at village level for small ruminants, to promote local exchanges (sub -activity 2.3.4.2). Additional details on roads and 
markets can be found in Annex 2, Chapter 6.2. 
Outcome 3 An improved institutional enabling environment for sustainable landscape management and climate 
resilient agriculture is in place at State and Federal Levels  
106. Activities under Outcome 3 form part of the project’s sustainability and upscaling strategy. The aim is to create 
conditions and an enabling environment for the replication and broader adoption of project results. Given the fragile 
conditions of the Govern ment of Somalia, strengthening of capacity is required to ensure that Federal Member States 
can implement new norms for sustainable landscape management and climate resilient agriculture. The activities 
support the institutional capacity of the Government of Somalia at various levels.  Output 3.1 considers legal 
frameworks and modalities  for monitoring their implementation  (the normative elements of institutional capacity), 
while output 3.2 strengthens the informational capacity of the Government of Somalia, in particular its capacity to 
generate and disseminate useful, relevant and timely climate information to last mile u sers.  
Output 3.1 Legal  frameworks and implementation  modalities for NRM and CRA are improved.  
Activity 3.1.1  Update  legal and institutional frameworks for sustainable landscape management  
107. This activity recognizes that significant changes need to be affected to the national legislative and policy 
apparatus to support the transition towards climate -resilient development pathways. This includes, in particular, the 
institutionalization of appro aches such as landscape management as integrated adaptation strategies and as 
innovative  governance frameworks that can build communities across traditional lines.  The project will therefore 
work with MoECC to develop new pathways for monitoring he implem entation  of landscape management 
approaches that cut across sectoral lines.  This will be done on the basis of a needs assessment study, which will 
also include considerations related to the decentralization of landscape management approaches at State level, and 
the potential complexities of enforcing Landscape Management Plans across administrative boundaries (sub -activity 
3.1.1.1).  
108. Following this study, the project will bring Federal Member states and districts together, learning from the 
experience of the landscape management committees established under outcome 1, to develop new regulations, 
by-laws and other instruments to consolidate landscape management and upscale it to the rest of the country. (Sub -
activity 3.1.1.2 .)  The experience of landscape management committees will also be useful in the design of a n LSMP  
manual, tailored to the specific Somali context, covering all the e lements of the landscape approach on the basis of 
lessons learned nationally and internationally (sub -activity 3.1.1.3).  
109. The project will also work with MoECC to develop a strategy  and action plan on the management of Prosopis, 
as an invasive species that severely restricts agricultural development potential. The Strategy and action plan will 
also build on project experience with the removal, management and re -use of Prosopis that was deployed under 
outcome 1, and on the results reported by landscape management committees in terms of benefits of such 
approaches (sub -activity 3.1.1.4).  Fin ally, the project will also assist wi th the development of a set of new standards 
for construction, building s and infrastructure that will enshrine the principle of resilience and will formalize adaptation 
in any reconstruction and future construction efforts throughout the country, drawing on the climate studies and 
assessments conducted in the project (sub -activity 3.1.1. 5). Standards on climate proof ing infrastructure will be 
defined as water management infrastructure but also transport infrastructure as it is poorly designed and does not 
resist extreme weather events such as floods.  
Activity 3.1.2  Strengthen  policy dialogue and coordination between sectoral ministries at State levels.  
110. Furthermore, the project will work at national and State level to increase intersectoral coordination between 
various ministries  and vertical coordination from the local to the federal level .  The landscape management approach 
provides an opportunity to break down stove -piped sectoral management of natural resources to generate multiplied 
adaptation benefits for vulnerable communities. The project therefore will assess the existing coordinati on


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 26 
 
 mechanisms at federal, state, and local level, and make recommendations on improvements that can facilitate the 
adoption of more integrated approaches over natural resource management and climate resilient agriculture (sub -
activity 3.1.2.1).  A proposal wi ll be made on the design of an improved coordination framework (sub -activity 3.1.2.2). 
To build knowledge and regional networks, the project will also integrate regional and international knowledge and 
policy best practice s into national policy making.  Th ese improved coordination frameworks will be formalized and 
operationalized in the project States (sub -activity 3.1.2.3) towards the end of the project.  
Activity 3.1.3  Strengthen the capacity of MoECC  to manage, monitor and govern natural resources and implement 
Ecosystem -based Adaptation  
111. To support effective decentralization and to create an enabling environment in which landscape management is 
facilitated by government frameworks and support, the project will build the capacity of the MoECC to understand, 
plan and monitor EbA solutions  to climate change.  Training will be provided to district, State and Federal level 
MoECC officials on climate change and Ecosystem -based adaptation solutions (sub -activity 3.1.3.1), especially 
focusing on staff that will be acting as support to landscape man agement committees established under output 1.1. 
Staff will also be supported in learning how to facilitate participatory monitoring of landscape restoration measures 
(sub-activity 3.1.3.2). This will be particularly important to ensure that all local stak eholders are aware and can 
measure the immediate benefits of landscape restoration, whether environmental, economic and social.  This will 
serve to facilitate broader upscaling and replication later on. To this end, the MoECC  at FMS level  will be supported  
in rehabilitating local monitoring and observation infrastructure, which will include offices and weather stations, as 
well as field -testing facilities to support continued research into the applicability of Ecosystem -based Adaptation 
(sub-activity 3.1.3.3). The project will also support the development of the implementation plan for the National 
Environmental Management and Protection Act  (sub-activity 3.1.3.4) and the operationalization of the Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment regulations (sub -activity 3.1.3.5).  
Activity 3.1.4  Build capacity for the monitoring, assessment, analysis and early warning related to the impacts of climate 
on food and nutrition security . 
112. Similarly , the MoAI, local universities and NGOs will also receive support to conduct monitoring, assessment 
and early warning of food security at decentralized levels (sub -activity 3.1.4.1).  This will include provision of training 
and materials for the collection  of data, assessment, analysis of the linkages between food production/availability 
and climate conditions, in order to develop more reliable food security warnings at district level. Each district will then 
conduct, through a collaborative Food Security w orking group, seasonal assessments and analysis  of the impacts 
of climate on food and nutrition security (sub -activity 3.1.4.2).  This will be linked to the existing IPC working group 
and federal food security early warning systems currently in place. Each State will disseminate two annual briefings 
through local media, print and radio (sub -activity 3.1.4.3).  
113. The project will also provide interactive training sessions on climate change adaptation and the effects of climate 
change on the environment to media professionals and the institutions in charge of Early Warning and Disaster Risk 
Reduction  (sub-activity 3.1.4.4). The training sessions aim at enhancing stakeholder s’ understanding and awareness 
of climate change impacts but also at establishing permanent links between media professionals and the institutions 
to involve media professionals in the creation of Early Warning systems in the country.  
Activity 3.1. 5 Build capacity of MoAI for climate informed water  management infras tructure planning.  
114. The project will support technical assistance to the ministry of agriculture and irrigation to develop climate 
informed water management infrastructure  master plans targeting regions surrounded by Shabelle River and Juba 
river. The process will be participatory and will include the development of a multi -stakeholder task force, as well as 
local consultations to develop irrigation master plans that will guide future investments.  The MoAI will first c reate an 
Irrigation plan task force (sub -activity 3.1.5.1 ) which will coordinate and c onduct consultations with water and land 
users  (sub-activity 3.1.5.2). Based on the assessment and consultations with water and land users, the project will 
support the d evelop ment of  a climate -informed  irrigation master plan s (sub-activity 3.1.5.3) . The objective of having 
a master  plan is to identify the  large -scale  infrastructure needed for irrigation water supply and flood protection  in 
order to prepare  other initiatives and prioritize future investment .  
Output 3.2 Increased  Access to Climate Information Among Last Mile Users 
115. Currently, last mile users, producing households and extension services do not have sufficient access to climate 
information services.  Forecasts are not yet being shared from national to State or local level, and their reliability is 
inadequate. Seasonal forecasts are currently available, but only distributed to government services.  Early warnings 
for climate extremes are not being disseminated, leading to missed opportunities for early adaptive action at local 
levels. If producer households do not have a ccess to adequate agro -meteorological advice, the transition to climate -
resilient livelihoods will be incomplete and unsustainable.


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 27 
 
 Activity 3.2.1  Collect , disseminate and share relevant climate and land data to support decision making at all levels.  
116. The project will work with the MoECC and the climate information service providers at Federal and State levels 
to redesign and deploy an open -access GIS -based climate information platform, on which users will be able to 
access forecasts at 3 and 10 -day int ervals. Seasonal forecasts will be improved, and the early warnings and regular 
forecasts will also be linked to agronomic advice (sub -activity 3.2.1.1). All information will be made publicly available 
free of charge on an online climate information platfo rm associated with the current SWALIM system. State level 
meteorological and agro -meteorological staff will also receive training and capacity building for the deployment and 
use of the climate information.  
117. To ensure that last mile users receive information and can act on it in a timely and appropriate manner, the 
project will partner with local radio, mobile phone service providers and the existing Dign iin platform, to deliver digital 
early warning and decision support tools for agricultural producers (sub -activity 3.2.1.2). The activity will build on the 
rapid growth in mobile phone connectivity and disseminate information to crop and livestock producers either directly 
or through the relay of group leaders (FFS, associations, savings groups, cooperatives). Information will be free of 
charge, however, towards the end of the project, the MoECC will establish the modalities for continued operation of 
the system, including exploring cost -sharing mechanisms, cost  recovery and pricing options for long -term 
affordability and sustainability, on the basis of documented lessons learned and benefits from this project (sub -
activity 3.2.1.3).  
118. In addition, to further strengthen the capacity of the MoECC to undertake climate informed landscape 
management and planning, the project will work with the MoECC to establish 2 SWALIM information management 
centre (IMC) at decentralized level.  The IMC s will be established and will serve as centre s for data collection, 
analysis, management and sharing on all aspects related to natural resources. The centre s will be tasked with 
producing land use maps, monitoring land degradation and water availability, collecting all data sources from studies 
developed in this project (under outcome 1) and distributing information that can serve to deploy climate -informed 
land use planning, landscape restoration and water management ( sub-activity 3.2.1.4) .  The 2 IMCs will be staffed 
by MoECC staff and operated by MoECC and MoAI, as part of the institutionalization of SWALIM, and thereby 
integrated into the government apparat us. The IMC will provide coordination and M&E function with support from 
the project (sub -activity 3.2.1.5). The IMC will be modelled on the existing SWALIM IMCs that has successfully been 
established in Somalia to date.  
119. Finally, the project will support the development of radio programs , awareness and distance learning targeting 
the population (sub -activity 3.2.1.6). Although there is an ongoing transition in the Somali media landscape as online 
media is growing in importance, the Somali’s population still relies on radio and the information that people hear on 
the radio or read/see online is quickly spread throughout the community.  The awareness raising radio programs  will 
be developed and disseminated through local radio  stations reaching the communities at the district and community 
level.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages plus diagrams ) 
Accredited Entity  
120. FAO will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for this project. As such, FAO will be responsible for the overall 
management of the project, including (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical 
oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver 
results and  achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of 
reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. FAO will ensure these responsibilities in accordance 
with the detailed provisions o utlined in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between FAO and GCF.  
121. FAO’s role as AE will be attributed to the relevant offices and divisions in FAO Headquarters located in Rome, 
Italy (HQ), Regional Office for Africa located in Accra, Ghana, Sub-Regional Office for East Africa located in Addis 
Abeba, Ethiopia, the Country Representation Office for Somalia (FAO -Somalia).  
122. In order to fulfil the AE functions, FAO will set up a dedicated Project Task Force (PTF) in line with FAO project 
cycle guidelines. The PTF will be composed by the Budget Holder (BH), the Lead Technical Officer (LTO), Funding 
Liaison Officer (FLO), HQ Tec hnical Officer and other technical officers, as appropriate.  
123. The PTF will remain independent from the Executing Entity functions also performed by FAO (see Project 
execution section below). In line with the GCF policy on fees adopted through GCF Board Decision B.19/09, the 
above -mentioned segregation of responsibili ties within FAO will ensure that the Organization can independently and 
effectively perform the AE functions listed in the GCF General principles and indicative list of eligible costs covered 
under GCF fees and project management costs . 
Project co -financing


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 124. FAO will provide in -cash (grant) co -financing through the USAID -funde d TRANSFORM  project to be executed 
by FAO, for a total amount of 15.19 million USD . The executing entity of co -financing is responsible for reporting of 
co-financing activities and their disbursement amount to the AE in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined 
in the GCF policies as well as AMA, Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between FAO and GCF and the co -financing 
agreement signed between the co -financier and FAO in its capacity of AE. FAO will be responsible for executing and 
managing  their co -financing under the coordination of the Central Project Implementation Unit ( CPIU — see below) 
and through the Project Steering Committee —PSC (see Project execution section below).  
Executing Entities  
125. The project will be executed by FAO and the Government of Somalia acting through (i) the Ministry of 
Environment and Climate Change (MoECC) (ii) the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI in a co -execution 
modality to deliver the project activities f unded by GCF proceeds (see below for details).  
126. FAO will act as EE and will ensure strong country -driven execution of project activities and will be in charge of 
the execution of selected activities funded by GCF proceeds based on its comparative advantages. This will allow 
Somalia to benefit from the technical and operations experience of a specialized development assistance agency 
from the United Nations (UN), while providing opportunities for the government to increase their capacity through 
technical assistance and development an d implementation of a ctivities under the three components. FAO will also 
execute the activities co -financed by FAO. 
127. Flow of funds and legal arrangements . In line with the project implementation arrangements outlined above, 
GCF proceeds received by FAO in its capacity as Accredited Entity will flow to the Executing Entities, namely FAO-
Somalia , MoAI, and MoECC for the implementation of project activities (figure 3). A summary of EE activities also 
illustrating the flow of funds is presented in table 5 below. More details are presented in the feasibility study (Annex 
2 of the FP). The provisions regarding MoAI and MoECC re sponsibilities as EEs, together with all financial details, 
will be included in the Project Agreement, which will also serve as subsidiary agreement, signed by the Government 
of Somalia.  
 
Figure B.4.1 : Flow of funds  
 
Table  B.4.1 : Project activities per EE  
Activity  Sub-activity  Executing Entity (EE)  Funding source  FAO GoS-MoECC  GoS-MoAI  
1.1.1  1.1.1.1  x   GCF  
1.1.1.2  x   GCF  
1.1.2  1.1.2.1  x   GCF  
1.1.2.2  x   GCF


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 29 
 
 1.1.2.3  x   GCF  
1.1.2.4  x   GCF  
1.2.1  1.2.1.1  x   GCF  
1.2.1.2  x   GCF  
1.2.1.3  x   GCF  
1.2.1.4   x  GCF  
2.1.1  2.1.1.1  x   GCF  
2.1.1.2  x   GCF  
2.1.1.3  x   GCF  
2.1.1.4  x   GCF  
2.1.1.5  x   GCF  
2.1.1.6  x   GCF  
2.1.2  2.1.2.1  x   FAO 
2.1.2.2  x   GCF  
2.1.2.3  x   GCF  
2.2.1  2.2.1.1  x   GCF  
2.2.1.2  x   GCF  
2.2.1.3  x   GCF  
2.2.1.4    x GCF  
2.2.2  2.2.2.1  x   GCF  
2.2.2.2  x   GCF  
2.3.1  2.3.1.1    x GCF  
2.3.1.2  x   GCF  
2.3.1.3    x GCF  
2.3.1.4    x GCF  
2.3.1.5    x GCF  
2.3.1.6  x   GCF  
2.3.1.7  x   GCF  
2.3.1.8  x   GCF  
2.3.2  2.3.2.1  x   GCF  
2.3.2.2  x   GCF  
2.3.2.3  x   GCF  
2.3.3  2.3.3.1  x   GCF  
2.3.3.2  x   GCF  
2.3.3.3  x   GCF  
2.3.3.4  x   GCF  
2.3.4  2.3.4.1  x   GCF  
2.3.4.2  x   GCF  
3.1.1  3.1.1.1  x   GCF  
3.1.1.2   x  GCF  
3.1.1.3  x   GCF  
3.1.1.4   x  GCF  
3.1.1.5   x  GCF  
3.1.2  3.1.2.1   x  GCF  
3.1.2.2   x  GCF  
3.1.2.3   x  GCF  
3.1.3  3.1.3.1   x  GCF  
3.1.3.2   x  GCF  
3.1.3.3   x  GCF  
3.1.3.4   x  GCF  
3.1.3.5   x  GCF  
3.1.4  3.1.4.1  x   GCF  
3.1.4.2  x   GCF  
3.1.4.3  x   GCF  
3.1.4.4  x   GCF  
3.1.5  3.1.5.1    x GCF  
3.1.5.2    x GCF  
3.1.5.3    x GCF


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 3.2.1  3.2.1.1  x   GCF  
3.2.1.2   x  GCF  
3.2.1.3   x  GCF  
3.2.1.4   x  GCF  
3.2.1.5  x   GCF  
3.2.1.6   x  GCF  
 
128. The project will establish a Central Project Implementation Unit (CPIU)  that will be functional for the entire 
duration and be responsible for day -to-day implementation of the project, with support  FAO offices in each FMS . 
The main functions of the CPIU, following the guidance of the PSC and project technical committee (PTC), will be to 
ensure overall efficient management, coordination, implementation, and monitoring of the project through the 
effective implementation of the annual work plans and budg ets (A WPBs). The CPIU will be led and managed by a 
project -recruited a Technical Advisor  and National Technical Coordinator (NTC) , who will be appointed by FAO and 
will be responsible for overall project management and coordination with project stakeholders . The CPIU will also 
include the following core personnel  (part time) ; Admin istration  and Finance Officer, Compliance Officer, Operations 
Officer, Procurement Office r, Project Implementation Specialist, HR specialist  National Specialists in the area of 
admin, HR, finance, procurement and operation, National Field Support Assistants , international and national 
technical specialists  for outcomes 1 –3, international an d national Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialists , 
international gend er, social inclusion and Indigenous Peoples specialist, national gender specialist, national conflict 
and risk management specialist, national Indigenous Peoples and Land Tenure expert  (refer to Annex 2 Chapter 8 
and also Annex 6, IPPF ). 
129. The project’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning plan will be supported by a MEL Unit, who will be supervised 
by the CPIU. The head of Monitoring and Evaluation, with support from  other project staff,  international and national 
consultants  and experts , will be responsible for overseeing all activities related to information collection related to 
the project indicators (e.g. household surveys) and for managing the project’s learning, communications and 
knowledge sharing strategy.  
130. The CPIU will coordinate closely the field officers posted at the 6 FAO Somalia  field offices  located in all target 
states , who will supervise  the day -to-day project operations in each district, liaising with the Focal Points (appointed 
by the respective EE) in each district. National M&E specialist s, National Finance Specialists, and National Field 
Support Assistants  will be located in the FAO Somalia field offices to closely support the operations in the field.  
Other Project Partners  
 
131. During implementation, in addition to the above EE, the project will engage relevant government counterparts 
from MoAI (e.g. Seed Bank and laboratories), MoECC (e.g. department of climate information services). It will also 
engage knowledge centres (e.g. C GIAR, agricultural research organizations), universities and training centres (for 
example University of Somalia, Nile University of Science and Technology), local non -profit and community -based 
organizations, finance service providers and the private sect or, financial institutions, mobile phone operators . In 
addition, several partners will be engaged in the project either to ensure complementarity with their activities and/or 
delivery of goods works and services. In particular organizations and partners working with the other related projects 
and cofinancin g partners, including IFAD, USAID, World Bank and other donors with projects in the area. It will also 
work with NGOs having a proven track record of implementing activities in the countries or in the reg ion. The partners 
will be selected during project implementation in accordance with relevant FAO Manual Sections.  
Project Governance  
 
132. A Project Steering Committee (PSC)  will be established to provide strategic guidance for the project. The PSC 
will be chaired by the  MoECC, and co -chaired by FAO -Somalia. The CPIU  will serve as Rapporteur to the PSC. The 
PSC will include representatives of other key government departments and agencies, private sector, and civil society 
organizations. These partners will include MoA , Ministry of Livestock, Rangelands  and Forestry, Ministry of Water 
and Energy . State MoAI and MoECC representatives will also be invited to the PSC meetings.  
133. The role of the PSC will be to: (i) provide overall guidance and direction to the project, ensuring it remains within 
any specified constraints; (ii) address project issues as raised by the national project implementation coordinator; 
(iii) monitor project  risks and the effectiveness of mitigation measures, and provide guidance on new project risks, 
and agree on possible countermeasures and management actions to address specific risks; (iv) review the project 
progress, and provide direction and recommendati ons to ensure that the agreed deliverables are produced 
satisfactorily according to plans; (v) review and agree with annual work plan and provide necessary strategic 
guidance for its implementation; (vi) appraise the annual project implementation report, i ncluding the quality


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 31 
 
  
47 IPC assessment rating report; (vii) make recommendations for subsequent work plans to build on achievements and 
address any shortcomings; and (viii) provide ad hoc direction and advice for exceptional situations when the project 
coordinator’s tolerances are ex ceeded.  
134. The PSC will be expected to meet formally at least once every 12 months. Formal meetings will be scheduled 
and arranged by the National Project Implementation Coordinator in consultation with, and at the request of PSC 
members (with tentative dates for the  following meeting being agreed under Any Other Business). Extraordinary 
meetings of the PSC can be requested by any of its members.  
135. The PSC will be supported by a Central Project Technical Committee ( CPTC)  and Regional Project 
Technical Committees (RPTCs) , which will review and, where needed, advise on the technical delivery of the 
project  at FGS and FMS level respectively . The CPTC will be co -chaired by the Ministry of Agriculture  and Irrigation  
and Ministry of Environment and Climate Change . Other members of the CPTC will include the Ministry  of Livestock, 
Rangelands and Forestry and the Ministry of Water and Energy , FAO,  and relevant CSOs and NGOs. The CPTC 
will: (i) technically oversee activities in their sector; (ii) ensure a fluid two -way exchange of information and knowledge 
between their agency and the project; (iii) facilitate coordination and links between the project activities and the work 
plan o f their agency; and (iv) facilitate the provision of co -financing to the project.  A RPTC  will be set up in each of 
the target Federal Member State to monitor project implementation. It wi ll be chaired by the State Ministry  of 
Environment and Climate Change and includes line Ministries, CSOs and private sector and international partners . 
Technical committees will meet quarterly and on a n ad hoc basis.  
 
Figure  B.4.2  Implementation arrangements  
 
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
136. Somalia , one of the world’s most fragile states and LDCs,  stands at a critical juncture where the convergence of 
several challenges demands urgent attention. The nation grapples with a myriad of issues, and the agriculture sector 
is at the heart of socio -economic recovery. Somalia’s agricultural sector remains particularly vulnerable, with local 
populations facing extreme vulnerability to climate variability and climate change, in a context where scarcity is 
already stark. Currently, four million  people in Somalia (21 percent  of the population) are facing Crisis or Emergency 
food insecurity, according to the latest Integrated Phase Classification (IPC). An estimated 1.7 million children below 
the age of 5 face acute malnutrition in 2024, including 430,000 who are likely to be  severely malnourished47.  
137. Somalia is very much exposed to Climate extreme events as demonstrated in section B.1. The country is 
therefore in need to access to Climate Finance Instruments, providing resources to addre ss Climate Change and at


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 32 
 
  
48 https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2023/12/13/pr23438 -imf-and-world -bank -announce -us-4-5-billion -in-debt-relief -for-
somalia#:~:text=Following%20HIPC%20Completion%20Point%2C%20Somalia's,poverty%2C%20and%20promote%20job%20creation .  
49 https://somalipublicagenda.org/review -of-the-federal -government -of-somalias -first-billion -dollar -budget -for-
2024/#:~:text=The%20federal%20government%20of%20Somalia's%20budget%20for%202024%20was%20approved,last%20year's%20%
24977%20million%20budget.  the same time contributing to build the resilience of ecosystems and communities . Large -scale investments 
programs, such as the ones funded by the GCF, are also relevant in the context of Somalia, where emergency 
response and humanitarian aid prevail.  Most of the interventions have thus far focused on governance, peace -
building, and disarmament, with urgent food aid and food security interventions taking the forefront.  If recovery is to 
be sustainable, and local communities can gradually move on from survi val and subsistence, development has to 
be conducted in climate -informed manners. The country has just ended the HIPC transition program and has finally 
gotten rid of massive debt.  With a GDP of 10 billion in 202248, it cannot be expected to take on new loans.  Although 
public expenditures are rising (1 billion USD in 2024, a 4 percent increase from 2023), over two thirds of resources 
originate from external aid49.  
138. Somalia’s ability to invest in crucial sectors such as water and agriculture remains limited. With limited fiscal 
space, public investment in agriculture remains dismally low, hindering the development of resilient farming practices 
and infrastructure. Grant financi ng presents a viable avenue to inject much -needed capital into the agricultural sector, 
enabling the implementation of sustainable initiatives aimed at mitigating climate risks and improving productivity.  
The project also creates the conditions for the em ergence and strengthening of an agri -food private sector, one in 
which communities, with adequate support, can begin to create their own economic opportunities. Currently, the 
absence of accessible finance mechanisms further exacerbates the plight of farmers, and the risks involved  in 
transitioning to climate -resilient development pathways, stifling innovation, and inhibiting adaptation to climate 
change.  
139. The government has expressed clear commitment to actively participate in international climate governance 
mechanisms, particularly UNFCCC processes, recently revising its NDC submission in 202 3 (the first NDC was 
submitted in 2016) and submitting its first National Communication in 2019 and the first Biennial Update Report in 
2021. Somalia is one of the LDCs without a submitted National Adaptation Plan (NAP), however a draft document 
has been in  process. Somalia’s NDC 2021 estimated the cost of implementing the adaptation actions of the NDC 
target at USD 55 billion for 2021 –2030 , meaning USD 5.5 bill ion per year. For agriculture and food security area, 
USD 10 billion is estimated as investment required for 2021 –2030. As stated in Somalia’s NDC, Somalia, as an LDC 
in a fragile context, requires external financial support through multilateral and bilateral donors for successful 
implementation of the NDC.   These initiatives demonstrate a strong commitment on the country level to work with 
partners to promote a paradigm shift from fragility to resilience, contributing to long -term development and stability  
in the country.  
140. The proposed GCF grant is appropriate to address the urgent needs of the country to cope with climate change. 
Decades of conflict have taken a toll on Somalia’s agricultural sector, exacerbating the vulnerability of local 
populations to the impacts of climate change. Environmental degradation further compounds these challenges, 
undermining agricultural productivity and exacerbating food insecurity. The degradation  of natural and built 
infrastructure  that support climate coping mechanisms, must be reverted i n order to continue to support local 
development.  These investments, however, lie beyond the means of the Somalia government for the moment.  In 
light of these challenges, the imperative for GCF grant financing to bolster climate -resilient agriculture eme rges as 
a crucial solution to sustain livelihoods, enhance food security, and foster socio -economic stability and resilience.  
141. Co-financing with other initiatives has been identified, including the USAID -funded project  (USD 15.19  million) 
to be implemented by FAO. Co -financing from the Government of Somalia will ensure country ownership, 
complementarity with other initiatives and sustainability.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max . 500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
142. The project’s exit strategy is ingrained in all the project interventions. All activities are designed to be sustainable 
in the long term, and plans are integrated to ensure that the Somali government can maintain and upscale the key 
strategies promoted in this project. A significant aspect of the project’s exit strategy is included in Outcomes 1 and 
3.  
143. First, the project creates a basis of information and knowledge that will be integrated into future policy making; 
for example, the baseline study of land cover and land degradation will be integrated into the information systems 
created under Output 1.1, 2.1, and 3.2 and can be leveraged to prioritize interventions by the government or other 
donors.  Capacity built for monitoring landscapes, climate conditions, crop production and food security will also feed 
into long -term agricultural policy -making and o perations  at both State and Federal levels. The project also includes


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 33 
 
  
 measures to strengthen the capacity of the government in terms of monitoring the adherence to  rules and regulations 
related to natural resources use and management.  
144. Second, at the local level, the creation of landscape management committees and strengthening of water user 
committees, which are expected to outlast the project duration, will create a lasting foundation for community -based 
management of natural resources, nested within the context of decentralization.  These committees will create lasting 
capacity a mong their members (who are expected to change regularly) to understand and manage natural resources 
in a climate informed manner.  These institutional structu res are expected to outlast the project duration and to serve 
as a basis for further institutionalization of the watershed -based landscape management approach.   
145. Third, all infrastructure and landscape restoration activities  are designed with an exit strategy in mind.  The 
development and institution of fee -based systems for water management, the promotion of standards  for the 
construction of climate proof infrastructure , the formalization of water user committees as key management bodies 
create conditions under which future land and water management can be continued by the beneficiaries themselves.  
In particular, all community groups (FFS, WUAC, LMC) will receive training  and capacity building for the continued 
operations and maintenance of all infrastructure and natural assets.  The creation of a fee -based system for water 
management plays a key part in the exit strategy, as it creates a lasting basis for financing of wat er services.  
Although there remains a high level of dependency on external resources for investment in water infrastructure, the 
government of Somalia is committed to invest in the operation and maintenance of all works. The project works with 
the MoAI to  develop an irrigation master plan, which will include recommendations on water financing.  A detailed 
O&M plan is available in Annex 16.  
146.  Care has been taken not to create systems or institutions that create undue financial burden on the beneficiaries 
or on the Government .  For example, under Outcome 3, work to develop early warning systems, agrometeorological 
information dissemination and other e -extension, is conducted with a view to ensuring the autonomy and financial 
viability of the system, and continued affordability  for end users.  Pricing will be limited to a minimum to ensure 
continued service, and modalities for the establishment o f user fees for e -extension will also be explored.  
147. Another element of the project’s exit and sustainability strategy is the strong emphasis on building the capacity 
of government actors in delivering support to local producing households. While it is understood that significant 
support is needed due to the  dire situation experienced in the country, it is also agreed that all systems and services 
will be owned and continued by the government in the long -term.  This includes information management centres, 
early warning systems, all databases and, of course, any infrastructure upgraded by the project.  The project develops 
training programs that will fill both immediate capacity gaps and long -term gaps, to ensure the climate risk 
management aspects are mainstreamed in all aspects of the MoECC and MoAI’s work.


---
*Page 38*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
79,707,268  USD  ($) 
GCF f inancial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter a mount    Enter  % equity 
return  
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  79,707,268     
(vii) Results -
based payments  Enter a mount     
(b) Co-
financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
15,194,229   USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
FAO Grant  15,194,229  USD ($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Click here to 
enter text.  Options  Enter 
amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
Click here to 
enter text.  Options  Enter 
amount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
94,901,497  USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max . 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page ) The project also i dentified parallel co-financing opportunities, namely WB -funded project  
implemented by the Government of Somalia, IFAD -GEF Adaptive Agriculture and 
Rangeland Rehabilitation Project (A2R2) (2024 -2028) , IFAD -Adaptation Fund (AF) 
project ‘’ Green and Resilient Ecosystems for Somali Livelihoods (Hal -abuur) ’’ (under 
formulation) . 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
 USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
 USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1  Output 1.1  4,307,984  4,307,984  Grants  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here to 
enter text.  
Output 1.2  30,127,943  30,127,943  Grants  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here to 
enter text.


---
*Page 39*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
   
 Component 2  Output 2.1  24,172,925  9,311,909  Grants  14,861,01
6 Grants  FAO 
Output 2.2  8,181,815  8,181,815  Grants  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here to 
enter text.  
Output 2. 3 9,544,024  9,544,024  Grants     
Component 3  Output 3.1  3,317,004  3,317,004  Grants  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here to 
enter text.  
Output 3.2  2,755,379  2,755,379  Grants  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here to 
enter text.  
Monitoring & 
Evaluation  M&E  4,360,155  4,360,155  Grants  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here to 
enter text.  
Project 
Management 
Cost PMC  5,812,700  5,479,487  Grants  333,213  Grants  FAO 
Contingency   2,321,571  2,321,571  Grants     
Indicative total cost  (USD)  94,901,497  79,707,268  15,194,229  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
148. A total of 108,180  people will directly benefit from  capacity building activities  with the amount of USD 
19.7 million . Activities where the main aspect is capacity building  are as follows : 
• 1.1.1 Strengthen the information base for climate -informed local land use planning  
• 1.1.2 Develop climate -informed inclusive landscape management plans  
• 2.1.1 Strengthen water management capacity at State and local level  
• 2.2.1 Disseminate CRA practices to farmers  
• 2.2.2 Build the capacity of GoS -MoAI at Local, State and Federal level to support communities in the adoption of 
CRA practices  
• 2.3.1 Improve access to climate resilient inputs for crop and livestock production  
• 2.3.2 Build the capacity of producer groups to develop sustainable climate -informed business plans  
• 2.3.3 Increase MSME, cooperatives and farming group access to agricultural finance  
• 3.1.1 Update legal and institutional frameworks for sustainable landscape management  
• 3.1.2 Strengthen policy dialogue and coordination between sectoral ministries at State levels  
• 3.1.3 Strengthen the capacity of Mo ECC to manage, monitor and govern natural resources and implement EbA 
solutions  
• 3.1.4 Build capacity for the monitoring, assessment, analysis and early warning related to the impacts of climate 
on food and nutrition security  
• 3.1.5 Improve capacity of MoAI for climate -informed irrigation planning  
 
149. A total of  1,152,142  people will directly benefit from the following activities related to technology 
transfer with the amount of USD 41.8 million . 
• 1.2.1 Conduct landscape restoration through local landscape management committees and community -based 
associations  
• 2.1.2 Increase access to water resources and climate -smart irrigation infrastructure  
• 2.2.1 Disseminate CRA practices to farmers  
• 2.3.1 Improve access to climate resilient inputs for crop and livestock production  
• 2.3.2 Build the capacity of producer groups to develop sustainable climate -informed business plans  
• 2.3.4 Increase all -season access to market for smallholder producers, cooperatives and farmer groups  
• 3.2.1 Collect, disseminate and share relevant climate and land data to support decision making, early warning 
and early action at all levels


---
*Page 40*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
150. The project reaches 1,152,142 people (Direct beneficiaries) and benefits are expected to accrue to an 
additional 972,689 indirect beneficiaries50. Direct beneficiaries represent 6% of Somalia’s total population, with 5 0% 
female. Benefits in terms of food security, and livelihoods will be felt by poor rural households, specifically children 
(in Somalia 45% of the population is less than 15 years old).  
151. Estimations of beneficiaries were made as follow s: For output 1.1, since direct beneficiaries would be 
participant s in LMC (960 people  who are community members ), they are included among other outputs.  Indirect  
beneficiaries are the entire population of the district who will benefit from improved planning of natural resources.  
152. For output 1.2, direct beneficiaries represent all people served by areas under ecosystem -based  adaptation , 
calculated according to the average size of ha per person  (1 ha/person ).  Indirect beneficiaries are also the entire 
district population who benefit from improved ecosystem services.  
153. For output 2.1, the direct beneficiaries are the people served by areas under improved water management , 
mobilization and conservation at both landscape and farm levels ( 899,300  people) . Indirect beneficiaries are also 
the entire population of the districts who will benefit from improved ecosystem services related to water. Direct 
beneficiaries of output 2.2 are FFS facilitators, lead farmers and  participants in FFS and APFS and their households  
(85,932  people) .  Direct beneficiaries  of output 2.3 are coope rative members, producer group members who benefit 
from technical assistance on market -oriented agriculture.  
154. Under Output 3.2, the direct beneficiaries are people in each district who can access climate information, 
estimated as a factor of the rate of access to mobile phones (4 4.7%). In both cases,  the indirect beneficiaries 
represent the  total district population.  
155. To avoid double counting, since the figure for output 3. 2 also includes the others (as a sub -set), we have 
retained that figure as total number of beneficiaries and added the proportion of the population of Jowhar district 
who benefit from output 2.1 but are not counted under output 3.2 The total indirect beneficiaries will be the entire 
district population (less direct beneficiaries).  In all cases, we have assumed that women make up 50% of 
beneficiaries, except in the case of activities that involve training government staff, where the proportio n of women 
is lower due to inequalities in employment  (30%) .  
156. Adaptation b enefits include increased yields of maize, sorghum, and sesame from the application of climate 
resilient agricultural practices and increased access to water (through better mastery of productive assets, both 
natural and man -made ). The overall yield increase from the project interventions (see Table B.2.1 below and Annex 
2, FS) can be significant, ranging  broadly from 20 -50% depending on the specific context and effectiveness of the 
implementation51,52 (see Annex 2, FS for details). Considering all these elements together, the estimated average 
percentage increase in annual income per household (HH) after proposed interventions are implemented ranges 
from 20 -77% (under RCP 2.6) to18 -66% (under RCP 8.5), depending on the indicative mod el (see Annex 3) . 
Assuming that the increase in income is at least partially spent by HHs on food, these results should translate into 
increased food security for project beneficiaries.     
157. The project will also improve efficiency of livestock production through the introduction of agro -pastoralism and 
fodder production, leading to better yields and food diversification among pastoralist communities.  Access to food 
and input storage will als o help reduce losses and wastes, which will improve land -use efficiency as well as mitigate 
climate risks locally. This will lead to more stable livelihoods, increased income from agriculture (both on farm and 
off farm), and improved food security and nutr ition for beneficiary households. Improved access to early warning 
and agronomic advice will also help increase yields and stabilize production despite variability and extremes.  
Gradually the project will also consolidate value chains, including input sup ply chains, and strengthen the private 
sector’s participation in the agriculture sector.  
158. Government staff and employees will also benefit from the project , including improved knowledge and material 
capacity to deliver more reliable extension services  and EbA  solutions . The improvement of data flows will support 
 
50 Refer to Annex 23 for the methodology to calculate the number of beneficiaries.  
51 Enfors, E., Barron, J., Makurira, H., Rockström, J., & Tumbo, S. (2011). Yield and soil system changes from conservation tillage in 
dryland farming: A case study from North Eastern Tanzania. Agricultural Water Management , 98(11), 1687 -1695.  
52 Mwangi J, N., W. Catherine, M., Shem, K., John, N., & Fergus, S. (2020). Rainfall variability, soil heterogeneity, and role o f trees in 
influencing maize productivity —the case from an on -station agroforestry experiment in semi -arid Kenya. Forests, Trees a nd Livelihoods, 
29(1), 34 -52.


---
*Page 41*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
   
 more informed policy -making at State and federal levels, enabling them to deliver better climate extension services 
to last mile users. Additional details on adaptation benefits and the methods of calculations are indicated in Annex 
23. 
159. In terms of emissions reductions, the project will also generate a mitigation co -benefit of 1,678,938  tCO2 -eq 
(see A ppendix 5 of Annex 2 : EX-ACT calculation sheet) through on -farm and off -farm interventions that include: 
reforestation, agroforestry, better land  management and preparation techniques, a stronger control of irrigation, 
and the introduction of solar energy, including in food storage and water pumping.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
160. Pastoral systems are the backbone of the agricultural sector is Somalia but went through successive shocks 
and crisis in the last decades due to  Rangeland degradation and increasing livestock as compared to the available 
carrying capacity. The project will promote the transformation of pastoral systems into agro -pastoral systems in 
target project district a nd alternative livelihoods . 
161. This project will shift the paradigm of the agricultural sector in Somalia from a current scenario of ongoing land 
degradation and crop  and livestock  losses and failure because of floods and droughts, to one where yields are 
sufficient to ensure food security regardless of climate conditions. The project creates the conditions for a major 
leap in agricultural production, through infrastructure, rural f inance, and value addition, so that households can exit 
the survival and subsistence mode and enter a marke t-oriented economy that provides opportunities for 
diversification and builds social safety nets.  
162. This project will enable producers to overcome barriers to market access by providing them with technical skills, 
irrigation technologies, climate information, and by creating linkages among producers, private sector, and State 
actors, as well as to potent ial finance providers. A major change instituted in this project lies in the creation of 
mechanisms for collaborative, democratic management of natural assets, infrastructure, agricultural land, and agro -
pastoral production systems through local organizati ons such as landscape management committees and Water 
user associations.  
163. The paradigm shift in this project lies in the integrated approach that targets not only producers, but also those 
whose mandate it is to support them (extension services, climate information service providers, and financial 
institutions). The project will  enable the existing extension -related organizations at local, state, and federal level to 
build their capacities and ensure producers have access to extension services sustainably. At the same time, the 
project will enable to strengthen coordination mecha nisms at federal and state level among national and 
international partners willing to adopt an integrated and coordinated approach to address droughts and floods on 
short and longer terms and to build the capacity of Government organizations in mainstreami ng climate resilient 
agriculture and landscape approach in Government’s policies and strategies.  
164. The interventions in the project are all conceived to be replicable in all areas  but will be adapted at each of the 
local context . At local level, the process set up for selecting and implementing natural landscape restoration and 
infrastructure rehabilitation, can be applied in all regions, provided political stability is in place. The project also 
builds national level systems and  capacity to generate information and that that can be used by all States and state 
structures at federal and decentralized lev els. The information management centre and data collection exercises 
that are implemented under the various outcomes will also serve to the development of a next generation of climate 
information services.  Similarly, once in place, the systems for dissemi nation of early warning and climate 
information through mobile phones, radio, and media, can also be upscaled rapidly.   
165. At the local level, the physical intervention and technologies promoted by this project for agricultural production 
are all based on best practice and can be adapted or upscaled to other regions. For example, the project will 
develop technologies for maize  and sorghum production that can be disseminated to other regions either through 
extension services or through farmer networks themselves. In this regard the perception and communication of 
benefits will be key in ensuring farmers opt in to the resilient p ractices.  Access to rural finance and the consolidation 
of input markets will also serve as elements of this upscaling strategy, since they will facilitate the broader adoption 
of project -promoted practices by other groups.  
166. Knowledge sharing and learning are essential components of this project’s strategy.  First the project will 
generate data and knowledge on natural capital, agricultural production, and climate conditions, that will be used 
to inform policy and planning at local and government level. Second, the project will disseminate knowledge and 
best practice on climate resilient production technologies, as well as value addition and transformation of 
agricultural commodities.  The mechanisms for transmission of informa tion to end users include traditional 
extension services, FFS and APFS, community groups, awareness raising and use of mobile phones and media.  
167. The project not only shares knowledge but also ensures that those who receive the knowledge are well 
equipped to interpret it and act upon it.  This is why the project works closely with local communities and


---
*Page 42*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
   
 organizations to ensure the adequate downscaling of information that has, to date, been concentrated to central 
government authorities.  
168. The project also creates mechanisms for knowledge sharing among government partners.  This includes 
promoting cross -sectoral coordination between ministries, cross -sectoral planning frameworks and the 
mainstreaming of climate risks into development and ter ritorial planning at all levels.  
169. Outcomes 1 and 3 activities lead to the creation of a stronger enabling environment in which the adoption of 
climate -smart agricultural practices is facilitated by efficient government services. Policies that include climate risks, 
or that are based on better understanding of climate -environment changes, such as landscape management 
strategies, will emerge as a new paradigm for the intersectoral management of territory. In addition, the project wil l 
advance capacity for the participatory monitoring of these  new frameworks, particularly by strengthening the 
technical means for monitoring the state of land degradation, but also by creating homegrown, locally owned, 
monitoring mechanisms.  It is expected that the landscape management committees, water user committees and 
other groups of beneficiaries will begin playing a more important role in the management of resources in the future.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
170. The environmental benefits  of this project are as follows:  
- Improved water management  through irrigation  and regulation and erosion control through soil and land 
management techniques .  This will be achieved through Ecosystem -based adaptation (green infras tructure)  such 
as contour bunds, half -moons, rock dikes and catchments, for example.  As a result, water availability for irrigation 
will also increase, and erosion from rainfall will be limited.  
- Ecological benefits will also arise from the implementation of landscape management plans through regeneration 
of the natural  land cover  using local resilient species, through reforestation, rangeland rehabilitation and through 
the integration of trees in production systems (agroforestry and agro -sylvo -pastoralism) and ecosystem -based 
solutions, such as reduced erosion and flooding risk, increased land cover, soil fertility and soil moisture, which will 
also contribute to increasing natural land productivit y and reducing emissions from the land use sector. The total 
area covered by such measures is 41,800  ha. Indirectly, land cover is also expected to improve thanks to the 
introduction of anti -erosion and run -off control structures listed above, since improved soil moisture is likely to help 
vegetation growth.  
- Improvement of biodiversity through Prosopis removal  and control .  Removal of Prosopis will also be supported by 
reforestation using indigenous species  as mentioned above to avoid the return of the invasive species, which grows 
on degraded land  and riverine areas .  Alternative uses for Prosopis will also be promoted, including for example as 
hardwood, charcoal briquettes, or animal feed, which may bring added economic value.   
- On farm, the project will also lead to improvement s in soil fertility  and land productivity  through the use of integrated 
soil fertility management, better alluvi um management through relevant infrastructure for flood management and 
integration of livestock and cropping . 
171. The economic benefits the project will generate include: (i) income generation that will overtime allow 
investments in small ruminants, acquisition of lands, housing and asset accumulation, not to mention provide added 
coping mechanisms in times of extreme s (ii) additional income from value addition, food and input storage in 
constructed warehouses (iii) access to credit that will help producers diversify and intensify their production systems 
(iv) links of the producers to microfinance institutions, to ena ble them to build their resilience to shocks and ensure 
that their investments are sustainable.    
172. Main social  benefits the project will generate will include: (i) employment opportunities on farm particularly in 
irrigated areas and in processing/storage units , involvement in tree nursery and seed multiplication and control of 
invasive species  (ii) promotion of youth , wome n and minorities  engagement along the value chains, particularly in 
value addition and processing (iii) increase equity and representation in local governance system for men and 
women; (iv) better management and prevention of local con flicts over natural resource management and 
strengthening of social cohesiveness, (v) built/strengthened linkages between agro -pastoralists and pastoralists in 
areas where the competition for grass and animal feeding is severe.  
173. Because of the objective to facilitate the transition from pastoral to agro -pastoral systems and the capacity built 
in conflict management, the project will also contribute to mitigate conflicts over natural resource management at 
local level.  
174. Added information on sustainable development benefits can be found in Annex 2, FS.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page )


---
*Page 43*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
   
 175. Vulnerability  to climate change  in Somalia is underpinned by various combined factors such as extreme poverty 
and conflict, demographic pressure over natural resources, the effects of climate change but also structural 
constraints such as disruption of  traditional land rights and rangeland management systems that are no longer 
adapted. Somalia confronts a host of pressing challenges, including inadequate public investment in agriculture, 
underdeveloped value chains, and a fragile – and informal - private sector. These hurdles, coupled wi th prolonged 
conflict and environmental degradation, heighten the vulnerability of the nation's agricultural sector. In this context, 
targeted financing, and reinvestment to promote climate -resilient agriculture emerge as a necessity for bolstering 
food se curity, fostering resilience, and catalysing sustainable progress.  
176. Somalia's agricultural landscape suffers from meagre  public investment and underdeveloped value chains for 
crucial staple crops, impeding the adoption of resilient farming practices and the establishment of robust 
infrastructure. The dearth of financial backing undermines endeavours  to enhance productivity and adapt to climate 
fluctuations, exacerbating food insecurity and poverty. Grant financing presents a strategic avenue to inject 
essential capital, fortify value chains, expand market access, and facilitate the uptake of climate -smart agricultural 
techno logies, thereby fortifying the resilience of Somalia's agricultural sector.  
177. Decades of conflict have exacted a heavy toll on Somalia's agricultural and natural resources sectors , 
exacerbating the vulnerability of local communities to the uncertainties and risks of climate change. Severe 
environmental degradation exacerbates these challenges, eroding agricultural productivity and intensifying food 
insecurity. GCF financing can hel p address the root causes of conflict, rehabilitating degraded ecosystems, and 
nurturing resilience among conflict -affected communities, laying a robust fo undation for sustainable agricultural 
development and recovery.  
178. The beneficiaries’ needs include the urgent need to improve the water infrastructure (including the design and 
construction), to better manage water resources and avoid negative impacts of recurrent floods. Given the 
prevalence of land degradation, all are as require the improved management of natural resources to regenerate the 
land cover and reduce local conflicts over natural resources in a context of drought. Beneficiaries also need to 
access climate -smart agriculture techniques including drought toleran t varieties, improved cropping techniques or 
integrated soil fertility management and integrated crop and livestock systems.  
179. The Government capacity is limited in terms of financial resources but also in terms of institutional capacities 
and knowledge. Most interventions in the last 3 decades have been humanitarian responses and few small scale 
investment programs have been created. Somalia is building its institutions at federal and federal state level. The 
very small Somali government  budget still relies on heavily on international aid: the Overseas Development Aid to 
GDP ratio in 2020 was 43%, whereas the remittances to GDP ra tio was 31% in 2020 (Ministry of Planning, 2021). 
Having just recently transitioned out of HIPC initiative, the government of Somalia is unable to contract large -scale 
loans to support development in the primary sector.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
180. The proposed project is aligned with current Government policies and programs to foster adaptive capacity and 
climate -resilient development, as noted in the country’s most recent NDC which emphasizes the need to focus on  
“climate smart agriculture, livestock and Land use”  including , among others : i) Provision of climate resilient water 
resources and infrastructure for agro -pastoral productivity and resilience in the rangelands of Somalia, ii)  up-scale 
development of new irrigation schemes and modernizing ex isting schemes , iii) Development of soil maps for 
Somalia , iv) Establishing and restocking national grain reserves to enhance food security v) Establish ing national 
plant and livestock breeding systems that can, in the long -term, possess technical capacity to develop fast maturing 
cultivars and climate smart livestock , vi) Promote the cultivation of legumes and other crops that offer multiple 
benefits, such as soil fertility enhancement and dietary improvement )53.   
181. The project is aligned with the Somalia National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to Climate Change 
which includes 3 program areas: (i) Sustainable Land Management (ii) Water Resources Management and (iii) 
Disaster Management.   
182. The proposal is also in line with national priorities as set out in the National Development Plan 2020 –2024, in 
particular the economic (3) and Social Pillars (4) with respect to Agriculture, Food Security, Social and Human 
Development. The proposal also a ligns with National Water Resource Strategy (NWRS 2021 –2025) to: 1 – Develop 
a functional water sector governance  framework; 2 - Operationalize Integrated Water Resources Management and 
 
53 The Federal Republic of Somalia updated nationally determined contribution (NDC), 2024 (draft)


---
*Page 44*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
   
 in particular sub -strategies 10 and 11 to plan and respond to climate change and its impacts on water resources, 
and 3 - Improve the provision of priority water services, including water security for agriculture54.  
183. The project is also in alignment with the Green Somalia  campaign, led by President Hassan Sheikh since 
August 2022, that aims to  plant 10 million trees nationwide.  These trees will bolster biodiversity, enhance climate 
resilience, and defend against droughts to transform arid landscapes into thriving oases, mitigating desertification 
and climate challenges for a sustainable future.  
184. The NDA for GCF Somalia is the Minist er of Environment  and Climate Change.  This project was developed in 
close collaboration with the NDA , who has endorsed this project for priority submission.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
185. The Project’s expected impact. With an estimated total budget of USD 94.9 0 million, the project's GCF grant is 
estimated at USD 79 .71 million. The project is expected to deliver direct benefits to an estimated 1.15 million direct 
beneficiaries, mainly agro -pastoralists and marginalized pastoralists, and indirectly to 972.69 thousand people in 
Somalia. These estimated direct and indirect  beneficiaries represent approximately 6.5% and 5.5%, respectively, 
of Somalia's total population, which reached 17.60 million in 2022 (World Bank, 2022 est.). The cost per beneficiary 
for GCF gran t is USD 69. 18 (per direct beneficiary) and USD 37. 51 (per all beneficiaries combined), and for total 
funding, USD 82. 36 and USD 4 4.66 respectively . 
186. Concessionality justification. The proposed concessional financing level for the Project is justifiable based on 
the ongoing need for highly concessional financing in the country. This grant financial support will help Somalia 
address its development needs and contribute to achieving mo re sustainable economic growth. Various factors, 
including budgetary, macroeconomic, and internal government organization aspects, contribute to this need for 
grant financing:  
187. The project will establish the necessary intergovernmental and inter -agency cooperation mechanisms, 
linkages, and learning between the central and regional -level governing bodies. These activities will foster the 
implementation of the following actions: (i ).  Improving emergency monitoring schemes (ii) modernizing and 
customizing early disaster -warning systems (iii). Facilitating the provision and availability of public information to 
agro-pastoralists and pastoralists, (iv) Improving access to markets (e.g . via rehabilitation of rural accessibility). 
Knowing that these activities largely remain in the public good domain, per definition, they do not attract private 
sector investment, especially in countries like Somalia where the potential risk of conflict r emains strong.   
188. The project will provide the necessary financial resources that could not have been obtained otherwise due to 
the lack of the necessary internal resources. Quoting the IMF’s press release on Somalia’s budget and fiscal space 
from March 2024: “ The approved 2024 budget targets a modest overall fiscal deficit of 0.3 percent of GDP, which 
is appropriate to accommodate priority expenditure that is supportive of growth, security, and development while 
limiting other discretionary spending. External b udget support  from multilateral and bilateral partners remains 
crucial to support the authorities’ policy efforts.” [1] 
189. The project will cater to agro -pastoralists and marginalized pastoralists in a highly climate -vulnerable and 
poverty -stricken country to help them adapt to the onset of various weather and climate shocks: prolonged 
droughts, flash floods, heatwaves, etc., which negatively affect their agriculture production and animal herding, 
hence food security, and livelihood. The impoverished agro -pastoralists and marginalized pastora lists are 
characterized by a low level of available resources that could help them adapt their customary agricultural 
production and animal herding to climate change -related weather patterns. They tend to have insufficient 
knowledge about potential ways of  adapting their agricultural production to climate change and low access to credit 
due to the unavailability of lending institutions (caused by farmers’ remote location or non -sedimentary livelihood, 
for example), no credit score, or absence of collateral.  The Project will ensure the provision to Somalia’s agro -
pastoralists and marginalized pastoralists of goods that, in the long run, will contribute to the public good:  (i). 
Improved, climate -resilient farming practices (ii). Climate -smart soil and land man agement (iii). Efficient water 
collection, management, and water -saving techniques (iv). Management of encroaching plant invasive species.  
190. Economic and financial analysis modelling. The indicative ex -ante EFA was pursued separately in financial and 
economic terms from two perspectives: (1) the perspective of direct beneficiaries, and (2) the perspective of the 
entire project with an embedded accounting of the budgetary implementation framework of 7 years. These two 
modelling perspectives (1) and (2) were additionally appraised using two different climate scenario assumptions: 
 
54 Additionally, FAO is providing TA to coordinate a National Flooding Task Force and develop a road map to work across the huma nitarian 
and development nexus under the direction of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary -General (DSRSG) and the G overnment of 
Somalia. The work of the Task Force focuses on emergency humanitarian response, developmental programming with longer term ob jectives, 
national coordination and help in obtaining the goals of the Federal Government and the United Nations in So malia.


---
*Page 45*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
   
 RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 to show how the results might change under differing climate hardships. The financial and 
economic EFA results were calculated over 20 years, using a conservative level of discount rate of 15%. The 
incremental aggregate Financial Net Pr esent Values (FNPVs) of appraised indicative iCRAPs (6 indicative models) 
under RCP 2.6 assumption range from USD 6.25 million to USD 21.40 million.  The incremental financial FNPV 
from the perspective of the entire Project was estimated at USD 33. 44 millio n. The incremental aggregate FNPVs 
of appraised indicative iCRAPs (6 indicative models) under RCP 8.5 assumption range from USD 5.85 million to 
USD 14.76 million. The incremental financial FNPV from the perspective of the entire project was estimated at US D 
12.99  million.  The incremental aggregate Economic Net Present Values (ENPVs) of appraised six indicative 
iCRAPs under RCP 2.6 assumption range from USD 10.75 million to USD 30.40 million.  The incremental ENPV 
from the perspective of the entire Project wa s estimated at USD 74.94 million. The incremental aggregate ENPVs 
of appraised seven indicative iCRAPs under RCP 8.5 assumption range from USD 10.35 to USD 28.43 . The 
incremental ENPV from the perspective of the entire Project was estimated at USD 55. 47 million.  Therefore, the 
obtained EFA results suggest that the expected benefits will outweigh the costs, and the proposed project should 
be implemented in its proposed form . 
191. Application of the best practices. The project aims to make the most impact by supporting the introduction of 
integrated solutions and best practices that have already been tested in similar contexts and proven successful. 
Furthermore, the project will be implemented using a participatory a nd integrated approach in project target districts. 
For instance, the project plans to leverage the FAO’s Farm Field Schools (FFS) to improve agricultural practices 
and sustainable land management techniques and to addres s invasive species infestation. Additionally, the project 
aims to rehabilitate and strengthen climate -proof water infrastructure and promote alternative livelihoods through 
value chain development. One of the project's main objectives is to ensure that inn ovative approaches and 
capacities built up interconnect the various elements to generate virtuous cycles of implementation, testing, and 
feedback. This will help to scale up and sustain efforts and generate financial and economic returns for intended 
benef iciaries and the entire economy.


---
*Page 46*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
  
  
  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
 
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will contribute (Description ) 
Description  Rating  
Scale  There is currently 
limited evidence of 
significant investment in 
climate -resilient 
development pathways 
at the local level in 
Somalia.  
Low Demonstrated benefits of 
adopting climate resilient 
agriculture and landscape 
management practices 
create momentum for a 
larger -scale adoption and 
upscaling.   The project reaches 6 regions and disseminates agricultural 
practices and landscape management practices that will lead to 
significant food security and economic benefits at local level 
(outcome 2 and outcome 3). These are expected to be taken up by 
local government, federal member states and local (communities as 
part of an upscaling and replication strategy).  The project will 
establish the necessary drivers to foster scaling -up, includ ing: 
- innovations: the Project will introduce and scale -up EbA 
solutions in highly vulnerable districts and watersheds to restore  
degraded ecosystems, increase climate resilience of agriculture, 
make water available, and enhance livelihoods.  
- Leadership: by supporting the adoption of the climate 
resilient agriculture (CRA) and EbA approach with a wide variety  of 
stakeholders, including local leaders, extension services, financi al 
institutions, government staff and policy makers, enabling its 
replication at all levels.  
- Incentives and accountability: the prospects of stabilized 
livelihoods  and higher yields  are a key incentive for the long -term 
adoption of proposed climate -resilient technologies at farm and 
community levels.  
Activities that directly contribute to scaling up include :  
- 1.1.1 the national baseline study which will help prioritize future 
intervention sites;


---
*Page 47*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
  
  
 - 1.1.2 the Landscape Management Plans which will help scale 
up at landscape level  
- 2.1.1 which provides data on water accounting at State level to 
support future interventions  and the creation of open data 
systems  
- 2.2.1 which trains 1260 facilitators/ lead farmer s as local 
community extension champions  
- 2.2.2 the development of MoAI capacity for climate -informed 
extension which can be replicated at scale through the States 
and beyond  
- All activities under output 3.1, which create the institutional and 
legal framework for scaling and replication  
- And all activities under 3.2 which strengthen data systems and 
availability   
Replicability  Currently there are a 
few examples of 
replicable technologies 
and practices, which 
have been tested and 
piloted.  However, these 
have not been 
implemented at scale.  
Low The project scales up tested 
approaches and technologies 
to reach 10 districts in 6 
regions of the country, 
representing a cross -section 
of agro -climate zones and 
land use zones. The 
participation of federal 
member states makes the 
replication at State lev el 
realistically achievable.  A 
replication at national level is 
also plausible under certain 
conditions (particularly the 
availability of finance and 
national stability).  Activities under outcome 2 are all replicable at the scale of the entire 
country.  Activities under Outcome 1 (the landscape management 
approach) are replicable but must be adapted to the realities of each 
district and locality.  Activities under Outcome 3 are intended to 
support nationwide processes and can easily be replicated at 
national level, particularly in terms of early warning systems.  
Replicability will be guaranteed by (i) the relevance, efficiency and 
effectiveness of promoted techniques to buil d vulnerable 
smallholder’s and ecosystem’s resilience; (ii) the integration of EbA 
in local planning and extension programs through FFS – 
guaranteeing strong ownership and establishing the blueprint for 
future replication; and (iii) support to financial mechanisms both at 
local and national level to facilitate the pursued financing of 
promoted interventions.  
Activities that directly contribute to replication include  
- 1.1.1 the national baseline study which will help prioritize future 
intervention sites;  
- 1.1.2 the Landscape Management Plans which will help scale 
up at landscape level  
- 2.1.1 which provides data on water accounting at State level to 
support future interventions and the creation of open data 
systems


---
*Page 48*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
  
  
 - 2.2.2 the development of MoAI capacity for climate -informed 
extension which can be replicated at scale through  the States 
and beyond  
- All activities under output 3.1, which create the institutional and 
legal framework for scaling and replication  
- Activities  that help local farmers pool savings to support 
replication of project -supported activities, and the development 
of innovative financial products.  
-  all activities under 3.2 which strengthen data systems and 
availability  
- The monitoring and evaluation activities, that provide lessons 
learned in support of future replication in Somalia and beyond.  
Sustainability  Sustainability of 
previous interventions 
has been impacted by 
the level of instability 
and conflict in the 
country.   
Low As a recovering country, the 
creation of lasting institutions 
and processes depends on 
the participation of all 
stakeholders. Conflict -
prevention and peace -
building measures are 
integrated into the proposed 
interventions, with a view to 
strengthening the c apacity of 
the Federal government and 
member state governments 
to enforce laws and provide 
valuable services to local 
populations.  Approaches and strategies that will be used to ensure the 
sustainability  and scaling up of the impacts  of the project are : (i) 
participatory design and implementation of  landscape management 
plans , including operations and maintenance based on local self -
governance (ii) knowledge management and sharing with 
stakeholders (iii) promotion of the adoption of financial instruments 
at local level that will ensure producers can access to credit and 
insurance schemes either to make the value chains developed 
susta inable or to ensure producers’ activities resume after the 
occurrence of extreme events (iv) improvement of coordination 
mechanism s at local level , (v) capacity building for communities and 
government staff including for the replication and upscaling of 
project outputs; vi) creation of a lasting data collection system to 
support decision making and climate informed decentralized 
governance.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note


---
*Page 49*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
  
  
 Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Midterm  Final55 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  
 
 Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Yearly progress reports 
and final evaluation  
Progress reports from 
interventions and the 
constant monitoring  0 576,071 direct 
beneficiaries  
(288,036  
women)  
 
486,344 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(243,172  
women)  1,152,142 
direct 
beneficiaries 
(576,071 
women)  
 
972,689 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(486,344  
women)  Note: This represents the 
total number  of beneficiaries 
including those who will 
have resilient livelihood 
options by receiv ing training 
and capacity building on the 
implementation of CRA  and 
by benefiting from improved 
access to water for CRA , 
those who will have access 
to improved climate 
information services  and 
awareness -raising activities , 
and those served by 
improved landscape 
management . 
 
Calculations: This is the 
global number of 
beneficiaries (please refer to 
Annex 23  and 23a  for 
details).  
 
Assumptions: No major 
conflict occurs, no major 
change in presence of 
displaced persons. Cell 
phone connectivity is stable 
or increasing;  
 
55 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emiss ion reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number  of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 50*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
  
  
 ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Yearly progress reports 
and final evaluation  
Progress reports from 
interventions and the 
constant monitoring  0  576,071 direct 
beneficiaries  
(288,036  
women)  
 
486,344 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(243,172  
women)  1,152,142 
direct 
beneficiaries 
(576,071 
women)  
 
972,689 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(486,344  
women)  Note: This represents the 
total number  of beneficiaries 
including those who will 
have resilient livelihood 
options by receiv ing training 
and capacity building on the 
implementation of CRA  and 
by benefiting from improved 
access to water for CRA , 
those who will have access 
to improved climate 
information services  and 
awareness -raising activities , 
and those served by 
improved landscape 
management . 
 
Indirect beneficiaries 
represent the remainder of 
the total district population.  
 
Calculations: This is the 
global number of 
beneficiaries (please refer to 
Annex 23 and 23a for 
details).  
 
Assumptions: No major 
conflict occurs, no major 
change in presence of 
displaced persons. Cell 
phone connectivity is stable 
or increasing;


---
*Page 51*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
  
  
 ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options  Yearly progress reports 
and final evaluation  
Survey of project 
beneficiaries  0 
  
314,806  direct 
beneficiaries  
(157,403  
women)   
 629,612  direct 
beneficiaries  
(314,806  
women)  
 Beneficiaries estimated are 
included in Core 2 .  
This represents the total 
number  of beneficiaries who 
will adopt improved and or 
new climate resilient 
livelihoods options as a 
result of  training and 
capacity building on CRA , 
landscape management , 
improved access to water , 
and agriculture related 
climate information services.  
Calculations: More 
specifically, this refers to 
beneficiaries from activities 
1.2.1.1, 2.1.2.2, 2.2.1 and 
2.3.1, to avoid double 
counting. It is a subset of 
Core 2. Please refer to 
Annex 23 for details.  
Assumptions: No major 
conflict occurs, no major 
change in presence of 
displaced persons.  
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with more 
climate -resilient water 
security  Yearly progress reports 
and final evaluation  
Survey of project 
beneficiaries  0 449,650  direct 
beneficiaries  
(224,825  
women) 
benefitting 
from improved 
access to 
water  899,300  
(449,650 ) 
direct 
beneficiaries  
benefitting 
from improved 
access to 
water  Beneficiaries estimated are 
included in Core 2 .  
Calculations: This includes 
beneficiaries under water -
related activities in activity 
1.2.1 and 2.1.2 . Please  
refer to Annex 23.


---
*Page 52*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
  
  
 Assumptions: No major 
conflict occurs, no major 
change in presence of 
displaced persons.  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  Supplementary 2.4: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) covered 
by new or improved 
early warning systems  Yearly progress reports 
and final evaluation  0 474,900  direct 
beneficiaries  
(237,450  
women)  949,799 direct 
beneficiaries 
(474,900 
women)  This includes all individuals 
(male and female) that are 
covered by improved early 
warning systems for climate 
change related risks and 
hazards .  
Calculations: Beneficiaries 
estimated the same as core 
2. This is the global number 
of beneficiaries (please refer 
to Annex 23 for details).  
Assumptions: No major 
conflict occurs, no major 
change in presence of 
displaced persons. Mobile 
phone connectivity is stable 
or increasing;  
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment  Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions  Yearly progress reports 
and final evaluation  0 One barrage 
and main canal 
rehabilitated; 
5km of 
secondary and 
tertiary 
irrigation 
canals 
rehabilitated; 
30 km of rural One barrage 
and main canal 
rehabilitated; 
15km of 
secondary and 
tertiary 
irrigation 
canals 
rehabilitated; 
70 km of rural This is calculated as a 
factor of cost, bearing in 
mind that the existing 
infrastructure is up to 90% 
destroyed due to years of 
conflict.


---
*Page 53*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
  
  
 road 
rehabilitated: 
with an 
estimated 
value of USD 
12 million  road 
rehabilitated: 
with an 
estimated 
value of USD 
23.9 million  Please refer to Annex 23a 
(Data tab) for detailed 
calculations.  
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  Core 4: Hectares of 
natural resources 
brought under improved 
low-emission and/or 
climate -resilient 
management practice  SWALIM, earthmap , 
beneficiary  surveys  
Landscape Committee 
Reports, physical 
observation  0 25,625 ha 
under direct 
intervention  51,250 ha 
under direct 
intervention  This is calculated using the 
number of FFS participants 
at rate of 1 person per 
hectare  (at a 75% adoption 
rate), adding the total area 
under improved landscape 
management under activity 
1.2.1. Assumptions: No 
major conflict occurs, no 
major change in presence 
of displaced persons. 
Adoption of project 
technologies for improved 
natural resources 
management proceeds as 
planned  (an adoption rate 
rate of 75% is retained) . 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
 
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage


---
*Page 54*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
  
  
 Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  Very few projects and 
programs have been 
designed with the 
purpose of 
disseminating climate 
change related 
technologies, practices, 
or knowledge.  Most of 
the past years 
programming has been 
focused on conflict 
prevention or 
management and 
security and 
governance. There is a 
highly limited regulatory 
framework, staff, 
technical capacity, and 
financing available to 
promote climate -resilient 
development pathways  
and technologies .  low - Improved and 
enabling regulatory 
environment.  
- Availability of data to 
inform agricultural 
management, NRM 
governance, EW, 
and climate risk 
management.  
- local communities 
operate on the basis 
of updated 
knowledge and best 
adaptation practices 
through FFS  The project strengthens 
capacity at local and 
government level to 
identify and implement 
climate resilient 
pathways in the 
agriculture sector.  Under 
output 1. 2 the project 
develops and transfers 
best available 
technologies for 
landscape management 
and ecosystem -based 
adaptation.  Under 
output s 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3,  
the project transfers 
water management and 
climate resilient 
agriculture technology  
and strengthens the 
enabling environment for 
their adoption  through 
output 3.1 .    
In addition, the project 
supports the deployment 
of gender sensitive and 
gender targeted 
technologies, 
approaches, knowledge 
and practices to support 
a transformative change 
in the conditions of 
women .  Multiple sub -national 
areas within a country  
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute The institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for sustainable land low - Improved and 
enabling regulatory 
environment.  The project works to 
improve the regulatory 
framework governing Multiple sub -national 
areas within a country


---
*Page 55*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
  
  
 to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate -
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  management, land use 
planning, water 
management and 
irrigation control are only 
established at national 
level and remain 
theoretical.  
Decentralization is only 
beginning, and federal 
member states lack the 
technical and material 
capacity to plan, monitor 
and enforce. Local 
communities are not yet 
fully involved in the 
management of natural 
resources, and there is a 
lack of data that can 
inform the development 
of improved policy 
frameworks at any level.   - Availability of data to 
inform agricultural 
management, NRM 
governance, EW, 
and climate risk 
management.  
Existence of local, 
democratic and science 
driven institutions and 
processes for the 
allocation and 
management of land 
and water  agriculture and natural 
resources management  
through outputs 1.1 
(local leve l) and 3.1 
(state and federal 
levels) .  It will increase 
data availability to inform 
improved governance at 
a decentralized level.  In 
addition, the project will 
create processes for 
locally driven landscape 
management processes 
(while preventing 
conflict).  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators  (project outcomes and outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1 : Restored 
landscapes are 
resilient and 
sustainably managed  Change in land 
productivity dynamics  
(LPD)  and normalized 
difference vegetation 
index (NDVI) , 
disaggregated by Site  SWALIM, earthmap  TBD (A baseline 
assessment is 
foreseen in year 
1). Initial data 
from earthmap 
shows LPD for 
the period 2016 -5% increase in 
LPD and 15% 
increase in 
NDVI  
 15% increase 
in LPD  and 
30% increase 
in NDVI  Data for land productivity 
and average ND 
Vegetation indices  from 
earthmap and validated 
by SWALIM studies at 
baseline, mid -point and 
end point  (activity 1.1.1).


---
*Page 56*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
  
  
 2022  and NDVI 
for the period 
2017 -2019. 
Please refer to 
Annex 2, section 
6.1 for figures . 
Output 1.1 Improved 
participatory landscape 
and natural resources 
management and 
governance are 
established at 
watershed and village 
levels  ha of land under 
climate informed 
planning  mechanisms  SWALIM, earthmap  0 4,419,129  8,838,259  Areas are calculated on 
basis of sub -catchment 
map from SWALIM.  
Represents total area by 
sub-catchment under the 
governance of landscape 
management committees  
Output 1.2 Agricultural 
and Agropastoral 
Landscapes are 
restored and under 
sustainable 
management  ha of land under 
restoration , 
disaggregated by ty pe 
of intervention  Landscape Committee 
Reports, physical 
observation (SWALIM)  0 20,950  41,800  Based on initial 
prioritization of works.  Ha 
represents all area 
covered by landscape 
rehabilitation activities  
Outcome 2 : Local 
livelihoods are 
resilient to climate 
change  # of people adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate resilient 
livelihoods options 
disaggregated by 
gender/site  Beneficiaries records, 
Beneficiary  surveys  
(baseline , mid -term, and 
final), mid-term and final 
evaluations surveys and 
technical evaluations  0 314,805  
(157,403  
women)   629,612  
(314,806  
women)  This represents the total 
number  of beneficiaries 
who will have resilient 
livelihood options by 
receiv ing training and 
capacity building on the 
implementation of CRA , 
through  improved 
landscape management 
and improved access to 
water . These individuals 
will also benefit from 
improved climate 
information services.  
Output 2.1 Resilient 
water supply is secured # of ha covered by 
resilient water supply  Physical observation  0 16,400 32,800 This figure is based on 
the initial prioritization of


---
*Page 57*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
  
  
 and sustainably 
managed  work s. Please refer to 
Annex 23a for details.  
Output 2.2 Locally -
specific Climate 
Resilient Agriculture 
practices are adopted  # of people trained in 
locally specific CRA 
practices  Beneficiaries records, 
Beneficiary  surveys  
(inception, mid -point and 
end point),  0 61,800 
participants  
30,900 women  85,932  
participants 
(42,966 
women)  This represents FFS 
participants, assuming 
420 FFS and APFS 
groups of 30 people each 
(50% women globally)..  
Number of field 
extension officers and 
lead farmers 
capacitated as FFS 
facilitators  Project annual progress 
reports  
Training records,  0 630 1,260  The project trains 3 
facilitators for each FFS 
or APFS.  
Output 2.3 Additional 
income for farmers is 
derived from climate 
resilient value chains  # of people deriving 
increased income  (at 
least 1 5%) from value 
added in the climate 
resilient value chains  Sales registries, training 
reports, beneficiary 
surveys  (baseline , mid -
term,  and final), 0 7,440  (3720 
women)  14,880  (7,440 
women)  This represents the 
number of people , 
cooperative members 
and producer groups  who 
are specifically targeted 
under output 2.3 . Please 
refer to Annex 23.  
Outcome 3:  An 
improved institutional 
enabling environment 
for sustainable 
landscape 
management and 
climate resilient 
agriculture is in place at 
State and Federal 
Levels  # of institutional 
frameworks and 
coordination 
mechanisms updated 
on the basis of 
climate risk 
information  Policy documents  0 1 national level 
strategy/frame
work  2 national level 
strategies/  
frameworks, 1 
master plan  
and 6 state 
level 
frameworks 
updated   
Output 3.1  Legal 
frameworks and 
implementation  
modalities for NRM and 
CRA are improved  # of legal frameworks 
and implementation 
monitoring  modalities 
improved  Policy documents  0 1 national level 
strategy/frame
work  2 national level 
strategies /fram
eworks , 1 
master plan  
and 6 state 
level


---
*Page 58*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
  
  
 frameworks 
updated  
# of government staff 
trained  Project annual progress 
reports  
Training records,  0 970 1940   
Output 3.2 Increased 
access to climate 
information among last 
mile users # and type of new or 
improved climate 
information products 
and services 
produced and 
distributed  SWALIM records and 
data, Beneficiary surveys  
(baseline , mid -term,  and 
final), 2 all-hazard 
seasonal  
bulletins  annually  At least 2 
hazard specific 
seasonal 
forecasts, and 
30 10 -day 
bulletins  per 
year 3 hazard -
specific 
seasonal 
forecasts, flood 
and drought 
EW and 30 10 -
day bulletins 
per year  Note that flood and 
drought early warnings 
would only be emitted if 
and when triggered 
according to the selected 
methodology.  
# of people accessing 
improved climate 
information services  Platform data , Beneficiary 
surveys  (baseline , mid -
term,  and final), 0 474,900   
(237,450  
women)  949,799 
(474,900 
women)   
Project/programme co -benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1 : Reduced 
GHG emissions from 
AFOLU sector  GHG emissions 
reduction  EX-ACT 0 777,748  tons of 
Co2eq reduced  1,549, 496 
 tons of C O2eq 
reduced.  41,800  ha under 
improved landscape 
management and  85,932  
ha under improved CRA 
practices (incl. 80,000 ha 
under improved irrigation)  
restoration and improved 
CRA practices.  Please 
refer to Annex 2 – 
EXACT.  
Co-benefit 2 : Improved 
access to nutrition  # of people with 
improved access to 
nutrition.  Beneficiary surveys  
(baseline , mid -term,  and 
final) 0 42,966  (50% 
women)  85,932  (50% 
women)  People trained under FFS  
(Activity 2.2.1). Nutrition 
will be mainstreamed in 
FFS to improve people’s 
access to nutrition.  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables


---
*Page 59*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
  
  
  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Strengthen the 
information base for climate -informed 
local land use planning  The purpose of the activity is to 
update the basis of knowledge on land 
degradation in the country as a way to 
inform future planning.   The study will 
relate the land parameters to climate 
parameters such as mean annual 
rainfall, temperature, and types of  soil 
erosion and will provide land use 
information including data on the 
invasion of Prosopis for prioritization.  Sub-activity 1.1.1.1  Develop a 
baseline study of land status  
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2  Map the invasion 
of Prosopis  One baseline study covering land 
cover, soil types and areas affected by 
different types of land degradation  
1 Map of Prosopis invasion per district  
Activity 1.1.2  Develop climate -
informed inclusive landscape 
management plans  The project will work with local 
Landscape Management Committees 
(LMC)  to develop LMPs that include 
recommended options for watershed 
restoration and landscape restoration, 
conflict prevention measures, gender -
disaggregated activities and related 
cartography.  Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Conduct targeting , 
cartography and conflict -informed 
FPIC  
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Assess water and 
land-related conflict risks  
Sub-activity  1.1.2.3 Build capacity of  
Community Landscape Management 
Committees  
Sub-activity 1.1.2. 4 Develop climate 
informed Landscape  Management 
Plans  A FPIC process for the project is 
completed  
A detailed conflict sensitivity 
assessment  
930 people in 31 LMCs  trained and 
capacitated for the management of 
landscape  
31 LMP including landscape 
restoration options + annual 
monitoring reports  
Activity 1.2.1 Conduct  landscape 
restoration  through  local landscape 
management committees and 
community -based associations  Implement Landscape Management 
Plans land restoration techniques 
through training and material support, 
including replanting and off -farm 
reforestation, Prosopis removal and 
control , riverbank rehabilitation, anti -
erosive measures, soil conservation 
and soil moisture conservation 
measures, small scale water storage 
reservoirs , ponds, water and soil Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Implement 
ecosystem -based adaptation priorities  
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2 Rehabilitate 
eroded riverbanks  
Sub-activity 1.2.1.3 Provide training 
on landscape restoration monitoring  
Sub-activity 1.2.1.4 Support 
monitoring and data collection on EbA  31 LMP s under implementation  
90km of eroded riverbanks 
rehabilitated  
One annual landscape restoration 
report in each State


---
*Page 60*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
  
  
 moisture conservation infrastructure 
such as semicircular bunds, soil 
bunds, rock catchments, check dams, 
sub-surface dams and sand dams, 
Balley, Hafirs and berkad.  
Activity 2.1.1  Strengthen water 
management capacity at State and 
local level  The project will support the 
registration and operationalization of 
water user association committees 
(WUAC) and provide training on 
financial management and 
bookkeeping, management and 
bylaws, water management modalities 
and support for the establishment of 
fees.  In parallel, the project will also 
work with the government to assess 
water resources (water accounting 
and auditing) and develop an open -
source data system that will relate 
water data with crop monitoring.  Sub-activity 2.1.1.1 Operationalize  
water user association committees 
(WUAC)  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Build governance, 
operational and management capacity 
of WUAC   
Sub-activity 2.1.1.3 Develop and apply 
fee-based systems at WUAC level  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.4 C onduct a water 
accounting and auditing study at State 
level 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.5 Conduct training 
on water accounting  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.6 Create open data 
systems for water accounting and 
crop monitoring  31 WUAC operationalized.  
1550 people trained  
1 operational fee -based system per 
WUAC (3 1 in total)  
1 water accounting and auditing study 
at State level (6 in total)  
500 Water Ministry Staff (M/F) trained 
on Water accounting at State level + 1 
training at Federal Level  
1 open data system for crop and water 
monitoring  
Activity 2.1.2 Increase access to water 
resources and climate -smart irrigation 
infrastructure  This activity includes tangible 
investments in the rehabilitation and 
re-operationalization of critical water 
infrastructure in the targeted regions.  
This includes restoration of the 
Sabuun barrage and supply canal in 
Jowhar (under cofinancing) which 
allows for the irrigation of 50,000 ha, 
as well as the rehabilitation and 
upgrade of secondary and tertiary 
canals  in the other districts  Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Restore Sabuun 
Barrage and Supply canal in Jowhar  
Sub-activity 2.1.2.2 Upgrade 
secondary and tertiary canals to 
resilience standards  
Sub-activity 2.1.2. 3 Deploy water -
saving technologies  One barrage + reservoir, outlet 
regulator and canal rehabilitated 
providing water to irrigate 50 ,000 ha 
16 irrigation schemes  rehabilitated 
and upgraded to resilience standards  
31 WUAC equipped with drip irrigation 
kits and night batteries  
Activity 2.2.1 Disseminate CRA 
practices to farmers  Deployment of FFS and APFS 
focusing on Application of CRA Sub-activity 2.2.1.1 Curriculum 
Development for FFS and APFS   1 curriculum and materials developed 
for each technology promoted


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
  
  
 methodologies including: nutrition; 
climate resilient crops and varieties, 
different agricultural practices 
(agroforestry, crop rotation, 
intercropping, use of micro -
catchments, establishment of cover 
crops, mulching, minimum tillage, soil 
fertility manage ment; bunds and 
ridges, micro -catchments,  contour 
farming, fallowing, use of cover crops, 
tree planting; improved climate 
resilient fodder crops and varieties, 
exposure to tested technologies and 
practices such as inter -cropping, relay 
cropping, promotion  of tillering grass 
fodder e.g. sorghum, fodder 
processing and storage;  contour 
farming, use of mulching and cover 
crops; safe/targeted use of inorganic 
fertilizers to prevent chemical 
imbalances, use of legumes for 
nitrogen fixing and adoption of plant 
species with high organic matter 
production (carbon fixing plants); 
greenhouses and drip irrigation 
systems especially in cultivation of 
fruits and vegetables, rain water 
harvesting for kitchen gardens, 
mulching and micro -catchments.; 
rotating rice with leg umes, 
intercropping cowpea with maize or 
sorghum, rotating maize or sorghum 
with legumes, transplanting sorghum 
after flood recession etc.  Sub-activity 2.2.1.2 Train  FFS/APFS 
Trainers and Facilitators  
Sub-activity 2.2.1.3 Deploy FFS /APFS  
on climate resilient agriculture  
Sub-activity 2.2.1.4 Conduct regular 
FFS technical and operational 
backstopping and monitoring  1260 facilitators/ lead farmers trained  
12,600  people trained in CRA  
Annual FFS monitoring reports;  
9 Farmer advisory centres operational


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
  
  
 Activity 2.2.2 Build the capacity of 
GoS-MoAI at Local, State and Federal 
level to support communities in the 
adoption of CRA practices  The project will deliver a 
comprehensive retraining program for 
MoAI staff related to climate -smart 
agriculture on the basis of a targeted 
training needs assessment at State 
and Federal Level. This program will 
be made available to all new recruits 
following the project.  In addition, the 
project will  deliver short -term training  
on climate resilient technologies and 
practices such as crop diversification, 
adoption of climate -smart crops and 
varieties, crop rotation, intercropping, 
agroforestry, soil fertil ity management, 
crop cover establishment, economic 
use of water resources and integrated 
pest management (short term training 
in the field)  Sub-activity 2.2.2.1 Develop and 
deliver a public service retraining 
program for GoS -MoAI staff  
Sub-activity 2.2.2.2 Short -term training 
of GoS -MoAI technical and extension 
staff  One public service retraining program 
developed.  
100 Staff trained each year at State or 
Federal levels  
420 GoS -MoAI Staff trained in CRA 
technologies  
Activity 2.3. 1 Improve access to 
climate resilient inputs for crop and 
livestock production  The project will operationalize 30 seed 
growing cooperatives, 30 nurseries, 
and 30 feed/fodder cooperatives to 
supply local farmers and agro -
pastoralists with stable and adequate 
input supply. This includes support to 
the government’s seed certification 
system and also partnering with 
private sector seed providers and 
multipliers to strengthen the supply 
chain.  Sub-activity 2.3.1.1 Conduct a seed 
market dynamics analysis  
Sub-activity 2.3.1.2 Deliver training to 
on resilient seed characterization and 
certification.  
Sub-activity 2.3.1.3 Conduct seed 
certification  
Sub-activity 2.3.1.4 Acquire seed 
material and engage private sector to 
produce foundation seeds  
Sub-activity 2.3.1. 5 Deliver material 
assistance and training for seed 
multiplication  
Sub-activity 2.3.1. 6 Deliver material 
assistance and training for fodder 
production  1 Seed Market Dynamics Report 
including pricing and subsidy 
recommendations  
20 seed varieties certified, and 
technical documents published  
500 tons of resilient crop breeder 
seeds; 2.4 metric tons of 12 fodder 
crop varieties  
1800 farmers become resilient seed 
producers  
8 fodder processing facilities in 4 
districts  
30 nurseries operational  
10 seed storage facilities operational


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
  
  
 Sub-activity 2.3.1. 7 Deliver material 
assistance and training for tree 
seedling production  
Sub-activity 2.3.1. 8 Construct climate 
resilient seed/feed storage facilities  
Activity 2.3.2  Build the capacity of 
producer groups to develop 
sustainable climate -informed business 
plans  In this activity the project works with 
private sector, cooperatives, producer 
groups to build capacity for value 
addition and food transformation.  This 
will create a pull effect on the market, 
encouraging production and ensuring 
access to markets and finance for any 
increased production.  Sub-activity 2.3.2.1 Build capacity for 
value addition, processing, packaging, 
marketing . 
Sub-activity 2.3.2.2 Provide technical 
assistance on climate informed 
business planning  
Sub-activity 2.3.2.3 Build, repair, 
retrofit or upgrade climate -resilient 
food storage facilities  8200 people trained in value addition, 
processing, packaging, marketing and 
financial management  
410 business plans developed and 
submitted to financial institutions  
20 food storage facilities upgraded  
Activity 2.3.3 Increase MSME, 
cooperatives and farming group 
access to agricultural finance  The project also strengthens the 
capacity of the private sector, savings 
groups, producer groups and 
cooperatives to access finance in 
order to reinvest into climate resilient 
agriculture.  This activity works on the 
demand and supply side of rural 
finance , building capacity of the 
financial institutions to develop and 
deploy financial products.  The project 
will also strengthen the capacity of 
local producers and processers to 
access finance through business 
planning.  Sub-activity 2.3.3.1 Operationalize  
Village Savings and Loans 
Associations (VSLA)   
Sub-activity 2.3.3.2 Support access 
for cooperatives to credits  
Sub-activity 2.3.3.3 Develop 4Ps 
between farmer cooperatives , 
Government, Private sector and 
finance institutions   
Sub-activity 2.3.3.4 Assist  financial 
institutions to develop innovative 
financial products  210 savings groups established  
175 savings groups, cooperatives and 
SME incl. Seed grower cooperatives, 
accessing microfinance  
2 MOU/contracts and loan 
agreements signed  
2 new/improved  financial products 
developed  (with gender consideration)  
Activity  2.3.4 Increase all -season 
access to market for smallholder 
producers, cooperatives and farmer 
groups  The project will support the 
rehabilitation of market infrastructures, 
including rural roads, cattle corridors 
to ensure that access is un -interrupted 
even during climate extremes. 
Furthermore, the project also creates 
new market poles to promote local Sub-activity 2.3.4.1 Rehabilitat e and 
upgrad e rural roads, cattle corridors .  
Sub-activity 2.3.4.2 Construct 
intermediary markets at district level .  150 km of rural roads  
10 intermediary markets built


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
  
  
 exchanges and increase economic 
activity among local users.  
Activity  3.1.1 Update legal and 
institutional frameworks for 
sustainable landscape management  Under this activity the project 
strengthens the institutional and 
regulatory capacity of the government 
of Somalia by assisting in the 
development of norms, regulations 
related to landscape management.  
This will enable the Ministries to 
adequately  implement and  monitor  
landscape and natural resources 
management practices at district and 
State level.  Sub-activity 3.1.1.1 Develop 
Landscape management monitoring  
modalities . 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.2 Strengthen 
capacity for landscape management 
monitoring  through State regulations . 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.3 Develop 
Landscape Restoration  and 
management (LRM) manual  
Sub-activity 3.1.1.4 Develop a national 
strategy and action plan for Prosopis 
management and control  
Sub-activity 3.1.1.5 Develop climate -
proof agricultural infrastructure 
standards  1 Landscape management 
implementation monitoring  modality 
report  
6 new regulations or by-laws 
1 LRM  Manual and guidance  
1 National Strategy and Action Plan 
for Prosopis control and management  
1 set of climate resilient infrastructure 
standards  
Activity  3.1.2 Strengthen policy 
dialogue and coordination between 
sectoral ministries at State levels  This activity brings all major 
stakeholders involved in landscape 
management and natural resources 
management together to improve 
inter-sectoral coordination.  The 
project builds on existing practices in 
other area and focuses on areas 
where coordination is lagging, with a 
focus on South -West, Somaliland and 
Puntland. The project will create 
intersectoral platforms and support 
their training and operationalization. 
Linkages to regional and international 
platforms will also be promoted to 
ensur e learning.  Sub-activity 3.1.2.1 Assess  existing 
coordination mechanisms  
Sub-activity 3.1.2.2 Design an 
improved coordination framework 
Sub-activity 3.1.2.3 Operationalize 
coordination mechanisms  1 landscape coordination mechanism 
assessment report for each state  
1 new intersectoral coordination 
platform operational  
6 coordination mechanisms meeting 
biannually


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
  
  
 Activity  3.1.3 Strengthen the capacity 
of Mo ECC to manage, monitor and 
govern natural resources and 
implement Ecosystem -based 
Adaptation   The MoECC will receive training and 
on the job support for the planning, 
management and monitoring of 
landscape management and EbA 
solutions. This will also include 
support on conducting participatory 
monitoring to inform communication 
on adaptation benefits. The 
government will receive both technical 
assistance and material assistance to 
conduct decentralized operations at 
State lev el. Sub-activity 3.1.3.1 Training on 
Ecosystem -based Adaptation for 
MoECC  
Sub-activity 3.1.3.2 Participatory 
monitoring of landscape restoration 
and Ecosystem -based Adaptation  
Sub-activity 3.1.3.3 Rehabilitate State -
level infrastructure for observation, 
monitoring and management  
Sub-activity 3.1.3.4 Develop the 
implementation plan for the National 
Environmental Management and 
Protection Act  
Sub-activity 3.1.1.5 Support MoECC 
to operationalize ESIA regulations  200 people trained in MoECC  
2 reports on evolution of restoration in 
targeted landscapes  
Five State MoECC offices are 
rehabilitated  
1 implementation plan for t he National 
Environmental Management and 
Protection Act  
ESIA regulations  operationalized  
Activity 3.1.4 Build capacity for the 
monitoring, assessment, analysis and 
early warning related to the impacts of 
climate on food and nutrition security  The MoAI, local universities and 
NGOs will also receive support to 
conduct monitoring, assessment and 
early warning of food security at 
decentralized levels.  This will include 
provision of training and materials for 
the collection of data, assessment, 
analysis of the linkages between food 
production/availability and climate 
conditions, in order to develop more 
reliable food security warnings at 
district level. Each district will then 
conduct, through a collaborative Food 
Security working group, seasonal 
assessments and analysis of the 
impacts of climate on food and 
nutrition security.  Sub-activity 3.1.4.1 Train ing on the 
assessment of the impact of climate 
and other risk factors on food security, 
nutrition and livelihood outcomes  
Sub-activity 3.1.4.2 Conduct seasonal 
assessments and analyses of the 
impact of climate and other risk 
factors on food & nutrition security  
Sub-activity 3.1.4.3 Produce and 
disseminate information products on 
the impact of climate on food security  
and nutrition  
Sub-activity 3.1.4.4 Train media 
professionals on climate change 
adaptation  One training at national level and one 
training at FMS Level in 10 districts  
One seasonal report in each State  
Two annual briefing in each State  
Three trainings for media 
professionals and the institutions  
Activity 3.1.5  Build capacity of MoAI 
for climate informed irrigation planning  The project will support technical 
assistance to the ministry of 
agriculture and irrigation to develop Sub-activity 3.1.5.1 Create an 
Irrigation plan task force  Irrigation task force  meeting  
Local  consultation meetings


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
  
  
 climate informed irrigation master 
plans targeting regions surrounded  by 
Shebelle river and Juba river . The 
process will be participatory and will 
include the development of a multi -
stakeholder task force, as well as local 
consultations to develop irrigation 
master plans that will guide future 
investments.  Sub-activity 3.1.5.2 Conduct 
consultations with water and land 
users  
Sub-activity 3.1.5.3 Develop an 
irrigation master plan  One irrigation master plan  
Activity 3.2.1 Collect, disseminate and 
share relevant climate and land data 
to support decision making, early 
warning and early action at all levels.  The purpose of this activity is to 
ensure that climate, land and 
agriculture data reaches last mile 
users in ways that are relevant to 
them.  The project will redesign the 
early warning systems through an 
open access platform that will 
distribute more granular forecasts and 
early warnings at various times -
scales.  The project will promote the 
use of digital information 
dissemination systems, particularly 
applications and mob ile phone -based 
tools that can reach more people.  In 
addition, the project will design and 
operationalize a new decentralized 
SWALIM information management 
systems, that will be operated by the 
Government.  Sub-activity 3.2.1.1 Redesign and 
deploy an open -access GIS -based 
climate information platform  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.2 Develop and 
deploy digital EWS and decision -
making tools for farmers and livestock 
producers  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.3 Develop a 
sustainability strategy for digital EWS  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.4 Design and 
operationalize SWALIM information 
management center s  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.5 Provide support to 
the IMC on coordination and M&E  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.6 Develop 
awareness raising r adio programmes . One open access GIS-based climate 
information platform  
1 free digital EWS operational  
One sustainability strategy for digital 
EWS  
Two fully operational SWALIM IMC s 
Radio programmes disseminated  
E.7. Monitoring , reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
192. In its role as Accredited Entity (AE), FAO will oversee project implementation according to the Accreditation Master Agreement ( AMA) signed between FAO 
and GCF and will bear overall responsibility for ensuring that reporting is provided to the GCF in a timel y manner and in accordance with the required standards. 
The M&E team will prepare draft performance reports, which will in turn be sent to the PSC/PTC. As per the GCF Monitoring and  Accountability Framework , 
FAO will provide the GCF with: Inception Report,  Annual Performance Reports, independent Midterm Evaluation report, Project Closure Report, and an 
independent Final Evaluation report. FAO will also provide semi -annual and annual Financial Reports throughout project implementation. The monitoring team 
will also share its findings with the CPIU so that they may discuss implementation issues as they arise.


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
  
  
  
 
 193. Project  monitoring will be conducted by the M&E team composed of international and National M&E specialists, information. Management and knowledge 
specialists. FAO will ensure the existence of a well -designed, operational, and effective impact monitoring and meas urement dashboard based on project 
indicators. Project oversight will be carried out by the Project Technical and Steering Committees (PTC and PSC), the Central  Project Implementation Unit 
(CPIU)  and relevant Technical Units in FAO Somalia and at HQ . The project will be implemented based on the annual workplan and budget (AWPB) which will 
be adjusted as envisaged by the CPIU, subject to the Budget Holder (BH) approval (FAO AE). Project components will be monitored separately as well as in 
relation to the achievement of higher -level project results and overall GCF goals. Monitoring data will be stored, compiled, and displayed in a dedicated module 
of the Monitoring Information Sys tem (MIS) to be developed by the CPIU. The MIS will serve to track on the  project implementation, including the outputs, 
outcomes, and targets in the results framework. It will also track implementation of the project’s Gender Action Plan and Env ironmental and Social Management 
Plans.  
194. In compliance with the requirements in FAO’s Accreditation Master Agreement with the GCF, FAO - Office of Evaluation (the Accredited Entity independent 
evaluation office) will conduct an independent evaluation of the project that meets GCF policy and Funde d Activity Agreement obligations. To this end, the 
evaluation will include multiple components aligned with GCF requirements, such as assessing implementation and impacts. The evaluation budget includes 
all evaluation costs, including design, inception mis sion, data collection (baseline and follow -ups through surveys, interviews, focus groups, etc.), data analysis, 
report writing, and quality assurance. The Accredited Entity will communicate the results of this evaluation through an inter im and a final inde pendent evaluation 
report.  
195. Please refer to Annex 11 for more detail on the M&E plan.


---
*Page 68*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 Political instability: high rotation of government officers , potential changes in the 
development priorities of the Government of Somalia , and political landscape between FGS and FMS  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Low enforcement of development priorities, strategies and international commitments preventing from fully engaging in integrated 
landscape management and climate resilient agriculture. Turnover and changes in decision makers and institutional arrangement s 
beyond the control of the proje ct lead to a volatile environment that hampers the long -term success of the work.  Since the political 
landscape between F GS and F MS has experienced notable improvements, thanks to collaborative efforts and strengthened 
cooperation , the political risk betwe en the F GS and the F MS exists but rated as medium/low, except between Somaliland and FGS 
due to claim for independence.  The overall inherent risk is assessed as high, but the following mitigation measures would lower the 
risk to medium.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Project priorities are well aligned with the international commitment of the Government of Somalia and with the most recent 
national strategies (such as NDC, NDC implementation plan). The project’s implementation arrangements have foreseen that the 
highest  level of project governance – the Project Steering Committee (PSC) – will include multi -sectorial high -level representatives 
(at least at Permanent Secretary level) and will debate together with the NDA about any changes in government policy and any 
chang es in the project governance that might have an impact on the project, its activities, and its implementation modalities. 
Previously marked with tensions over authority and resource allocation, there has been a concerted push towards greater 
inclusivity and dialogue. Inter -regional relations have seen positive developments, with FMS and the FGS developing alliances and 
partne rships to address common challenges. Security enhancements, including successful counterterrorism efforts and (relatively) 
improved go vernance structures, have contributed to a more stable environment. Economic growth and development initiatives 
have helped alleviate disparities between regions, showing a sense of shared prosperity . Based on FAO’s past experience, this 
project will support the enhancement of coordination under output 3.1 and strengthen the capacity of actors both at FGS and FMS 
level. The FAO Representation in Somalia, which has been operating in Somalia since 1980, will remain in constant dialogue with 
the Government counterparts to anticipate potential changes in policies and strategic directions and to propose the necessary  
measures.  To mitigate  the risks due to high rotation of government officers, FAO Somalia is i n the process of establishing a joint 
workplan with the MoECC  (NDA). The project delivers training programs that will be made available to any new incoming staff, 
guaranteeing the inclusion of climate related knowledge in public service training and retraining. The FAO Representation is based 
in Mogadishu with 5 field offices located in target  Federal Members States, and one support office based in Nairobi to ensure 
business continuity. AE will inform the GCF in case of any major changes in the government policies and strategic directions that 
may have adverse impacts to the project. In additio n, the project will support strengthening legal framework and modalities for 
implementation monitoring  for landscape management and climate resilient agriculture ( output  3.1). FAO Somalia is an integral 
part of the United Nations Country Team and works clo sely with all United Nations agencies and the UN mission in Somalia 
(UNSOM) ; major changes impacting the work of the United Nations in Somalia are jointly responded under the leadership o f the 
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary -General, Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for Somalia (DSRSG/RC/HC ).  
Selected Risk Factor 2 Insecurity that can hamper access to project target areas  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Medium  
Description  
The security situation remains complex and unpredictable in Somalia with Al -Shabaab (AS), linked to Al -Qaeda being the primary 
perpetrator of attacks against the government and security forces in Southern Central Somalia, which could hamper access to 
project target areas. Islamic State in Somalia (ISIL), linked to Daech presents a lesser concern and its presence in Somalia 
primarily consists of small cells or factions operating independently or in collabora tion with local militant groups. These cells are 
often concentrated in specific areas, particularly in the northeastern part of the country. Both AS and ISIL are listed as sa nctioned 
entities by the United Nations. It is anticipated that the ongoing Govern ment/ATMIS  (African Union Transition Mission in Somalia ) 
offensive will displace most of these insurgent groups from their current locations, potentially affecting humanitarian acces s 
positively in areas where the operation succeeds, but negatively in areas where these groups relocate.  
There are other paramilitary groups and regional armed militias/forces particularly in the Galmudug and Mudug regions, and in  the 
Jubaland region, and also clan armed factions in the disputed territories of Sool and Sanaa g between Somaliland and Puntland. 
These paramilitary groups and regional armed militias/forces operate in various regions throughout Somalia, with each exertin g 
influence and control over specific territories. When Al -Shabab, ISIL or these paramilitary gro ups and regional armed


---
*Page 69*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 militias/forces clashes, it results in accessibility issues and forced displacement of the communities/beneficiaries assisted , 
impacting therefore in the timely delivery of the programs.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
FAO Somalia is monitoring on a regular basis the security situation at all levels (FGS, FMS and local level). The security situation 
and feasibility of implementation have been also considered during the prioritization of the project target regions and distr icts. The 
target districts  have been selected  to mitigate the security related risks during the project implementation.  Al-Shabaab is active in 
swaths of central and southern Somalia including Lower Shabelle, Middle Shabelle, and Lower Juba while there i s no or limited Al -
Shabaab presence in Nugaal, Togdheer and Mudug where the accessibility is higher from a security point of view. FAO has been 
supporting those six regions with a strong field presence (FAO Somalia has the main office in Mogadishu and five field offices) in 
close collaboration and coordination with the Government of Somalia and relevant ministries at FMS level. The project will al so 
work with the min istries at FMS level as well as local NGOs which have a strong presence and better access to  local communities 
in the target regions through Letters of Agreement (LoA) for activities which require strong engagement with communities in t he 
fields such as landscape management planning & implementation, rehabilitation of irrigation scheme as well as  FFS. Conflict -
sensitive programming approach has been used and will be mainstreamed during the implementation of the proposed project.  
The risks mitigation measures involve different approaches and tools, and interventions are designed based on the last 30 yea rs of 
experience in Somalia and decided based on strategic interventions and operational modalities implemented and challenged in t he 
past and contained in sectoral strategies. FAO adapted the design and modality of implementation of activities to mitigate  risk or 
reduce its likelihood; as example a) Mobile Money transfer for a safer and inclusive modality, b) level of assistance adap ted to the 
degree of accessibility, c) distribution of inputs via a network of verified and vetted local agro -dealers and suppliers, d) modality of 
registration and verification of beneficiaries via digital tools (kobo, voice prints, GPS photos, etc .), e) inclusion of contingency 
budget in case of security emergency, etc. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 Local resource -based  tension or conflict  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The Somali society is clan-oriented and competition among clans underpins natural resource management. There has been also 
tension around access to scarce natural resources between pastoral, agro pastoral, farmer, and displaced groups.  The inherent 
risk is assessed as high, but the residual risk is assessed as medium  with the following mitigation measures.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project will avoid areas where there are large -scale conflicts which cannot be addressed or responded to by the project’s 
mitigation measures. The project will build the capacity of communities in conflict management over natural resource manageme nt 
(output 1.1). A conflict -sensitive and peace -responsive programming approach has been used and will be mainstreamed during 
the implementation of the proposed project. In particular, FAO has a structured participatory process designed to identify an d 
integrate con flict sensitive strategies to minimize risk of any negative or harmful impacts due to interventions – as well as to 
maximize, where possible, any positive contributions to strengthening conditions for sustainable peace. The project will cond uct a 
conflict sensitivity assessment as part of FAO’s “Conflict Sensitivity Programme Clinic”56 under output 1.1  to better deconstruct 
local dynamics, including conflict and peace drivers over natural resources among local groups. This will support the project  in 
taking mitigative and resolution measures and will bolster the adaptive capacity for this intervention t o reduce any harm. The 
conflict sensitivity analysis will also consider intra -household conflict  potential , to ensure that the project does not create conditions 
for gender -based violence, or SEAH. The project’s principle is based on community/locally led adaptation approach to encourage 
dialogue and engagement with local communities while building their capacity. All local governance mechanisms to be established 
by the project have the added purpose and benefit of creating avenues for dialogue among local groups, and to develop trust -
based systems for natural resources management. Other vulnerable groups mentioned under this Risk Mitigation section, such as 
women and youth, will also be engaged as part of this conflict mitigation and peace building discovery process.  
For the risk of exclusion, including Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA)  matters, FAO’s approach to 
Accountability to Affected Population  (AAP) provides a framework for addressing and integrating issues in its programmes such as 
gender equality, protection, the inclusion of the aged and people living with HIV, AIDS, disability, including marginalized a nd at -risk 
social groups, and the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse by FAO and partner staff. FAO has zero tolerance for Sexual 
Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) , harassment and abuse of authority and considers such acts, when substantiated, to 
be serious mi sconduct that will result in summary dismissal or termination of contract. FAO engages local communities in the aid 
assistance process through awareness -raising sessions, radio campaigns, bulk SMS information, beneficiary orientation meetings, 
and communit y feedback mechanisms to foster ownership, accountability, and trust. Local community representatives (elders, 
council members, district authorities, etc .) are registered by FAO and consulted for feedback and mediation. FAO established clear 
 
56 See Appendix 13 of Annex 6: ESMF for the summary of FAO’s conflict sensitivity programming approach.


---
*Page 70*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 reporting channels and response mechanisms for beneficiaries and community members to report any suspicions or concerns 
regarding targeting, fairness, safety, aid diversion, etc. ensuring timely investigation and appropriate action by relevant a uthorities.  
FAO favors the direct contact with beneficiaries via the Call Centre and FAO’s toll -free hotline, however other mechanisms are 
available to communities via elders, implementing partners, district authorities, TalktoLoop, and anonymous emails.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 Exogenous risks  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Exogenous risks include: (i) climate risks: more extreme weather events negatively impacting all landscape restoration effort s; (ii) 
COVID -19 and other sanitary crisis  such as Cholera and respiratory infection  disturb implementation. These risks would translate 
into operational disruptions and discontinuation of activities’ implementation, and would threaten the project’s investments,  
livelihoods, and producers’ resilience (if climate related).  The inherent risk is assessed as high, but the following mitiga tion 
measures would lower the risk to medium.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project seeks to restore and enhance the services provided by ecosystem that support sustainable and resilient livelihood s. The 
project will support investments in sustainable landscape management including restoration and climate -resilient agricultura l 
practices. During the formulation of community -based landscape management plan under output 1.1, areas that are high risk (such 
as inundation zones) will be identified and the landscape management plan may also identify areas where physical intervention s, 
e.g. terraces or bunds are required to reduce erosion / water flows. The budget includes contingency that would be used ( upon  prior 
consultation with and agreement from the GCF Secretariat ) in case of unexpected costs or situations that may emerge during project 
implementation, such as sudden increases in material prices, unanticipated delays, or urgent repairs . 
Risks mitigation strategies against the sanitary crisis  will include (i) adjusting stakeholders’ engagement plans, adopt higher flexibility 
and adaptive management and use remote communication whenever possible, (ii) maintaining social distancing, (iii) reviewing a nd 
adjusting implementation and stakeholder en gagement arrangements to compensate staff shortages, and (iv) favour local sourcing 
for environment and contextual adaptability.  These actions will lower the impact of risk to medium.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 Resistance on Women's Participation and Empowerment  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The project may encounter passive or active resistance to women's participation as well as when working to strengthen women’s  
empowerment in the communities.  The inherent risk is assessed as high, but the following mitigation measures would lower the 
risk to medium.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project targeting mechanisms including direct, community -based, and self -targeting mechanisms will promote women's 
participation including vulnerable groups such as female -head of household, female youth and girls, and persons living with 
HIV/AIDS. The  project will rely on participative community approach and on gender -transformative approach that promote the 
participation of all community and household members including women, men, female and male youth. Religious, traditional and 
community leaders and  other key figures will be trained to strengthen their capacity to play active roles in social mobilization on 
Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment (GEWE). The use of these approaches will allow to openly discuss gender -sensitive 
topics such as (i) gend er and sex; (ii) advantages and disadvantages of gender -specific roles and tasks; (iii) gender -based violence 
(GBV) and SEAH, including masculinities and patriarchy; (iv) origin/history and merits/demerits of social inclusion Free Prio r and 
Informed Consen t (FPIC) process; (v) examples, motives and results of gender discrimination and social exclusion; and (vi) gender 
and social inclusion in community development and welfare, including food and nutrition security. All along the project lifec ycle, the 
projec t will refer to the GAP developed during the design process to monitor the progress made on GEWE and take necessary 
corrective actions as appropriate.  
The safety of women in FAO’s activities is of paramount. FAO  Somalia  developed modalities for delivering assistance that are safer 
and prevent exposing beneficiaries to harmful events including SEA, despite delivering assistance in hard -to-reach most insecure 
areas. FAO has zero tolerance for SEA, harassment and abuse of a uthority and considers such acts, when substantiated, to be 
serious misconduct that will result in summary dismissal or termination of contract. FAO  Somalia  approach to preventing and 
responding to SEA involves i) safe programming, ii) ensuring safety and accessibility for all, iii) people proximity, iv) capacity 
strengthening, v) information sharing, vi) victim protection, and vii) trust and confidentiality.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 Money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (ML/TF)


---
*Page 71*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low Low 
Description  
Risks of money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism.  The inherent risk is assessed as high, but the following 
mitigation measures would lower the risk to low.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
FAO includes in the project agreement signed between FAO and the Government of Somalia clauses related to AML/CFT, as 
follows:  
a) The Government shall comply and shall require all persons and entities engaged in its activities under the Project to 
comply, with all internal anti -money laundering, counter -terrorism financing laws, rules, and regulations.  
b) The Government confirms it has obtained sufficient undertakings from all persons and entities involved in its activities 
under the Project that they shall not engage in any prohibited practices; the Government undertakes and confirm that it 
shall comply wi th the substantive objectives of the GCF’s Policy on Prohibited Practices.  
c) Consistent with numerous United Nations Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, the 
Government and FAO are firmly committed to the international fight against terrorism and against the financing of 
terrorism. It is the pol icy of the Government and FAO to seek to ensure that none of their funds are used, directly or 
indirectly, to provide support to individuals or entities: i) associated with terrorism, as included in the list maintained b y the 
Security Council Committee est ablished pursuant to its Resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011); or ii) that are the 
subject of sanctions or other enforcement measures promulgated by the United Nations Security Council. This provision 
must be included in all agreements that may be concl uded with third parties for the implementation of activities under the 
Project.  
FAO confirms that the project will be implemented in full compliance with the UN Security Council Resolution 2714 (2023) related 
to Somalia and that, based on the currently applicable 1844 Sanctions List, no exemptions are needed from the UN Security 
Council Committee established pursuant to the above -mentioned Resolution.  Would new UN  Security Council  sanctions apply to 
Somalia, FAO will, as per current procedures, assess their impact on project operations and inform accordingly GCF.  
As part of the FAO clearance process to prevent risk of funds being diverted to listed entities, including AS or ISIL, FAO co nducts 
due diligence processes to all implementing partners, contractors, and third - parties before entering into agreements. Verif ication of 
the implementing partners is conducted where their board composition and members’ background with the Somalia United Nations 
Risk Management Unit (RMU) is checked to ensure that they are not affiliated to terrorist groups. The RMU database allow s the UN 
to cross check names against listed individuals or organizations on Security Council sanctions lists, and other donors’ sanct ions 
lists. All FAO Somalia registered suppliers/contractors are invited (through special advertisements and directly) to register with the 
UN Suppliers' management system, UNGM (United Nations Global Market Place), where they are thoroughly scrutinized by UN and 
FAO and, if approved, may be registered. Contracted entities, including NGOs, are required to sign a declaration o f non -affiliation 
(including any partner staff) with illegal entities, including Al -Shabaab. FAO Somalia invitations to bid contain a clause as a 
commitment to act in compliance with the provisions of the UN Security Council resolutions.  
FAO encourages its suppliers, IPs, and other third parties, including beneficiaries, to report any cases of fraud and corrupt ion 
through its Complaints, Compliance and Feedback Mechanism (CoCO platform). The CoCO platform offers various confidential 
channe ls of communication that allow FAO to monitor, react to and provide feedback to stakeholders on such cases.  
During project implementation FAO, as AE, will ensure close monitoring and supervision through its offices in the regional of fice 
and HQ to ensure that the activities are implemented in full compliance with the signed project agreement. Please also refer to 
Annex 20.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 Post Distribution Aid Diversion  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Somalia is plagued by a systemic Post -Distribution -Aid Diversion  (PDAD) , primarily identified in IDP camps, but also spread across 
other activities and locations, including rural areas. The risk of PDAD in Somalia is primarily at the stage of the targeting  and 
selection of the beneficiaries where they are required (mainly by local community representatives) to pay registration fee at time of 
receiving assistance, and if they refuse, they are not registered or frightened not to be registered in future interventions.  Local 
community representatives may act on behalf of other ind ividuals or entities such as district authorities or local militia commander, 
in collusion or not with local staff of the implementing partner. The inherent risk is assessed as high, but the following mitigation 
measures would lower the risk to medium.  
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 72*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
   
 FAO Somalia’s approach on risk of PDAD  involves implementing rigorous monitoring and evaluation protocols, establishing robust 
accountability mechanisms, conducting thorough risk assessments, utilizing advanced technology for tracking and tracing aid 
distribution, implementing transparent repo rting systems, and fostering strong partnerships with local communities and authorities. 
By utilizing a combination of actions and tools, systematically embedded in activities, it effectively reduces the risk of PD AD. 
More specifically to prevent PDAD FAO Somalia is putting strong efforts in preventing it via strengthening its operating fram ework 
and SOPs for  i) Risk Assessment and Mitigation, ii) Community communication and sensitization, iii) Transparent Beneficiary 
Targeting and Selection, iv) Safe and secure Distribution Modalities, v) Flexible Programing, vi) Community Engagement, vii) 
Monitoring and Oversight, viii) CFM, Reporting and Response Mechanisms, ix) Coordination and Collaboration, x) Third 
parties/Implem enting Partners and Contractors (due diligence and oversight), xi) Government involvement, xii) Capacity Building, 
xiii) Digital Solutions, and xiv) Data Protection and data sharing agreements.  
In addition, FAO Somalia has recently introduced new PDAD mitigation measures which involves a new Layering Targeting 
Approach, and provision in the Mobile Money Operators contracts with post distribution transactions monitoring services to fl ag 
PDAD. FAO Somalia has also broadened its two -way communication with communities and beneficiaries specifically on PDAD via 
i) Bulk Voice SMS informing of entitlement and hotline number to 100% beneficiaries, ii) Bulk SMS surveys reaching 100% of HH s, 
with 40% respon se rate expectation, and iii) Radio Public Services Announcements.  
FAO Somalia ensures also systematic involvement of the Government in PDAD matters when recovery is not feasible.


---
*Page 73*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
196. During project formulation, an environmental and social management framework was developed – see the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in Annex 6. An initial risk assessment was carried out 
against FAO’s  Framework for Environmental and Social Management  (FESM) . All project activities considered 
gender, social, and environmental aspects, and identified priority design elements to proactively address these. A 
stakeholder engagement process was carried out to identify and engage with all stakeholders of the project , from 
national to local authorities , relevant technical institutions, to NGOs and CSOs, among others, as outlined in Annex 
7. As per the FESM , the project was screened to establish its overall environmental and social risk categorization. 
The ESMF (Annex 6) identifies the project as Category B (Moderate Risk), based on the fact the project contains 
activities with potentially limited adverse en vironmental and/or social risks and impacts that individually or 
cumulatively, are generally site -specific, largel y reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures.  
197. Overall, the project is expected to bring about major positive impacts, thanks to the socially inclusive participatory 
processes it creates, with a strong focus on women, youth and vulnerable groups; and the major environmental co -
benefits resulting from Ecosystem Based adaptation  (enhanced biodiversity, soil and water conservation, land 
restoration, etc.), which will be promoted at farm and landscape level. Even with these expected positive impacts, 
the project has been classified as Moderate Risk  with out comes of the application of FAO’s safeguard s standard  
(see screening Table G.1.1 below).  
Table G.1.1 summarizes the outcomes of the application of FAO’s screening checklist  
Safeguard Policy  Triggered  Safeguard Instruments & Mitigation Measures  
ESS1: Biodiversity 
conservation, and 
sustainable 
management of natural 
resources  Yes ▪ ESMF/ESMP  
▪ List of non -eligible activities (Appendix 1 of Annex 6: ESMF)  
▪ Biodiversity Management Planning Framework (Appendix 7)/ Biodiversity 
Management Plan  
The project aims at sustainable intensification. No land conversion will take place 
(expansion of agriculture frontier, clearing of native forest or similar activities, increases in 
areas under cultivation within protected areas (PA). The project will work mainly with 
local/native breeds and species sourced from local or national markets where available. 
All genetic material for plants and animal (seedling/planting material, species, breeds) 
should be free from pests and diseases.   
ESS2: Resource 
efficiency and pollution 
prevention and 
management  Yes ▪ ESMF/ESMP  
▪ Pest Management Plan (see Appendix 3 of Annex 6: ESMF for the guidance)  
▪ Waste Management Plan (see Appendix 10  of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
▪ Construction management plan (Appendix 12  of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
(rehabilitation/renovation)  
Solid or water waste, which will be generated during the infrastructure construction works 
period and not the whole project timespan, will be managed by Waste Management Plan 
and Construction Management Plan. The rehabilitation activities will be designed in a way 
to ensure minimum permanent soil damage of the p roductive soil.  
Practices and technologies promoted by the project aims at improving efficiency in the use 
of natural resources (water, land, soil, energy) through inclusive and participatory 
approach of women, man, youth, elders, PLWD and indigenous people. The project 
promotes the use of local or native breeds and species (for livestock, poultry and 
planting/seedling material), IPM to reduce use and dependency of agrochemicals (Refer 
to Appendix 3 of ESMF)  and integrates sustainable soil and water management.  
Implementing agro -ecological approach at landscape level will ensure the sustainable 
management of natural resources, avoiding pollution and degradation of the environment, 
protecting human and animal health, properly manage water, soil and biodiversity. 
Additionally t here will be no pesticide procurement under the project, and highly hazardous 
pesticides (HHP) will not be used in the project areas.  
ESS3: Climate change 
and disaster risk 
reduction   Yes ▪ Non-Eligible activities ( Appendix  1 of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
The Project already incorporates findings from the climate risk assessment and will 
address risks related to climate change and disaster by enhancing adaptive capacity of 
communities, rehabilitating ecosystems and irrigation infrastructure and improving ac cess 
to climate information services  
In order to avoid dependencies on the external resources in the post project situation, the 
project will internalize the capacities including sustainability planning that enable the 
beneficiaries to sustain and manage the project investment self -reliantly.   
ESS4: Decent work  Yes ▪ ESMF/ESMP


---
*Page 74*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
   
 ▪ Labour Management Plan (Appendix 8  of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
▪ Occupational Health and Safety Plan (Appendix 9  of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
▪ Construction management plan (rehabilitation/renovation)  
The project promotes compliance with national and international employment and labor 
regulations and guidelines. All employment relationships will be based on the principle of 
equal opportunity and fair treatment and will not discriminate, particularly as women, youth 
and minorities are targeted. Training and sensitization campaigns will be carried for 
farmers/FOs on Occupational, Health, and Safety (OHS) child labour and appropriate work 
for youth.   The project supports knowledge generation and  will genera te 
youth/women  opportunities in selected value chains and  support rural 
youth/women/PLWD  access to information and productive resources.  The project will 
ensure that children under aged are not employed, adequate and verifiable mechanisms 
for age verification in recruitment procedures will be set. Project will conduct sensitization 
training on safe, decent rural employment and age -appropri ate work, given that youth 
often assist with the farming work . 
The project will carry out rehabilitation/renovation activities including restoring Sabuun 
Barrage and Supply canal in Jowhar, upgrade secondary and tertiary canals to resilience 
standards and deploy water -saving technologies. The project will also support  the 
rehabilitation of market infrastructures, including rural roads, cattle corridors to ensure that 
access is un -interrupted even during climate extreme. This will be done through FAO 
procurement of contractors, nevertheless the beneficiaries will be inv olved in the overall 
decision making process regarding planning, execution, monitoring and subsequent O&M.  
ESS5: Community 
health, safety, and 
security  Yes ▪ ESMF/ESMP  
▪ Zero tolerance of SEAH  
▪ Labour Management Plan (Appendix 8  of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
▪ Occupational Health and Safety Plan (Appendix 9  of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
The project adopts a Zero tolerance of SEAH and GBV, all project stakeholders will 
participate on sensitization campaigns and training on SEAH & GBV . Additional risks for 
the community are related to exposure of waterborne diseases, vector -borne diseases, 
zoonotic diseases, food -borne diseases from construction and agro -facilities. The project 
activities will follow recommendation established by industry -specific best management 
practices fo r management of risks related to community health and safety . Design, 
construction, and operation will follow national legal requirements and good international 
practice, ensure inclusive engagement to avoid increasin g inequalities.   
ESS6: Gender equality 
and prevention of 
gender -based violence  Yes ▪ ESMF/ ESMP will include  measures to facilitate social inclusion and enhance 
gender equality, and safeguard against SEAH.  
▪ Gender Action Plan (GAP: Annex 8 of FP)   
▪ Zero tolerance of SEAH  
Project design and implementation incorporates gender equality and prevention of gender -
based violence as an integrated element, a Gender Analysis and Action Plan, with specific 
gender -targeted activities and indicators was developed (Annex 8). The project ’s GRM will 
be accessible for all project -related complaints, including SEAH -specific complaints. The 
GRM will be survivor -centered and gender responsive, and will have specific procedures 
for SEAH, including confidential reporting and safe and ethical doc umenting .  
ESS7: Land tenure, 
displacement, and 
resettlement  Yes ▪ ESIA/ESMF  
▪ Project will employ Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure 
of Land, Fisheries, and Forests and incorporate land tenure assessment as part of 
the landscape/watershed strategies.  
The project activities will not lead to involuntary resettlement or displacement of people or 
communities; resources from the project will not be used for land acquisition. No set aside 
land or additional conservation areas  will be established as part of the project. 
Reforestation/rehabilitation areas will take place mainly on public or community land 
(executed by region  administrations) or interventions on private land (executed by 
communities with funding from the project ) and will focus on areas where such 
interventions can facilitate or leverage improved productivity through ecosystem services. 
Proposed activities will mostly imply the involvement of districts on a purely voluntary and 
demand -driven basis.  
ESS8: Indigenous 
Peoples  Yes ▪ ESMF and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), and subsequent ESMP 
and Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , refer to Annex 6.  
▪ FPIC will be carried out before any project activity is implemented, and it will 
consider the active participation of indigenous people living in the project area, as 
well as those indigenous people (nomadic pastors and hunter gatherers that depend 
on the resources of the project area of influence).  
The project activities will not lead to involuntary resettlement or displacement of people or 
communities; resources from the project will not be used for land acquisition or resources.


---
*Page 75*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
   
 Some of the project activities could affect IPs and their livelihood (e.g., loss of access to 
grazing land, interference with pastoralist livelihood), if these groups are excluded from 
planning and decision -making processes (e.g. indigenous groups are repr esented in 
project main committees). Any involuntary restrictions on land use and access to natural 
resources is subject to traditional ownership or under customary use and will be addressed 
by ensuring IPs rights are respected and that they are involved i n the development, 
implementation, and monitoring of the project and in the decision - making processes.  The 
project will use a participatory approach to design the Landscape Management Plan 
making sure to include all social categories. Furthermore, the same categories will be 
targeted for Value Chain Development and Agriculture and Livestock support  
ESS9: Cultural heritage  No ▪ Non-Eligible activities ( Appendix 1 of Annex 6: ESMF ) 
The project will not invest in areas identified as cultural heritage sites. These include  
shrines, village squares, etc. The region specific ESMPs (regional ESMPs for all six project 
regions will be developed at the project inception level) will ensure that the scoping and 
screening exercises caption these kinds of issues.   
 
198. The ESMF establishes a framework that guides the screening and categorization, level of impact assessment, 
required institutional arrangements, and processes  to be followed during project implementation. The project's ESMF 
has entailed careful planning and includes a range of management controls to ensure that post -appraisal social and 
environmental due diligence takes place in a timely manner. It describes th e required institutional mechanisms to 
allow the executing entities to implement sub -activities in a manner consistent with the requirements of FAO’s ESMG, 
and Somali regulations.  
199. Institutional arrangements:  Overall compliance with the project’s ESMF will be ensured by the Environmental 
and Social Safeguards within the CPIU, who will work closely together with the Gender and Social Inclusion 
Specialist (who will oversee the GAP).  
200. In addition, there will be zero tolerance of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEAH),  and the 
project’s ESMF and consequent ESMPs will mainstream SEAH risk mitigation, in accordance with the FAO FESM . 
The project will support gender sensitization  and trainings for project staff and beneficiaries on gender equality and 
social inclusion and SEAH and will elaborate a code of conduct for the implementation of the project. Specific 
procedures to minimize SEAH risk will be developed for the project GRM,  to ensure the mechanism is survivor -
centered and gender -responsive (including confidential reporting), and to facilitate linkages to related services and 
redress for anyone affected by SEAH.  
201. Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM):  The GRM is an integral project management element that intends 
to seek feedback from beneficiaries and resolve complaints on project activities and performance. The mechanism 
is based on FAO requirements and most importantly, it is based on existing, comm unity -specific grievance redress 
mechanisms preferred by the local beneficiaries. FAO and EEs will inform communities about the GRM through 
culturally appropriate mechanisms, ensuring information on mechanisms at all t hree levels is communicated (i.e. 
project -based, and FAO -level redress mechanisms  and GCF’s Independent Redress Mechanism ). The CPIU and 
FAO Somalia will be responsible for managing the grievance and redress mechanism . The GRM has a strong link 
with FAO Somalia’s competent officers to ensure the right application of GRM principles. Project -related SEAH and 
gender -based violence ( GBV ) grievances will be managed through the existing FAO GRM system, which will also 
be strengthened to include a procedure for ha ndling SEAH that is inclusive, survivor -centered and gender -
responsive, complemented by GBV referral pathways (see Annex 6 : ESMF ). 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
202. Somalia has integrated gender equality objectives into the country’s constitution and national development plans. 
However, the progress in the implementation of the commitments is very slow. Women’s participation in the formal 
labor force is constrained be cause of unpaid care work responsibilities that women shoulder and the restrictions on 
their mobility as a result of social norms. In the agriculture sector, women are actively engaged in crop and livestock 
production, however, they have limited access to agricultural inputs and advisory services and limited control over 
income. Conflict and displacement have heightened the risk of SEAH and GBV  against women and girls. Women’s 
right to land is challenged by customary laws that discriminate against them. Somalia has one of the highest levels 
of gender inequality globally. The impacts of climate change exacerbate existing gender inequalities.  
203. The project’s Gender Action Plan aims at reducing inequalities and removing the above -identified barriers; 
mainstreaming gender equality and prevention of SEAH and GBV  as an integrated element . The implementation of 
the Gender Action Plan will be led by an international Gender, Social Inclusion and IP Specialist (part time) and a 
national Gender Specialist (full time) in collaboration with the National Project Coordinator, international Technical 
Advisor as well as relevant technical ex perts.


---
*Page 76*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
   
 204. Under outcome  1, the project aims to establish participatory landscape and natural resources management and 
governance systems. Due to social norms that restrict women’s mobility and representation in the public sphere, 
women can be excluded from the consultation proce ss and management committees. The project will organize 
community dialogues targeting clan and traditional leaders to sensitize them on the importance of including women 
in landscape management committees and in consultations  as well as preven tion of SEAH/GBV related issues .  
205. Under outcome  2, the project aims to develop the resilience of local livelihoods by improving the management 
of water supply systems, building capacities on climate -resilient agriculture practices, and supporting farmers to 
develop climate -resilient value chains. Tradi tional norms can restrict the participation of women in WUACs . Women’s 
ability to benefit from the trainings on climate resilient agriculture practices may be limited due to time and mobility 
restrictions and a culture of extension agents not consid ering women as clients. A gender -blind value chain 
development intervention can limit women’s ability to benefit from the value chain development activities.  
206. The gender action plan will address these barriers in the following ways. The project will set a quota to increase 
the representation of women in WUACs  and train women committee members on scheme management and basic 
maintenance. The project will set a quota for the recruitment of women lead farmers who will receive TOT and 
facilitators training on climate -resilient  agriculture practices. A gender assessment of the rural advisory services will 
be conducted to identify barriers and good practices to improve women’s access to advisory services in the country 
and develop a gender strategy for the agriculture extension department. Capacity -building training on how to develop 
and deliver gender -sensitive advisory services will be cascaded down targeting agricultu re extension staff at various 
levels.  
207. A gender -sensitive seed value chain analysis will be conducted to inform the development of a subsidy system. 
Women’s groups will be supported to engage in seed multiplication business. In addition, value chains where women 
are overrepresented and have a g rowth potential will be identified to provide support to women entrepreneurs.  
208. The project will engage financial institutions to influence the development of financial products that are suitable 
for women agripreneurs. Selected women agripreneurs will be supported to develop business plans using FAO’s 
Rural Investment Tool. B2B meetings will be organized between women business owners and financial institutions 
to help them present their business plans and identify funding opportunities.  
209. To address GBV/SEAH and gender inequality in the country, the project will use the Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS) approach  as part of support to VSLAs under sub -activity 2.3.3.1. GALS approach is  a community -
led empowerment methodology using specific participatory processes and diagram tools that aims to give women 
as well as men more control over their lives as the basis for individual, household, community and organizational 
development . 
210. Outcome  3 of the project includes increasing farmers access to climate information through digital early warning 
and decision -making tools. Although a significant proportion of women in the project sites have mobile phones most 
women don’t access the internet or use mobile to access information on agriculture. The project will conduct a gender 
assessment on how men and women farmers access information on agriculture and the barriers to use digital 
services, including good practices and approaches that facil itate access and use of digital information for agriculture 
decision -making by men and women farmers. The assessment will inform the development of the early warning 
system and other digital agriculture advisory services.  
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
211. Financial management and control and procurement processes will be implemented as per FAO rules and 
regulations, which were certified as acceptable to the GCF in the FAO accreditation process. FAO has an 
Administrative Manual organized across various Chapters covering Finance, Human Resources, Travel and 
Procurement. The FAO Intranet provides access to this Manual and to other procedures, information and guidance 
via the “FAO Handbook”.  
212. FAO has deployed an Oracle based ERP system the Global Resources Management System" (GRMS) to its 
world -wide offices, which provides all FAO employees, in all locations globally, with travel, human resource, 
procurement and finance functionalities. Using GRMS improves the flow of financial information, supports financial 
monitoring and reporting, increases transparency and visi bility, and strengthens internal control. FAO maintains a 
chart of accounts which is used by the whole organization and that allows for a separation of income and expenditure 
by donor and project and supports and provides a standardized coding structure th at enables data to be recorded, 
classified and summarized to facilitate internal management and external reporting requirements. Procurement and 
Letters of Agreement Services are managed by a dedicated FAO unit, which provides policy and operational suppor t 
to ensure that the Organization procures goods, works and services based on "Best Value for Money" principles as 
embodied in the Manual Section 502 and for Letters of Agreement under Manual Section 507.


---
*Page 77*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
   
 213. As mentioned in Section C.4. FAO as the Accredited Entity of the GCF will have overall responsibility for quality 
assurance and oversight of co -executing entities and shall assume fiduciary responsibility in accordance with FAO 
standards and procedures. In  addition to this, FAO will be responsible for the financial execution of GCF funds 
according to FAO rules and regulations mainly contained and detailed in the FAO Handbook (including those referred 
to financial monitoring, audit and procurement).  
214. During implementation, FAO will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures. This may include monitoring missions, spot checks and participation at project governance meetings. 
The project will be audited internal ly and externally following FAO’s Financial Regulations.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the follow ing two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an explanatory  
note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure 
policy,  and 
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.


---
*Page 78*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 
57 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan , Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 1 7 Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☒ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)57 
☒ Annex 23 Methodology for calculating the number of beneficiaries


---
*Page 79*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 80*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme 
title  Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia  (Ugbaad ) 
Existence of 
subproject (s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval  Yes 
Sector (public or 
private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Environmental and 
social safeguards (ESS) 
category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location(s) of project  
or target country or 
location(s) of 
programme  Lower Juba , Lower Shebelle , Middle Shebelle , Mudug , Nugaal , 
Togdheer  regions of Federal Republic of Somalia  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  Thursday, September 19, 2024  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Somali  
Explanation on language  Somali  is the national language of Somalia , which is a language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/CD2301EN  
 
Somali:  
https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/CD2301SO  
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal ( English and Somali):  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
safeguards/disclosure/en   
 
FAO Representation in Somalia  website  (English and Somali):  
https://www.fao.org/somalia/resources/publications/en/  
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B  project 
is contained in the “Annex 6: Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  Thursday, September 19, 2024  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Somali  
Explanation on language  Somali  is the national language of Somalia, which is a language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders . 
Link to disclosure  English:


---
*Page 81*
---

https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/CD2301EN  
 
Somali:  
https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/CD2301SO  
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal ( English and Somali):  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
safeguards/disclosure/en   
 
FAO Representation in Somalia  website  (English and Somali):  
https://www.fao.org/somalia/resources/publications/en/  
Remarks  An ES MP consistent with the requirements for a Category B  
project is contained in the “Annex 6: Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”.  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website  N/A  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s 
website  Thursday, September 19, 2024  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English and Somali  
Explanation on language  Somali  is the national language of Somalia, which is a language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/CD2301EN  
 
Somali:  
https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/CD2301SO  
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal ( English and Somali):  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
safeguards/disclosure/en   
 
FAO Representation in Somalia  website  (English and Somali):  
https://www.fao.org/somalia/resources/publications/en/  
Remarks  An IPP Framework consistent with the requirements for a 
Category B  project is contained in the “Annex 6: Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF)”.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, September 20, 2024  
Place  The hard copies will be made available in English and Somali  in 
the following places;


---
*Page 82*
---

 
FAO Representation in Somalia:  
1. National Office:   
FAO Representation in Somalia  
Aden Abdulle International Airport (AAIA)  
Mogadishu, Banadir Region , Somalia  
2. Nairobi Support Office  
Ngecha Road Offices, Off Lower Kabete Road,  
P.O Box 30470 – 00100, Nairobi, Kenya  
 
FAO field offices at the Federal Member States (FMS):    
1. Somaliland: FAO office at Hargeisa, H27R+3H8, 17 May 
School Rd, Hargeisa, Somaliland  
2. Puntland: FAO office at UN common complex, Garowe, 
Puntland  
3. Juba -land: FAO office at Juba -land, IOM -Premises, UNSOS -
MR-Kismayo  
4. South -West state of Somalia : FAO office, UNICEF Premises, 
off Baidoa airport, Baidoa  
5. Galmudug  State of Somalia: FAO office, UNHCR common 
compound, North Galkayo  (Mudug region of Puntland 
State)    
6. Hirshabelle : FAO office, UN common compound, Airport 
Area, Beletweyne city, Hirshabelle State of Somalia.   
 
National Level Government:  
1. Ministry of Environment and Climate Change, Wadajir 
District, Airport Road, Mogadishu, Somalia  
2. Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation: KM4 Street, Hodan, 
Mogadishu, Somalia. Offices  
 
Government Representative s at Federal Member State (FMS) 
level:  
1. Somaliland:  
- Ministry of Environment and Climate Change, Hargeisa, 
Somaliland : 14, Ali Bin Abi Talib Road, Durya, 26 -June, 
Hargeisa, 90602  
Ministry of Agriculture Development, Hargeisa, 
Somaliland : 10, Lane 216, Abu Baker Al Siddiq Road, 
Durya, 26 -June, Hargeisa, 90602  
 
2. Puntland : 
- Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation : Ministerial Road, 
Garowe -Puntland, Somalia  
- Ministry of Environment and Climate Change : Ministerial 
Road, Garowe -Puntland, Somalia  
 
3. Juba -land:   
- Ministry of Environment and Climate Change,  Juba -land 
State of Somalia : Ministerial complex ground floor , Opp K2  
Minist ry of Agriculture and Irrigation Jubaland State of 
Somalia : Ministerial complex ground floor,  Opposite  to K2 
| 252 -Somalia


---
*Page 83*
---

4.Galmudug:
-Ministry of Environment Climate Change and Rural
Development, at Government offices, G9JJ+J9C,
Dhuusamareeb  Galmudug State of Somalia
-Ministry Agriculture, Plant and Forestry , Galmudug State
of Somalia.  Government offices, G9JJ+J9C, Dhuusamareeb,
Galmudug State of Somalia
5.South -Wes t:
-Ministry of Environment & Climate Change Southwest
State of Somalia : Ministries Area, Adada Village, Baidoa.
-Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Southwest State :
Ministries Area, Adada Village, Baidoa.
6.Hirshabelle:
-Ministry of Environment and Climate Change, Ministerial
compound at Jowhar, Hirshabelle State of Somalia
-Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, Ministerial
compound at Jowhar
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited 
entity’s Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting Monday, October 21, 2024  
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 84*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 84 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP 246  
Proposal name:  Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia  (Ugbaad)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
Country:  Somalia  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
Strong paradigm  shift  in transitioning from 
emergency humanitarian interventions to 
long -term/developmental ones. Technically 
sound and with a good exit strategy, it will 
enhanc e the capacity of subsistence farmers  
to adapt to  climate impacts by addressing 
financial, knowledge  and enabling 
environment barriers – most importantly 
water , agricultural inputs  and market access.   The project has a heightened risk profile 
owing fundamentally to external risk factors 
outside of the project’s control. The Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations  has embed ded multiple  risk 
mitigation strategies at various  levels, from 
site selection to adaptive management  
measures  and contingency budget provisions . 
The project targets an extremely vulnerable, 
post -conflict African State, affected by a 
multi -year drought that collapsed food 
systems. Helping the agricultur e sector to 
adapt to new climate patterns has an 
extremely high impact potential on the lives 
and livelihoods of the population  of Somalia .  
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations  is an optimal partner as 
accredited entity  in terms of presence in the 
field and continued operati ons through 
conflict periods  in Somalia, building expertise 
on the ground , which may prove critical in 
scenarios of operational  disruptions.  
The proposed  project benefits from  
demonstrated buy -in from the government 
and align ment  with national priorities, with 
foreseen participation of various layers of 
national, provincial and district stakeholders 
receiving vital capacity -building.


---
*Page 85*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 85 
 
 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal  in accordance with the 
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity  (AE)  and, if  considered 
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in annex II to document GCF/B. 40/02. 
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. Somalia is one of the most fragile countries in the world from various points of view, 
including security, inequality, displacement, conflicts over natural resources and economic 
development, which are exacerbated by climate change. Many households are food -insecure and 
49 per cent  of the population is undernourished. The latest Integrated Food Security Phase 
Classification notes that 1.7 million children below the age of five face acute malnutrition. The 
domestic production meets  only  22 per cent  of per ca pita cereal needs on average and the 
country is dependent on food imports and food aid. The agricultur e sector in Somalia accounts 
for approximately 75  per cent  of gross domestic product, with 65  per cent  of the population 
relying on the livestock subsector, mainly nomadic pastoralism and agropastoralism , which  
depend on natural pastures on the country’s vast rangelands. Agricultural productivity is very 
low owing  to high dependency on rain -fed agriculture for major crops , including maize and 
sorghum , in an arid and semi -arid climate.  
4. There have been significant changes in the climate and extreme climatic events in 
Somalia since the baseline period (1981 –2016) and climate change is increasing the likelihood 
of compounding and cascading impacts for communities and ecosystems. At the same time, 
depleted technical capacity in government institutions due to years of conflict, low investment 
in agriculture and inadequate access to climate information among last  mile users are 
significant barriers that must be lifted for local communities to b e able to leverage climate -
resilient livelihoods.  
5. The project proposes a multi -faceted approach to address these barriers. It restores 
productive landscapes so  that  they can sustain resilient livelihoods, promoting sustainable 
agricultural practices and increasing access to water, enhancing access to climate -resilient 
inputs (seeds, feed, fodder), improving market access for smallholders and strengthening 
institution al frameworks and coordination for sustainable landscape management and climate -
resilient agriculture.  The project aims to achieve three outco mes  (see section 2.2 below)  that 
work together to create a context in which, on the one hand, communities participate in the 
restoration of the productive landscape and, on the other hand, they are supported by stronger 
government extension services, governance and climate informati on systems. The three 
outcomes support the transition from unsustainable, unproductive and maladapted production 
systems with low productivity to more resilient productive agricultural practices. Pastoral 
systems have declined be cause of rangeland degradation and the project will support  the 
transition from pastoralism to agropastoralism. The project builds on best practices and lessons 
learned from recent projects and program mes and is closely coordinated with other efforts to 
rebuild the country following years of conflict.  
6. The project will benefit a total of 2,124,831 people (1,152,142 direct beneficiaries and 
972,689 indirect beneficiaries). The project will directly contribute to the following targeted 
results  in alignment with the updated Strategic Plan for the GCF 2024 –2027:  1 (by supporting 
the country’s adaptation and mitigation goals) ; 4 (Food ) – 85,932 beneficiaries adopting 
climate -resilient agricultural practices ; and 5 (Ecosystems ) – 41,800 hectares to be conserved, 
restored and sustainably managed through a locally  led adaptation approach  in line with 
target ed result 9. The project will also support dissemination of climate information to


---
*Page 86*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 86 
 
 
communities, directly contributing to targeted result 3 (Climate information and early warning 
systems ). 
7. The project will be executed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations ( FAO ) and the Government of Somalia acting through the Ministry of Environment and 
Climate Change (MoECC) and the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI) in a co -execution 
modality to deliver the project activities.  
8. The AE requests a grant of USD 79.71 million, which will be complemented by a USD 
15.19 million grant from FAO.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1 : Restored landscapes are resilient and sustainably managed (total cost: USD 
34,435,926 ; 100 per cent  from GCF)  
9. Activities under this component are designed to restore productive landscapes and 
facilitate ecological resilience, supporting ecosystem -based  adaptation to climate change so that 
they can provide crucial ecosystem services and sustain the agricultural livelihoods of local 
communities. This requires both the creation and the strengthening of local planning systems 
and the deployment of urgent landscape restoration interventions. Given the prominence of 
water scarcity as a limiting factor in development in Somalia, the project has opted to adopt the 
sub-watershed as a planning unit. Component 1 is structured in t hree  main outputs:  1.1: 
Improved participatory landscape and natural resources management and governance are 
established at watershed and village levels ; 1.2: Agricultural and agropastoral landscapes 
are restored and sustainably managed ; and 1.3: Capacities of local governments to plan, budget, 
implement and monitor for effective locally led adaptation are enhanced.  
Component 2 : Local livelihoods are resilient to climate change  (total cost: USD 41,898,764 ; GCF 
cost: USD 27,037,748 (63  per cent ); co-finance: USD 14,861,016 ) 
10. Activities under this component are designed to ensure that local communities derive 
increased and improved climate -resilient livelihoods from agriculture. The project targets 
existing key value chains (maize, sesame, sorghum) , which are climate -vulnerable staple crops, 
as well as livestock production. In these value chains, the project also supports the transition 
from extensive to intensive cropping and from pastoralism to agropastoralism. Given that a 
significant limitation is posed by water sc arcity in Somalia, the project also focuses on securing 
a resilient water supply for agricultural production through a combination of ecosystem -based 
adaptation (component 1) and green and grey infrastructure solutions at both landscape and 
farm level. Component  2 comprise s three interconnected  outputs : 2.1: Resilient water supply 
that is  secured and sustainably managed ; 2.2: Local communities enabled to practice locally 
specific climate -resilient agriculture ; and 2.3: Farmers  are supported in deriv ing increased 
income from sustainable natural resource management and climate -resilient value chains . 
Component 3: An improved institutional enabling environment for sustainable landscape 
management and climate -resilient agriculture is in place at the s tate and federal level (total cost: 
USD 6,072,382 ; 100 per cent  from  GCF): 
11. This component forms part of the project’s sustainability and upscaling strategy. The 
aim is to create conditions and an enabling environment for the achievement, replication and 
broader adoption of project results. Given the fragile conditions of the Gove rnment of Somalia, 
strengthening of capacity is required to ensure that federal member states can implement new 
norms for sustainable landscape management and climate -resilient agriculture. The activities 
support the institutional capacity of the Governmen t of Somalia at various levels. Output 3.1 
considers legal frameworks, enforcement modalities and coordination (the normative elements 
of institutional capacity), while output 3.2 strengthens the informational capacity of the


---
*Page 87*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 87 
 
 
Government of Somalia, in particular its capacity to generate and disseminate useful, relevant 
and timely climate information to last mile users.  
Project management costs (total cost: USD  5,812,700;  GCF cost: USD 5,479,487 ) and other costs  
12. This cost  will support the management, coordination and implementation of the project 
activities, in compliance with the contractual obligations that are included or referred to in the 
legal agreements entered into with the AE. At 7.4  per cent  of the grant portion of requested 
funding from GCF , the GCF portion of the project management cost  exceeds the  5 per cent 
threshold established in  the GCF policy on fees . Accordingly, FAO has provided a strong  
justification based on the needs for security requirements, financi al transaction costs in the 
absence of SWIFT connectivity, higher costs for staff, etc.  
13. The budget also includes a USD 2.32 million contingency , which the Secretariat views as 
important for deal ing with implementation risks, as well as a USD 4.36 million monitoring and 
evaluation budget.  
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
14. The Secretariat considers the proposal to be strongly aligned with GCF investment 
criteri a, particularly in terms of impact and paradigm shift potential, as well as needs of the 
recipient . 
3.1 Impact potential        Scale: High  
15. The project shows strong impact potential , reaching an estimated 1,152,142 direct 
beneficiaries , 6 per cent  of the population  of Somalia , mostly in the form of improved water 
management and conservation , access to climate information  and training . These outcomes are 
critical at the farm  level  to improve food security and livelihoods  in Somalia , particularly for 
poor rural households.  
16. In particular, training through farmer  and agropastoral  field schools is ambitious in its 
scale, with 420 field schools benefiting u p to 85,932 people (including household  member s) as 
facilitators, lead farmers or regular participants, helping  to build up farmer and herder technical 
knowledge on resilient agriculture . 
17. Climate -resilient agricultural practices and increased access to water are expected to 
result in yield increases of 20 –50 per cent  for target crops, including maize, sorghum and 
sesame, raising household incomes by 18 –66 per cent  and contributing to food security in the 
area, providing a keenly needed benefit to over 2.1 million people (direct and indirect 
beneficiaries) . 
3.2 Paradigm shift                  Scale: Medium  to high 
18. Under the current agropastoral system, Somalia has undergone successive shocks as a 
result of land degradation  and overgrazing, compounded by increasingly frequent floods and 
droughts, leading to the failure of the rangeland ecosystems upon which households depend.  
19. The project aims to change this paradigm towards  a system  where yields are sufficient 
to ensure food security under climate change scenarios. The approach proposed combines 
infrastructure investment , rural finance and value addition, so that households can exit the 
survival and subsistence mode and enter a market -oriented economy that provides 
opportunities for diversification and builds social safety nets.  This would be enabled by an 
integrated approach targeting the capacity -building of both producers and support systems


---
*Page 88*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 88 
 
 
(extension services, climate information service providers and financial institutions) at  the 
local, state and federal level.  
20. In the project, FAO focuses first on areas with greater stability, w here  interventions will 
be tailored to local conditions , but the project is designed with a view  to scaling up  to other 
regions as conditions allow. This will be possible through the build -up of support services  and 
the replication of  processes to select and implement restoration interventions, with the help of a 
robust knowledge -sharing and learning system . 
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                             Scale: High  
21. The project, as a result of its ecosystem re generation using indigenous species, Prosopis 
removal and lan dscape management o n a total of 41,800 hectares , will have  significant 
environmental co -benefits . These  include improvements in biodiversity , reduced erosion and 
flooding risk, and increased land cover, soil fertility and soil moisture, which will also contribute 
to increasing natural land productivity . It will further lead to reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions from the land -use sector , which have been estimated a t 1.68 million  tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent , as described in appendix 5 to annex 2 (EX-ACT calculation sheet ). 
22. Similarly, s ocial and economic benefits are  highly relevant  in the low development 
context of the rural areas  of Somalia . These include income generation from enhanced land 
productivity and value addition , leading to  gradual asset accumulation for rural households, 
enabling coping strategies to deal with extreme events, and improved access to credit  – which, 
combined, can help  to unlock a cycle of further investment in production systems . The project 
will support job creation, promote the engagement of youth, women and minorities in value 
chains and decision -making, strengthen social cohesiveness and contribute to the prevention of 
conflict over natural resources.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                                          Scale: High  
23. The project targets one of the most climate -vulnerable countries globally . Somalia has  
the highest Notre Dame  Global Adaptation Initiative  vulnerability score  and is currently affected 
by a multi -year drought that has brought very high levels of food insecurity  and exacerbated 
rural poverty, two of the key focuses of the project.  
24. Somalia is affected by a long conflict that has led to severe underinvestment in rural 
development and agricultural value chains , most relevantly on water infrastructure, as well as 
an undeveloped private sector , both of which are underlying factors in the food crisis  in 
Somalia . The pro posal recognizes them and tackles them through a robust and integrated set of 
activities.  
25. The resources of the Government of Somalia are also severely limited, relying largely on 
international aid and without access to credit at scale for the primary sector, making GCF grant  
support a necessity.  
3.5 Country ownership                                               Scale: High  
26. The proposal shows strong alignment  with current government policies and 
program mes to foster adaptive capacity and climate -resilient development, including  the 
nationally determined contribution , national adaptation programme of action , the National 
Development Plan and Water Re source Strategy. Among others, it tackles several of the priority 
actions contained  under one of the nationally determined contribution ’s focus areas,  “Climate 
smart agriculture, Livestock and Land use”: (i) Provision of climate -resilient water resources


---
*Page 89*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 89 
 
 
and infrastructure for agropastoral productivity and resilience in the rangelands of Somalia ; (ii) 
Upscal ing development of new irrigation schemes and modernizing existing schemes ; (iii) 
Development of soil maps for Somalia ; (iv) Establishing and restocking national grain reserves 
to enhance food security ; (v) Establishing national plant and livestock breeding systems that 
can, in the long -term, possess technical capacity to develop fast maturing cultivars and climate -
smart livestock ; and (vi) Promot ing the cultivation of legumes and other crops that offer 
multiple benefits, such as soil fertility enhancement and dietary improvement.  
27. The proposal is also aligned with a key campaign led by the President of Somalia to plant 
10 million trees nationwide,  providing important high -level support in a challenging 
socioeconomic context.  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                          Scale: Medium  to high  
28. The overall assessment of this project’s efficiency and effectiveness is medium  to high. 
The AE developed a high -quality and robust economic and financial analysis with clear and 
thoroughly referenced data and assumptions. The economic and financial analysis  evaluates the 
economic and financial viability of six different agricultural packages, titled “integrated climate -
resilient agriculture packages”, in each of the project intervention zones. It includes both 
without -the-project and with -the-project scena rios under different climate scenarios 
(Representative Concentration Pathway 2.6 and 8.5).  
29. Financial viability in the long run is demonstrated through the profitability indicators 
for the six integrated climate -resilient agriculture packages  with and without the project. In all 
six models, the project scenarios generate returns above the financial discount rate of 15 per  
cent, with an overall financial internal rate of return of 24 per  cent and net present value of USD 
34 million. The results remain robust to the sensitivity analysis conducted on the decrease in 
inflows and benefits, indicating the project’s continued viability with positive net results. It is 
important to note that the without -the-project  scenario is also financially viable, and farmers 
may opt to continue with business as usual without adopting any adaptation measures. GCF 
additionality lies in the adaptation benefits, where farmers wil l adopt resilient agricultural 
inputs, leading to more sustainable and long -lasting impacts from a climate impact perspective.  
30. The proposal requests the highest level of concessionality, seeking full grants from GCF 
to make the project viable. The financial adequacy and appropriateness of this concessionality 
are justified by the macroeconomic context and fiscal capacity of Somali a, as well as the fiscal 
profile of project beneficiaries. Smallholder farmers in Somalia predominantly rely on cash 
transactions and have limited access to finance in the agricultur e sector, with less than 10 per  
cent holding a formal bank account. Histor ically, climate finance in Somalia has mostly been in 
the form of grants rather than debt instruments. Therefore, the justification for full 
concessionality is both adequate and reasonable.  
31. The project’s adaptation cost is USD 69 per direct beneficiary and USD 38 per total 
beneficiary. These costs are at the lower end of the GCF portfolio for climate -resilient 
agriculture in Africa. The co -financing ratio is 1:0.19. The proposal details the application of best 
practices in the project, specifically leveraging the expertise  of the AE  and experience in 
delivering agricultural practices and sustainable land management techniques through farm 
field schools. However, the potential for cataly sing an d leveraging private and public  sector 
investments is not demonstrated with quantitative estimates, and the degree of financial 
innovation is also not shown.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies


---
*Page 90*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 90 
 
 
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
32. Project overview.  The project is structured around three main components that aim to 
enhanc e the resilience of agro pastoral  systems through sustainable landscape management and 
improved irrigation water supply, promote climate -resilient livelihoods in agriculture and 
livestock production , and enabl e environment s conducive to  sustainable landscape 
management and climate -resilient agriculture. The project’s environmental and social co -
benefits include reduced greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture, for estry and other land 
use sector and improved access to nutrition.  
33. Environmental and social (E&S) risk category and safeguard instrument.  The 
project has been screened using the FAO Project Environmental and Social Screening Checklist, 
giving a classification of moderate  risk, which is equivalent to category B of the GCF E&S risk -
categorization system. This categorization indicates that the project will have activities with 
potential limited adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts that , individually or 
cumulatively, will be few, generally site -specific, largely reversible  and readily addressed 
through mitigation measures. The p roject will have multiple site -specific activities/subprojects 
to be implemented in several regions. These activities/subprojects will be based on master 
plans called landscape management plans  (LSMPs) , which are still to be developed with the 
project stakeholders during implementation. For these reasons, an environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) is deemed the appropriate pre -approval instrument for the 
project. More focused and detailed assessments and management plans will be conducted and 
prepared during implementation.  
34. Compliance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards.  The 
paragraphs below describe how the project will compl y with the standards.  
35. ESS 1: assessment and management of E&S  risks and impacts.  The ESMF includes a 
project description, baseline E&S conditions, a legal and institutional framework, details of 
stakeholder engagement, an Indigenous peoples planning framework, and details of expected 
impacts, mitigation measures, procedures  and implementation arrangements. The ESMF also 
identifie s the expected E&S risks and impacts of the project activities and provide s generic 
mitigation measures. Further, the ESMF contains various frameworks, templates and outlines of 
management plans that may be req uired or applied to individual project activities. The project 
will further conduct an E&S  impact assessment on the proposed activities in the 
regions/districts that will inform the development of LSMPs and project E&S management 
plans. Project sub activities  will undergo a screening, assessment, review  and clearance process 
before their execution.  
36. ESS 2: labo ur and working conditions.  The ESMF provides a brief background on the 
current policies and legislation on labo ur and working conditions in Somalia, including 
international treaties to which Somalia is a signatory. The ESMF identifie s the following risks 
and potential negative impacts relating to labo ur and working conditions: (i) risks of child and 
forced labo ur; (ii) occupational health and safety risk s for workers deployed at construction 
sites; and (iii) poor working conditions. The ESMF provides measures to mitigate the risks , such 
as the preparation of a labour management plan and an occupational health and safety plan. 
Where needed – for example , when the number of workers to be engaged is significant or when 
the nature of the work is hazardous  – subactivities /subprojects will be required to prepare and 
implement an occupational health and safety plan . A construction E&S  management plan has 
also been prepared that identifie s and addresse s some occupational health and safety issues.  
37. ESS 3: resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The project will have temporary 
impacts on air and water quality in the form of dust, noise and sedimentation , which are 
expected from the activities/subprojects that will involve construction work. Solid and domestic 
waste from construction camps may also cause local pollution if not disposed of properly. Other 
pollution impacts may occur from activities that involve support to the agricultural and


---
*Page 91*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 91 
 
 
livestock value chain, including soil erosion, air quality impacts due to emissions from 
processing facilities, water quality deterioration due to solid and liquid waste from processing 
and farm facilities , and contamination from fertilizers and pesticides in crop production. 
Irrigation water with high total dissolved solids may lead to salinization of soils. These potential 
impacts are addressed in the ESMF. For activities involving construction, a construction 
management plan and site waste management pla n may be required. The ESMF provides 
guidance on developing these plans . Value chain investments with significant solid and liquid 
waste will also be required to prepare and implement a waste management plan. Water use 
efficiency would be part of any activities that use water under this project. The ESMF also 
identifie s design and management measures that can be adopted in specific 
activities/subprojects to reduce water consumption.  
38. ESS 4: community health, safety and security (CHSS) . The anticipated CHSS risks for 
this project include (i) construction site and route safety hazards; (ii) increase s in criminality  – 
including sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment (SEAH) and gender -based 
violence (GBV) – due to a possible influx of workers into local communities; (iii) spread of 
communicable diseases brought in by non -resident workers; (iv) potential increase d incidence 
of vector -borne diseases due to changes in the landscape; (v) exposure to hazardous substances , 
including pesticides,  from value chain activities; (vi) food safety issues relating to value chain 
activities that involve production and distribution of food products; and (vii) potential 
exacerbation of conflict due to perceived unfairness or ex clusion or restriction of certain groups 
from accessing water, pasture  and land required for certain other uses, resulting from the 
implementation of LSMPs , the project ’s security arrangements, and /or cultural differences 
between migrant worker population (for projects with a significant labo ur influx). The ESMF 
identifie s construction -related safety hazards to the community, SEAH and GBV, water borne  
and vector -borne/zoonotic diseases, food -borne diseases, and potential exacerbation of the 
conflict situatio n, which could result from upsetting community dynamics due to, among other  
factor s, influx from neighbo uring  district and locations.  
39. To address CHSS risks related to construction and value chain operation, the project will 
follow recommendation s established in industry -specific best practices for management of risks 
related to community health and safety. Design, construction, and operation will follow national 
legal requirements and good international practice, and will ensure inclusive engagement to 
avoid increasing inequalities. The risk of pesticide poisoning will be minimized by not allowing 
project funds to be used to procure pesti cides. Moreover, highly hazardous pesticides will not 
be used in the project areas. The project will promote integrated pest management to reduce 
the use of and dependency on agrochemicals , and will employ sustainable soil and water 
management. Regarding potential exacerbation of the conflict situation, the ESMF provide s a 
concise conflict sensitivity assessment of the country focusing on the targeted regions and 
propose s to address the risk by (a) applying the FAO Program me Clinic1 approach to the 
project; (b) strengthening institutional capacities ; (c) reviving traditional governance practices; 
and (d) developing sustainable land and water management frameworks.  
40. ESS 5: land acquisition and involuntary resettlement.  The project will use the FAO 
Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests  
in the Context of National Food Security and incorporate land tenure assessment as part of the 
landscape/watershed strategies. With these  measures , project activities will not lead to 
involuntary resettlement or displacement of people or communities , and resources from the 
project will not be used for land acquisition. Moreover, there  will be no set -aside land or 
additional conservation areas to be established as part of the project. 
Reforestation/rehabilitation areas will be located  mainly on public or community land 
 
1 The Programme  Clinic: Designing conflict -sensitive interventions - Approaches to working in fragile and conflict -
affected contexts. Facilitation guide  |Policy Support and Governance| Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations   (fao.org) ).


---
*Page 92*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 92 
 
 
(executed by region al administrations) or interventions on private land (executed by 
communities with funding from the project). The p roposed activities mostly imply the 
involvement of districts on a purely voluntary and demand -driven basis. As added safeguard s 
against involuntary resettlement, the following are listed as non -eligible for funding under the 
project: (i) activities that involve relocation and/or demolition of any permanent house or 
business; (ii) activities that use the project as an incentiv e and/or a tool to support and/or 
implement involuntary resettlement of local people and village consolidation; (iii) activities that 
involve land acquisition; and (iv) activities that involve the establishment of new settlements or 
the expansion of existing settlements.  
41. ESS 6: biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources.  The ESMF provide s a brief background on the ecological profile of the target project 
areas and identifie s potential impacts and risks of project activities to biodiversity. The project 
will not involve land conversion or expansion of agriculture frontier s, clearing of native forest 
or similar activities, or increases in areas under cultivation within protected areas . Additionally,  
the project will use mainly local/native breeds and species sourced from local or national 
markets where available, and all genetic material for plants and animal (seedling s/planting 
material s, species  and breeds) will be free from pests and diseases. Furthermore, the non-
eligibility list specifie s that the following activities will not be funded: (i) activities of any kind 
within natural habitats and existing or proposed protected areas; (ii) introduction of invasive 
species (non-native species will only be introduced if the y are deemed to be essential , are 
climate -resilient and are know n for their non-invasive properties ); and (iii) significant 
conversion or degradation of natural habitat s, or activities where the conservat ion and/or 
environmental gains do not clearly outweigh any potential losses. A biodiversity management 
planning framework (BMPF) has been prepared that provides detailed description s of the 
country ’s biodiversity and natural habitat profile, including a list of protected areas and an 
assessment of the impacts of project activities on biodiversity and their management measures. 
The BMPF assesse s the project as having a generally beneficial impact on biodiversity , 
particularly component 1. The potential negative impacts on biodiversity may come mainly 
from component 2 due to its possible effects on infrastructure and livelihood and value chain 
development. Infrastructure may cause habitat fragmentation and loss of high -value 
ecosystem s, while the pursuit of livelihood s and value -chain development may ignore 
agricultur al biodiversity in favour of higher productivity and income generation. To address 
these impacts, the BMPF seeks to integrate biodiversity conservation objectives in to the 
formulation and implementation of LSMP s by requiring, among other  measure s, (i) biodiversity 
baseline assessments to inform the LSMP s; (ii) biodiversity impact assessment of water and the 
market infrastructure ; and (iii) ca pacity -building of relevant stakeholders (e.g. landscape 
management committees, water authorities, water users, the MoA I, producer groups, and micro, 
small and medium -sized enterprises ) on biodiversity conservation, habitat restoration and 
ecosystem functions.  
42. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS standard  7 (Indigenous Peoples). An 
Indigenous Peoples planning framework is provided as part of the funding proposal package, 
acknowledging the diverse population of the nation, as well as the complex relationship s 
between the different co mmunities . The Indigenous Peoples planning framework  will ensure 
social inclusion and safeguarding of rights for all marginalized and excluded communities. A 
stakeholder identification mission will identify stakeholder groups and project beneficiaries, 
including I ndigenous People s and any vulnerable or excluded minorities. Explanations of the 
project, its activities, potential benefits and risks will be provided in  the local language and 
participatory mapping will also take place. Each group will be invited to express its needs and 
priorities related to participation in the project, in a manner that is conflict sensitive. Iterative 
discussions will take place from the start of the project to make sure all participants and their 
concerns are identified early on. A free, prior and informed consent  (FPIC)  procedure will be 
carried out and capacity -building will be informed by local consultations. The AE highlights that


---
*Page 93*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 93 
 
 
the FPIC procedure will consider the active participation of Indigenous People s living in the 
project area, as well as those Indigenous Peoples (nomadic pastor alist s and hunter -gatherers ) 
that depend on the resources of the project area of influence. The AE recognizes the valuable 
role of traditional knowledge in the project. An Indigenous Peoples  and land tenure specialist, as 
well as an FPIC consultant are foreseen as part of the resources of the project. In line with its 
roles and functions, the Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the 
AE and executing entities  (EEs) . 
43. ESS 8: cultural heritage.  The project’s potential impacts on physical cultural heritage 
sites will be avoided, as the project will not invest in areas identified as cultural heritage sites, 
such as shrines, village squares  or known archaeological sites. Region -specific E&S management 
plans , developed at the project ’s inception, will ensure that activities are screened against this 
requirement.  
44. Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment . The GCF revised Environmental and 
Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM -2021/18 requires safeguarding from SEAH in GCF -
financed activities. The AE has identified potential risks related to SEAH and also noted that 
conflicts and displacement in the project implementation area increase the likelihood of sexual 
and GBV , especially against women and girls. The AE highlights safeguards that include a strict 
zero -tolerance policy towards SEAH. Additionally, a grievance redress mechanism ( GRM ) 
accessible to all project -related complaints, including SEAH, will be established. This survivor -
centred and gender -responsive GRM will incorporate specific procedures such as confidential 
reporting and ethical documentation.  
45. In the case of SEAH incidents, the AE outlines the procedure for addressing grievances. 
The GRM will have referral pathways for GBV  and special considerations for processing, 
handling and responding to complaints, prioritizing the rights, needs and wishes of survivors. 
The AE provides information on accessing the GRM, including specific guidelines for the project -
level GRM, the AE GRM  and the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism. These guidelines will be 
widely shared with stakeholders. Training and awareness -raising sessions will be conducted to 
ensure that all personnel involved in the grievance process understand the importance of a 
survivor -centred and gender -responsive approach.  
46. To monitor and report progress in SEAH responses, the AE will conduct annual gender 
reviews. These reviews will assess progress in mainstreaming gender in the project and share 
lessons learned. They will also be used to revise training on SEAH safeguarding . The AE 
emphasizes that all stakeholders involved in project implementation are responsible for 
documenting and reporting grievances received as part of safeguard performance monitoring. 
The GRM framework includes a provision to compile and share best pra ctices, enhancing project 
performance. All SEAH -related activities are outlined in the gender action plan and are 
budgeted for. Overall, the SEAH safeguarding measures presented by the AE are in alignment 
with GCF SEAH provisions.  
4.2 Gender policy  
47. The AE has provided a gender assessment and action plan and therefore complies with 
the GCF G ender Policy.  
48. Despite the development of the federal - and state -level national gender policies and 
other efforts, progress on implementation and resource allocation towards gender equity efforts 
has been lagging. Women, especially those in rural areas, are most affected by climate change 
owing to their  reliance on natural resources for their livelihoods. They are at the front  line 
confronting the challenges of climate change but are also poorly equipped and under -resourced 
to respond to the challenges , having limited acc ess to economic resources, land ownership and 
decision -making processes. They are disproportionately affected by gender -based


---
*Page 94*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 94 
 
 
discrimination, climate change impacts and high poverty rates ; they also bear increased 
responsibilities as heads of households and are excluded from decision -making spaces and 
leadership roles. Additionally, they have limited access to education, healthcare, training 
opportunities and climate -resilient resources, as well as significant barriers to market access 
and infrastructure. G BV, unpaid care work and a lack of representation in consultation meetings 
and management committees further exacerbate their marginalization.  
49. To address these challenges, the project will implement a range of activities  aimed at 
empowering women and promoting gender equality. Key initiatives include increasing women ’s 
access to water resources and climate -smart irrigation infrastructure, setting quotas for their 
representation in committees and providing gender -sensitive training in agriculture and 
leadership. The project will also focus on economic empowerment throug h financial literacy, 
vocational training and entrepreneurship support. Additionally, it will address GBV  and 
discrimination through awareness -raising  campaigns and support services, promote women ’s 
participation in agriculture and decision -making processe s and enhance their access to 
healthcare, education and  essential resources. Advocacy for policy changes to address gender 
inequalities and protect women ’s rights will also be a central component of the project.  
50. The gender action plan defines activities, indicators and targets for women ’s 
participation and benefit s with corresponding timelines, budget and gender expertise.  
4.3 Risks  
51. The proposed project exhibits high risks of political instability, insecurity impacting 
access , and local resource -based conflict, making it essential to enhance political engagement, 
provide flexible implementation, implement robust conflict resolution, and strengthen local 
monitoring and decentralized risk -reporting. The AE propose s several mitigation measures and 
the Secretariat suggest s consider ing developing multiple contingency plans for various risk 
scenarios before or during the implementation stage . 
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( medium  risk)  
52. The project operates in a high -risk environment characterized by a high turnover of 
government officers and potential shifts in development priorities, which complicates long -term 
planning and execution. Political improvements have been noted, yet tensions  remain. 
Mitigation measures include aligning project priorities with the national strategies of Somalia 
and international commitments, and engaging high -level governance structures to manage 
policy changes proactively.  
4.3.2.  Project -specific execution risks ( medium  risk)  
53. The project in Somalia is subject to risks due to ongoing political and security 
challenges. Mitigation plans are in place, utilizing the deep regional expertise of the AE and its 
strong field presence in Somalia to address these complex issues effectively. FAO has embedded 
multiple risk mitigation strategies at various levels, from site selection and enhanced local 
collaborations at project design to adaptive management measures an d regular monitoring 
during implementation, as well as contingency budget pr ovisions , which  are included in the 
term sheet.  
4.3.3.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk ) 
54. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.


---
*Page 95*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 95 
 
 
4.3.4.  Compliance risk (medium risk ) 
55. The project will be executed by the AE, FAO  and the Government of Somalia, acting 
through the M oECC  and the M oAI. The project activities generally present relatively lower risks 
of money -laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF). However, the AE highlights that the 
operating context on the ground is currently variable, which could in turn impact the overall 
ML/TF risk during project implementation. Therefore, the AE has assessed ML/TF inheren t risk 
as high. However, the AE considers the residual risk to be low  on account of key mitiga ting 
measures  that will be put in place , such as anti -money -laundering/countering the financing of 
terrorism (AML/CFT) clauses in the project agreement with the Government of Somalia, as well 
as the due diligence processes and AML/CFT controls  of FAO itself . Moreover, the 
implementation arrangements are further augmented by the inclusion of a central project 
implementation unit (CPIU) , which will be responsible for day -to-day project implementation, 
will be led by a Technical Advisor and National Technical Coordinator appointed by FAO, and 
will include a Compliance Officer whose role is to ensure AML/CFT risks are identified and 
appropriate controls are effectively applied throughout the project cycle.  
56. In addition, the AE assesses the risk of post -distribution aid diversion as high. To 
mitigate this, the project will include monitoring and evaluation protocols such as the use of 
tracking and tracing technology, as well as post -distribution transaction mo nitoring. The AE has 
assessed that the combined effect of these measures reduces the risk level to medium.  
57. Given the project -specific risks identified, the mitigation measures incorporated into the 
implementation plan, and the projections of the AE of ongoing external factors that could have a 
significant impact on the ML/TF risks throughout the project cycle, the Secretariat determines 
that the overall risk remains high.  
4.4 Fiduciary  
58. As the AE, FAO will be responsible for the overall management of the project, including 
(i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and 
supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are  effectively managed to 
deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as 
the timeliness and quality of reporting to GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. FAO will 
ensure these responsibilities are f ulfilled in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined in 
the Accreditation Master Agreement between FAO and GCF.  
59. The project will be executed by FAO and the Government of Somalia acting through 
MoECC and MoAI in a co -execution modality to deliver the project activities funded by GCF 
proceeds. FAO will act as EE and will ensure strong country -driven execution of project 
activities and will be in charge of the execution of selected activities funded by GCF p roceeds 
based on its comparative advantages. This will allow Somalia to benefit from the technical and 
operations experience of a specialized development assistance agency of the United Nations, 
while providing opportunities for the government to increase its capacity through technical 
assistance and the development and implementation of activities under the three project 
components. FAO will also execute the activities co -financed by FAO.  
60. In order to fulfil the AE functions, FAO will set up a dedicated project task force in line 
with FAO project cycle guidelines. The project task force  will be composed of the Budget Holder, 
the Lead Technical Officer, the Funding Liaison Officer, the HQ Technical Officer and other 
technical officers, as appropriate , and will remain independent from the E E functions performed 
by FAO.  
61. GCF proceeds received by FAO in its capacity as AE will flow to the EE s, namely FAO -
Somalia, MoAI and MoECC , for the implementation of project activities. The provisions


---
*Page 96*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 96 
 
 
regarding MoAI and MoECC responsibilities as EEs, together with all financial details, will be 
included in the project agreement, which will also serve as subsidiary agreement, signed by the 
Government of Somalia. On the other hand, the TRANSFORM project funded by the United States 
Agency for International Development , to be executed by FAO, will provide in -cash (grant) co -
financing.  
62. The project will establish a CPIU , which  will be functional for the entire duration and be 
responsible for day -to-day implementation of the project, with support FAO offices in each 
federal member state. The main functions of the CPIU, following the guidance of the Project 
Steering Committee and the Project Technical Committee, will be to ensure overall efficient 
management, coordination, implementation and monitoring of the project through the effective 
implementation of the annual workplans and budgets. T he CPIU will be led and managed by a 
project -recruited Technical Advisor and National Technical Coordinator, who will be appointed 
by FAO and will be responsible for overall project management and coordination with project 
stakeholders. During implementati on, the project will engage many other stakeholders , who will 
be selected in accordance with relevant FAO Manual Sections.  
63. A Project Steering Committee will be established to provide strategic guidance for the 
project. It will be chaired by MoECC and co -chaired by FAO -Somalia. The CPIU will serve as 
Rapporteur to the committee . The role of the Project Steering Committee  will be to (i) provide 
overall guidance and direction to the project, ensuring  that  it remains within any specified 
constraints; (ii) address project issues as raised by the national Project Implementation 
Coordinator; (iii) monitor project risks and the effecti veness of mitigation measures, provide 
guidance on new project risks and agree on possible countermeasures and management actions 
to address specific risks; (iv) review project progress, and provide direction and 
recommendations to ensure that the agreed d eliverables are produced satisfactorily according 
to plans; (v) review and approve the annual workplan and provide  the necessary strategic 
guidance for its implementation; (vi) appraise the annual project implementation report, 
including the quality assessment rating report; (vii) make recommendations for subsequent 
workplans to build on achievements and address any short comings; and (viii) provide ad hoc 
direction and advice for exceptional situations when the Project Coordinator’s tolerances are 
exceeded. The Project Steering Committee will be supported by a Central Project Technical 
Committee and regional project techni cal committees.  
64. Financial management and control and procurement processes will be implemented as 
per FAO rules and regulations. FAO utili zes the Oracle -based enterprise resource planning 
system , the Global Resources Management System , in its offices worldwide ; it provides all FAO 
employees, in all locations globally, with travel, human resource s, procurement and finance 
functionalities. Using this s ystem  improves the flow of financial information, supports financial 
monitoring and reporting, increases transparency and vis ibility, and strengthens internal 
control. FAO maintains a chart of accounts which is used by the whole organization and that 
allows for a separation of income and expenditure by donor and project , and supports and 
provides a standardized coding structure that enables data to be recorded, classified and 
summarized to facilitate internal management and external reporting requirements.  
65. As AE, FAO will have overall responsibility for quality assurance and oversight of co -EEs 
and will assume fiduciary responsibility in accordance with FAO standards and procedures. In 
addition to this, FAO will be responsible for the financial execution of GCF funds according to 
FAO rules and regulations , mainly contained and detailed in the FAO Handbook (including those 
related  to financial monitoring, audit and procurement). During implementation, FAO will 
provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures. This 
may include monitoring missions, spot checks and partici pation at project governance meetings. 
The project will be audited internally and externally following FAO financial regulations.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 97 
 
 
66. The funding proposal is based on a sound theory of change and is linked to a logical 
framework, allowing the project to measure results and evaluate its impact. The monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) plan submitted by the AE lays out the data -collection and measurement tools 
to be deployed along with a sufficient M&E budget consistent with the requirements of the 
Integrated Results Management Framework and the GCF Evaluation Policy.  
67. The project ’s theory of change illustrates three distinct and complementary outcomes 
that target all four GCF adaptation result s areas and contribute to improving the enabling 
environment for national and local institutions. The sustainable landscape management and 
livelihoods -based adaptation for farmers supported by access to climate information systems 
provide a multi -pronged ap proach to enhance the resilience of rural communities and 
ecosystems in the targeted regions. Logical pathways from activities t o outputs and outcomes 
are clear, and the barriers targeted through them are mapped. Critical assumptions that allow 
the achievement of project outputs and outcomes are noted, with the most important being the 
overall sociopolitical stability and the conti nued involvement by the national and state 
governments beyond the completion of activities.  
68. The logical framework is linked with the climate adaptation outcomes and project 
outputs identified in the theory of change. The most important outcome indicators such as 
direct and indirect beneficiaries reached (core indicator 2), value of physical asset s made more 
resilient to the effects of climate change (core indicator 3) and hectares of natural resources 
brought under improved climate -resilient management practices (core indicator 4) allow the 
measurement of adaptation impact across all GCF result s areas. The supplementary indicators 
on climate -resilient livelihood and water security will measure the depth of the respective 
adaptation benefits within the targeted communities. Project -specific indicators have also been 
proposed to measure results at ev ery level of the results chain.  
69. The M&E plan gives a high -level understanding of how the various M&E -related 
activities and systems will be operationalized. The plan provides sufficient details on the roles 
and responsibilities of various actors in collecting data, monitoring risks and r esults, and quality 
assurance reporting to stakeholders. In addition to monitoring the project activity and annual 
reporting, the entity will conduct midline and endline beneficiary surveys to measure 
adaptation impact results. The AE will also organize a baseline survey in the first year to inform 
the logical framework of the latest context. Finally, the AE confirms that a sufficient budget is set 
aside for conducting independent project evaluations at this scale and as per the GCF Evaluation 
Policy.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
70. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the A E on 8 June 2018, and it 
became effective on 4 October 2018. The five -year accreditation term of the AE lapsed on 3 
October 2023 but was extended by decision B.37/18, paragraph (q) until three years from the 
date the five -year accreditation term lapsed or the date on which a revised accreditation 
framework is adopted by the Board , whichever is earlier . The Board approved the re -
accreditation of the A E pursuant to decision B.37/18, and negotiation of the amended and 
restated Ac creditation Master Agreement is ongoing.  
71. The A E has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals 
and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
72. The proposed project will be implemented in Somalia, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed.


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B. 40/02/Add. 08 
Page 98 
 
 
73. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and the Independent Integrity Unit 
have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities 
and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF be made 
only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the 
country, or has been provided with appropriate privilege s and immunities.  
74. To address the matters raised in the previous section, it is recommended that any 
approval by the Board be made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/ B.40 /02/ Add.08  
Page 99 
 
 
   
   Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP246  
Proposal name:  Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia (Ugbaad)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
Country:  Somalia  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1. This is the first  submission of the  funding proposal  for the programme titled “ Climate 
Resilient Agriculture in Somalia” under the standard proposal approval process. The assessment 
by the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) is based on the funding proposal package 
presented to  the iTAP on 19 July  2024 , slightly revised on 8 August 2024,1 and informed by a set 
of written questions and answers further discussed in an online meeting between  the iTAP and 
the accredited entity , the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO) , on 
7 August  2024.  
2. The accredited entity  requests a grant contribution  from GCF  of USD 79,707,268 . The 
full project budget amounts to USD 94,901,497 and includes a co -financing contribution from 
FAO of USD 15,194,229.2  
3. The executing entities are FAO (i.e. FAO Somalia ) and the Government of Somalia, acting 
through the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change and the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Irrigation . 
4. The project  helps  communities  to manage resources and  restore  degraded  landscape s, 
with the  support  of strengthened  government extension services and climate information 
systems. There are  three main components:  
(a) Outcome 1: Restored landscapes are resilient and sustainably managed . The 
project seeks to  restore productive landscapes (watersheds) and facilitate  ecological 
resilience , supporting  ecosystem adaptation to climate change , so that they can provide 
crucial ecosystem services and sustain the agricultural livelihoods  of local communities ;   
(b) Outcome 2: Local livelihoods are resilient to climate change . Targeting key value 
chains  (maize, sesame, sorghum ) and resilient water suppl ies, the project seeks  to 
ensure that local communities derive increased and improved climate -resilient 
livelihoods from agriculture ; and 
(c) Outcome 3: An improved institutional enabling environment for sustainable 
landscape management and climate -resilient agriculture is in place at  the state 
and federal level . Capacity -building seeks  to ensure that authorities  can implement 
new norms for sustainable landscape management and climate -resilient agriculture. The 
 
1 The funding proposal package ( version 5) was received by  the iTAP on 19 July 2024. A slightly amended  version 
(version 6, dated 8 August 2024) fixed a few typo graphical error s and adjusted the language on “enforcement ” 
towards the broader concept of “implementation ”, which , in the view of both FAO and  the iTAP better captures the 
intention of the proposed activities.  
2 Constituted by a c ash (grant) co -financing through the TRANSFORM project funded by the United States Agency for 
International Development and executed by FAO .


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/ B.40 /02/ Add.08  
Page 100 
 
 
   
 project considers legal frameworks , monitoring  and coordination, and the generat ion 
and disseminat ion of  climate information . 
5. The iTAP has assessed  the funding proposal against the six GCF investment criteria .  
1.1 Impact potential                           Scale:  Medium to high  
6. This project  is intended to contribute  to all four  GCF adaptation result s areas (ARAs) . In 
order of budget priority t hese are  ARA 2  – Health and well -being, and food and water security ; 
ARA 1  – Most vulnerable  people and communities ; ARA 3 – Infrastructure and built 
environment ; and ARA 4 – Ecosystems and ecosystem services .  
7. The project outcomes  relating to food and water security stand to directly and indirectly 
bene fit more than  2 million people  across Somalia, many of whom have a recent history of living 
with conflict and instability.  Landscape management using  improved agricultural , agropastoral  
and agroforestry methods is expected to cover an area of 41,800 hectares.  
8. Adaptation benefits are expected to arise  from  increase d yields of maize, sorghum and 
sesame from the application of climate -resilient agricultural practices and improved  access to 
water.  The project should also improve the efficiency of livestock production , for example  
through  fodder production , and the diversification of pastoral livelihoods . 
9. The project is also  intended  to contribute to the strengthening of institutional capacity 
and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and development , along with the 
increase d generation and use of climate information in decision -making , especially at the local 
level.  
10. With a well -designed project in a challenging environment, the impact potential  – 
strengthening  of adaptive capacity and reduc ing exposure to climate risks  – is assessed as 
medium  to high.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential              Scale : Medium  to high 
11. The project’s theory of change statement  suggests that  “IF local communities’ capacity is 
strengthened to implement sustainable landscape management and climate resilient agriculture 
and an institutional enabling environment is improved, THEN  the resilience of local 
communities and ecosystems to climate change will be enhanced, BECAUSE  livelihoods will be 
derived from sustainably managed landscapes and adapted climate resilient agriculture and 
supported by adequate enabling environment. ”3  
12. The project is likely to catalyse impact beyond a one -off investment. The project’s logic 
and emphasis on  training and capacity -building – in support  of farming and pastoral 
communities as well as authorities at the state and federal level  – is convincing  and coherent 
with the project’s participatory approach .  
13. Substantively, the  project  addresses the degradation of rangelands and the decline of 
pastoral systems  by way of promot ing a transformation of pastoral systems into agropastoral 
systems , with more diversifi ed livelihoods . The project works with Farmer Field Schools to 
facilitat e access to  market s and irrigation technologies , and with the relevant authorities to 
support the production systems through extension services and climate information.  
14. A system of water fees  is to be developed to maintain upgraded or repaired  irrigation  
infrastructure s. Albeit  a challeng e in itself,  such an arrangement stand s to increase  the chances 
 
3 Funding proposal , version 6,  para . 34 ( see footnote 1 above ).


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/ B.40 /02/ Add.08  
Page 101 
 
 
   
 of th e refurbished  economic infrastructure remaining operational after the project’s 
implementation period.   
15. The project work s with crop and livestock producers to simultaneously restore the 
ecological resilience and the economic productivity of degraded landscapes . Parts  of Somalia are 
under “green ” water scarcity,  implying  that the rainfall is insufficient  to meet crop water 
demand. Under such circumstances , degradation may  still be halted and productivity increased 
by way of  optimum /supplementary  irrigation, water conservation , reduction in crop  water 
demand (e.g. through multi -cropping or shading) and by enhancing soil quality . 
16. The project also seeks to form part of a broader shift away from Somalia’s present 
dependence on humanitarian assistance , namely  by investing proportionally more in early 
response and resilience -building . FAO reporting suggests that farm -level disaster preparedness 
induces an  agricultural performance  under hazard conditions twice that of unprepared farms.4  
17. With a capacity -enhancing  project in a challenging environment, the paradigm shift  
potential  – diversifying livelihoods to be more climate resilient  – is assessed as medium  to high.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential                        Scale:  High  
18. The proposed project should yield substantial sustainable development benefits in 
several dimensions.  
19. Expected e nvironmental co -benefits  from the implementation of landscape management 
plans  include the regeneration of the natural  land  cover  through  reforestation, agroforestry  and 
rangeland rehabilitation . Biodiversity stands to be enhanced by using  local species and  
remo ving  invasive ones  (e.g. Prosopis ). 
20. Landscape management  – organized around sub -watersheds – should  also  contribute to 
environmental  and economic benefits such as  reduced erosion and flooding, and improved  soil 
fertility and soil moisture, with greater water availability. This is likely to increa se land 
productivity and reduc e emissions from the land -use sector , providing both e conomic  and 
environmental co-benefits .  
21. Social and economic co-benefits would also include the employment generated by farm -
level activities, food processing and  tree nurseries.  
22. Enhance d household income also stands to improve food  and nutritional security , 
allowing  more to  be spent on food . This is of critical importance across Somalia, and particularly 
in conflict -affected areas and among internally displaced persons, where more than 4 million 
people face  acute food insecurity , and some 1.7 million young children suffer from acute 
malnutrition.5  
23. In target areas, s ocial co -benefits can also be  derived from local institution -building  in 
the form of water user associations and landscape management committees. The project 
involves farming communities through a participatory approach and  pays attention to  gender 
parity and the inclusion of the most marginali zed. 
24. The participation of women as decision  makers and agents of change is fostered  through 
the project’s gender action plan . This includes recognizing and addressing the limitations and 
barriers women  currently face in accessing land, productive assets, education, information and 
 
4 FAO . 2023 . The Impact of Disasters on Agriculture and Food Security 2023 : Avoiding and reducing losses through 
investment in resilience . Available at https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/cc7900en . 
5See: 
www.ipcinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/ipcinfo/docs/IPC_Somalia_Acute_Food_Insecurity_Malnutrition_Jan_Jun20
24_Report.pdf .


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/ B.40 /02/ Add.08  
Page 102 
 
 
   
 finance. The project also seeks to safeguard women against additional  risk of violence or 
harassment that could be induced  by their increased access to assets and influence.  
25. Addressing the needs of  smallholders  and those that are marginalized and /or 
discriminated  against  in a participatory manner , the sustainable development  potential  of the 
proposed project  is assessed as high.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient                          Scale:  High  
26. Somalia  is one of the most fragile countries  in the world , facing rampant inequality, 
displacement and conflict , all worsened  by limited economic opportunities and escalating 
climate change. The effects of recent  heavy rainfall and flooding across Somalia  are exacerbated 
by the lingering effects of previous droughts .6 
27. The gender assessment and project -level action plan ( annex 8  to the funding proposal ), 
referring to Somalia ’s national adaptation programme  of action , describes  three groups 
(pastoralist communities, internally displaced persons  and women ) as the most vulnerable 
groups to climate change : Pastoralists depend on rangeland grazing for their livestock and have 
very few fixed assets, which makes them vulnerable to the impacts of climate change . Internally 
displaced persons  face  limited livelihood opportunities and heightened pressure s on natural 
resources  around their settlements. Finally, w omen are made vulnerable because of the gender 
division of labour , their unequal access to resources, low level of literacy and limited  
participation in decis ion-making.   
28. Gender roles and relationships on the project sites are characterized by  clan system s 
with  a strong patriarchal culture. Women and girls have limited rights under customary laws, 
and are thus  excluded from decision -making institutions in the community.  
29. Smallholder farmers in the sorghum, maize, sesame  and fodder  value chains face  similar  
challenges  – lack ing inputs such as improved certified seeds, fertilizers and mechanization 
services  – which limit  agricultural  productivity.  
30. Women farmers  face additional barriers relating to  land access and tenure insecurity , as 
land is inherited through patrilineal lines. Women can be allocated land to grow fodder and 
vegetables by their husbands  but have additional challenges accessing extension services or 
financial credit . 
31. The project’s gender action plan recognizes the limited livelihood opportunities and 
discrimination affecting women . In the targeting and selection of beneficiaries , the project seeks 
to include women from minority clan s or ethnic groups in consultation activities . The project 
will also include a gender assessment of the rural advisory services system to identify barriers 
and good practices to improve women’s access to advisory services and  develop a gender 
strategy for the agriculture extension department . 
32. The project’s analysis and endeavours to overcome inequality and deprivation are 
commended . The needs of the recipient investment criteri on is assessed as high . 
1.5 Country ownership              Scale:  Medium  to high  
33. Somalia grapples with a fragile political system, insecurity, poverty and climate change  
related shocks. Its 2021 nationally determined contribution7 points to the contradiction that  
Somalia has little historical or current responsibility for global climate change, but nonetheless 
 
6 See: https://www.ipcinfo.org/ipc -country -analysis/details -map/en/c/1156834/?iso3=SOM .  
7 Available at https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -
06/Final%20Updated%20NDC%20for%20Somalia%202021.pdf .


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/ B.40 /02/ Add.08  
Page 103 
 
 
   
 suffers disproportionately from the climate crisis . The effects in Somalia  includ e droughts, 
floods and locust infestations resulting in loss of livestock and agricultural production.  
34. The project aligns with Somali policies relevant to climate change and natural resources 
management. The foster ing of  adaptive capacity and climate -resilient development  fits neatly 
with the  views on  climate -smart agriculture, livestock and land use emphasi zed in a 2024 draft  
update of the nationally determined contribution  (see funding proposal, para . 180).  
35. The project contributes to the achievement of national adaptation priorities by way of 
providing local farmers with training and support, and supporting relevant authorities in 
coordinat ing and improv ing the enabling environment for climate -smart agriculture and 
provid ing climate information.  
36. The accredited entity , FAO, has an important presence  in Somalia  with  over 400 staff 
and six offices across the country,  along with a support office in Nairobi. With a portfolio of 76  
program mes,8 the organization works towards the transformation of agrifood systems in 
Somalia . 
37. The programme is to be executed  by FAO  Somalia and the Government of Somalia , as 
follows :  
(a) FAO, according to the funding proposal  (para. 126)  “will ensure strong country -driven 
execution of project activities ”, allow ing Somalia to “benefit from the technical and 
operations experience of a specialized development assistance agency from the United 
Nations ”; 
(b) The project also provid es opportunities for the Government of Somalia to increase its 
capacity through technical assistance and development and implementation of activities . 
The government  acts  through the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change , which is 
also the national  designated authority, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation ; 
and 
(c) As emphasi zed in the call between  the iTAP and the accredited entity, state governments 
and the Ministries’ representation at the state level will play an important role in project 
implementation.  
38. A Central Project Implementation Unit  will be established  for the day-to-day project  
implementation , with FAO support offices in each member state. FAO will appoint a Technical 
Advisor and National Technical Coordinator to lead implementation , with  guidance from a 
Project Steering Committee and Project Technical Committee.  
39. Effective engagement with communities is necessary to ensure that land -use plans are 
acceptable and beneficial to local stakeholders, but such engagement is often limited by lack of 
trust in authorities and insufficient mechanisms for public participation . International 
organizations and government bodies are working to develop better governance structures  and 
build local capacities . As state structures are recovering, developing integrated landscape -level 
natural resource management approaches will be cruc ial, both as a way of promoting climate -
resilient sustainable development and as a way of preventing further conflict.9 
40. During project design, stakeholder  consultations were conducted a t various levels: (i) at 
the federal level with main government  and non-government stakeholders as well as 
international partners ; (ii) in target federal member states with government and non -
government stakeholders as well as with international partners ; and (iii) at target district level, 
with local authorities and communities (annex 7 , para . 2). Community - and institution -level 
consultations are meticulously reported upon in the documentation constituting annex 7.   
 
8 See https://www.fao.org/somalia/en/ .  
9 Funding proposal, paras. 39 and 40 .


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/ B.40 /02/ Add.08  
Page 104 
 
 
   
 41. Whereas most execution is vested in an international organization, the stakeholder 
consultations and participatory approach are convincing, and there are pertinent indications of 
commitment to the project endeavours  at the community, state and federal level . Hence, the 
country ownership investment criteri on is assessed as medium  to high .  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                             Scale:  Medium  
42. The funding proposal  (para . 185)  estimates  the cost per beneficiary for the GCF grant at 
USD 69. 18 per direct beneficiary and USD 37. 51 per bene ficiary for all beneficiaries combined, 
and for total funding at USD  82.36 and USD 4 4.66 respectively .  
43. Two economic and financial  modelling perspectives were  appraised using 
Representative Concentration Pathway  2.6 and 8.5 climate scenario assumptions  to show how 
the results might change under differing climate hardships. Calculated over 20 years, using a 
conservative level of discount rate of 15  per cent , it is suggest ed that the expected benefits will 
outweigh the costs .10 
44. The accredited entity is providing cash co -financing at the level of 16 per cent  of the 
total budget , in the form of a  complementary  project funded by the United States Agency for 
International Development to be implemented by FAO Somalia.  
45. The largest project component , outcome 2 (local livelihoods are resilient to climate 
change ), absorbs 44 per cent  of the budget , where m ost funding goes to in creasing access to 
water and irrigation infrastructure.  The second -largest component , outcome 1 (restored 
landscapes are resilient and sustainably managed ), absorbs 36 per cent  of the budget , dedicated 
to landscape restoration . 
46. Project component 3, outcome 3 (improved institutional enabling environment for 
sustainable landscape management and climate -resilient agriculture is in place at the state and 
federal level ), absorbs  a lesser share of the budget at 6 per cent . It is hoped that the important 
capacity -development efforts included in the first two components will have positive spillover 
on the enabling environment  to ensure the sustainability of the project’s endeavours.  
47. As emphasi zed in the funding proposal (executive summary):  “Given the fragile 
conditions of the Government of Somalia, strengthening of capacity is required to ensure that 
Federal Member States  can implement new norms for sustainable landscape management and 
climate resilient agriculture. ” For this, output 3.1 considers legal frameworks , implementation 
(rather than “enforcement ” as initially worded) , monitoring  and coordination , and output 3.2 
strengthens the  government’s  informational capacity, in particular its capacity to generate and 
disseminate useful, relevant  and timely climate information to last mile users.  
48. Project management absorbs 6  per cent  of the budget, and monitoring and evaluation 5  
per cent . The project also has a contingency budget amounting to 2  per cent  of the total. This is 
to support the adaptive management of the project endeavours. Th e adaptive project 
management will be important given the  risks and challenges of the project environment, 
including a  fragile insti tutional context.  
49. The project  seeks to  build on best practices and lessons learned from recent projects 
and program mes and to closely coordinate with other efforts to rebuild Somalia  following years 
of conflict.  The project draws on a range of climate adaptation technologies, many of them 
ecosystem -based , which should have the potential to be appropriately and iteratively developed 
through community/stakeholder engagement coupled with  technical expertise  provided by the 
Government of Somalia and FAO . 
 
10 Funding proposal, para. 190.


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/ B.40 /02/ Add.08  
Page 105 
 
 
   
 50. The project operates in a fragile institutional  environment and will need to adaptively 
manage changing circumstances . Substantive financial and human resources will need to be 
invested to achieve success. The  efficiency and effectiveness potential investment criteri on is 
assessed  as medium.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
51. The iTAP  finds that the proposed project , “Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia ”, is 
well  designed and well  aligned with  the updated Strategic Plan for the GCF 2024 –2027  by 
accelerating climate action for the most vulnerable .  
52. The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal .


---
*Page 106*
---

 
 
       GCF/B. 40/02 /Add. 08 
Page 106 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP246 ) 
Proposal name:  Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia (Ugbaad)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
Country:  Somalia  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
The AE acknowledges that the overall impact potential  is assessed a s medium to  high  by 
ITAP . 
Paradigm shift potential  
The AE acknowledges that the overall paradigm shift potential  is assessed a s medium to  
high  by ITAP . 
Sustainable development potential  
The AE acknowledges that the overall sustainable development potential  is assessed as high  
by ITAP . 
Needs of the recipient  
The AE acknowledges that the overall needs of the recipient is assessed as high  by ITAP . 
Country ownership  
The AE would like to reconfirm that t he Government of Somalia including  the governments of 
federal member states in which this project operates  have bee n extensively consulted during 
design and will be actively involved in all aspects of project's implementation to ensure full 
country ownership.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The AE wou ld like to reconfirm that  the capacity building  activities in cluded in the first two 
components are designed to foster the emergence of a n enabling environment that will create 
conditions for sustainability, replication and upscale of the project strategies  to overcome  the 
barriers to adaptation and resilience  to climate change .  
The AE would like to also highlight that the project will generate multiple non -monetary 
benefits to communities currently living in extreme climate and social vulnerability.


---
*Page 107*
---

 
 
       GCF/B. 40/02 /Add. 08 
Page 107 
 
 
 Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
The AE acknowledges iTAP overall assessment and recommendation for the Board approval.


---
*Page 108*
---

Annex 8  
Gender assessment and  
project -level action plan  
For the GCF -FAO Project “ Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia  (Ugbaad )” Gender documentation for FP246


---
*Page 109*
---

 
2  
Contents  
 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 3 
Part 1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 4 
Part 2. Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 6 
Part 3. Legal and Institutional Framework  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 7 
3.1. National gender policy framework and implications for the project  ................................ ................  7 
3.2. Gender legal framework and implications for the project  ................................ ...............................  9 
Part 4. Overview of Gender Inequalities in the Country  ................................ ................................ ..........  10 
4.1. Poverty and demography  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  10 
4.2. Health  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  12 
4.3. Literacy and education  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  13 
4.4. Voice and Representation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  13 
4.5 Entrepreneurship  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  13 
4.6. Access to and control over resources ................................ ................................ ...........................  14 
4.7 Access to information  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  14 
4.8. Access to finance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  15 
4.9. Sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEAH) ................................ ................................ ... 15 
4.10. Other forms of GBV  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  15 
Part 5. Gender Inequalities Exacerbated by Climate Change  ................................ ................................ . 16 
Part 6. Gender Issues in the project implementation sites  ................................ ................................ ...... 17 
6.1. Gender profile of the implementation sites  ................................ ................................ ...................  17 
6.2. Gender gaps identified  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  17 
6.3. Barriers  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  18 
6.4. Gender roles and barriers in maize, sesame, sorghum and fodder value chains  ........................  19 
6.5. Intersectional nature of gender inequality  ................................ ................................ ...............  21 
Part 7. Strategies to integrate gender into the project  ................................ ................................ .............  22 
7.1. Formulation and implementation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 22 
7.2. Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting  ................................ ................................ ...........................  26 
7.3. Mitigation of the risks related to SEAH and GBV  ................................ ................................ .... 26 
Part 8. Gender Action Plan (GAP)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  29


---
*Page 110*
---

 
3 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  
B2B  Business to Business Meeting  
CEDAW  Convention on Elimination of All Discrimination Against Women  
FGM   Female Genital Mutilation  
GII   Gender Inequality Index  
HDI  Human Development Index  
IDP  Internally Displaced People  
MESAF   Ministry of Employment Social Affairs and Family  
MWHRD  Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development  
MSME   Medium Small and Micro Enterprise  
ND-GAIN  Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative  
SDG   Sustainable Development Goals  
SGBV   Sexual and Gender Based Violence  
SIGI  Social Institutions and Gender Index  
TVET   Technical and Vocation Education Training  
VSLA   Village Saving and Loan Association


---
*Page 111*
---

 
4 Part 1. Introduction  
Objective of the  project, country, and target areas.  
1. Climate Change in Somalia : The Horn of Africa (Somalia, Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Eritrea, 
Sudan and South Sudan) – is vulnerable to climate variability and security -related threats such as 
violent conflicts – due to its food insecurity and fragile livelihood systems whic h are vulnerable to climate 
change.  Somalia is listed as a Least Developed Country by the UN and also ranked among the 11 th 
most vulnerable countries by the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND -GAIN) Index, which 
measures vulnerability to climate change. Women, children, elderly people, people living with 
disabilities, minority clans, and other marginalized people often  bear the brunt of climate change.  
2. In Somalia pastoralists constitute over 50% of the population, inhabiting arid or semi -arid areas with 
very high temporal and spatial rainfall variability. The adverse changes in rainfall and weather patterns 
due to climate change have led to prolonged and  recurrent droughts in Somalia, which have 
exacerbated famines and the scarcity of pasture and water resources. Agricultural production systems 
have also constantly recorded below long -term average returns, against a backdrop of Somalia being 
a net importe r of cereals and grains even on bounty seasons. Protracted and recurrent exposure to 
shocks has resulted in low capacity to absorb, respond, mitigate, cope, adapt to climate shocks and 
conflicts. The coping capacity of institutional and physical infrastruc ture is also generally poor or lacking 
across the country, cutting across health services, early warning, food systems, and economic 
opportunities, which adds another structural layer of vulnerability for affected communities  
3. Impact on Women : The climate in Somalia is projected to become drier, warmer, more erratic and 
extreme – with grave impacts on livestock, crops, forestry and fisheries -based livelihoods. Cumulative 
impacts of droughts negatively affect livelihoods, resulting in chronic food insecurity,  massive 
displacement and resources -based conflicts. Women and children constitute over 80 per cent of 
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Women’s high dependence on climate sensitive livelihoods make 
them particularly vulner able to shocks, affecting their ability to adapt and recover. This is compounded 
by their limited and/or constrained access to economic and natural resources, rights of ownership and 
control over land  and decision -making power, a dynamic that is aggravated in displacement settings. 
In developing countries, including Somalia, women contribute up to 45 – 80 percent of production 
across crop, livestock, and fisheries value chains (Kibria, 2016). However, gender inequalities and 
dynamics have excluded them from , or limited their participation in decision -making, production 
systems, rights of ownership and management of natural resources, as well as resolution of conflicts 
emanating from the same . 
4. The project aims to scale up  climate resilient agriculture , sustainable landscape management  and 
ecosystem based adaptation  to increase resilience of communities and ecosystems to climate change 
and extreme weather events that affect agriculture and other livelihoods. It will directly benefit 1.1 million  
people  (50% women) . It consists of three outcomes : (i) restored landscapes are resilient and 
sustainably managed , (ii) local livelihoods are resilient to climate change , and (iii)  an improved 
institutional enabling environment for sustainable landscape management and climate resilient 
agriculture is in place at Federal Member State and Federal Levels .  
5. The targeted areas of the project were identified based on a climate risk analysis, which considered 
climate hazard, exposure , and vulnerability, and the agroecological  zones in Somalia.  The government  
provided a list of priority districts within the target regions, most of them being newly liberated districts.  
6. The states, regions , and districts where the project will be implemented are listed below.  
• Southwest  state, Lower Shabelle region , Afgoye, Baraawe, Kurtunwaarey , and Qoryooley  
districts  
• Hirchabelle  state,  Middle Shabelle  region , Cadale  district  
• Jubaland  state,  Lower Juba  region,  Kismayo  district  
• Puntland  state,  Nugal region , Eyl and Garowe  districts  
• Somaliland  state,  Todgheer region , Odweyne  district  
• Galmudug  state,  Mudug  region,  Hobyo  district


---
*Page 112*
---

 
5 7. Women’s adaptive capacity and vulnerability to climate change in Somalia : Women in Somalia, 
especially those in rural areas, are most affected due to reliance on natural resources affected by 
climate for their livelihoods.  They are at the frontline confronting the challenges of climate change but 
are poorly equipped and under -resourced to respond to the challenges. They have limited access to 
economic resources, rights of ownership and control over land and decision -making power. As climate 
change increase s the scarcity of resources and men migrate, women are pushed to assume new 
responsibilities becoming heads of households. However, they are not included in key decision -making 
spaces due to socio -cultural norms and gender -based discrimination. Conflict ha s eroded the gains 
made in education, healthcare, and employment before the civil war and deepened gender inequality.  
Women and girls are more likely to engage in risky coping mechanisms and be exposed to gender -
based violence.1  
8. The Somalia National Adaptation Plan of Action describes pastoralist communities, IDPs, and women 
as the most vulnerable group to climate change due to low access to information, markets, services, 
and technology required for climate -resilient livelihoods.  Women are vulnerable because of the gender 
division of labor, their unequal access to material and resources, non-material and  their low participation 
in decision -making.  
 
Objective and rationale for the gender assessment  
9. Gender inequality is very high in Somalia, as various global gender inequality measurements indicate. 
This gender inequality heightens the vulnerability and lowers the adaptation capacity of not only women 
but also their families, who depend on them and th eir communities. Therefore, it is important to 
understand how existing gender relations contribute to gender inequality and women’s ability to 
participate in and benefit from the project, as well as how gender relations might prevent the project's 
objectiv es from being achieved. This understanding is created through a gender analysis, which will 
identify potential gender -based constraints the project needs to address and strategies that can be 
used to address the identified gender -based constraints.    
10. The objective of this gender assessment is to understand how gender relations in Somalia and the 
project districts, in particular, affect the way men and women experience the problem of climate change 
and their ability to participate in and benefit from  the interventions of this project  Based on the findings 
of the assessment, g a gender action plan that can be implemented by the project to address identified 
gaps is developed, along with a list of indicators that can be used to measure progress in closing these 
gender gaps.    
 
 
 
  
 
1 Draft Somalia NDC Implementation Plan and Institutional Frameworks, Resource Mobilization and Monitoring & Evaluation Plan


---
*Page 113*
---

 
6 Part 2. Methodology  
11. The methodology for the assessment included desk review, primary data collection through a survey 
administered to farmers, and key informant interviews.  Extended consultations have taken place in the 
project target districts at community level: (i) in Odweyne district, Todgheer region, Somaliland, (ii) i n 
Cadale district, Middle Shabelle, Hirshabelle, (iii) in Hobyo, Mudug region, Galmudug, (iv) in Kismayo 
district, Lower Juba, Jubaland, (v) in Eyl District, Nugaal region, Puntland, (vi) in Garowe District,  
Nugaal region, Puntland. Focus Group Discussions have been conducted at community level have 
been conducted with small holder farmers where women and youth were represented. Semi -structured 
interviews were conducted with Farmer s’ Cooperatives where women and youth were also 
represented.  
12. Gender and climate change -related national policy documents, national gender profiles developed by 
FAO and UN Women, and documents like the last Demographic and Health Survey of Somalia were 
included in the desk review.  
13. A telephone survey questionnaire was administered to 257 mostly women farmers in seven project 
districts located in six states: Afgoye,  and Cadele,  Hirshabelle state  Eyi, and Garoowe,  Puntland state 
Hobyo  of Galmudug state . Kismaayo,  of Juba land state and Odweyne  Somaliland state . The survey 
respondents were selected  from the following livelihood and demographic categories .  
- Participation  in agro-pastoralis t livelihood  and any one of the following three major Value Chains : 
Sesame, Maize and Sorghum  
- Representatives of  various age groups  
- Representatives  of different clans including m inorities  
- ingle  women heads of households including w idowed women making up  (10% to 15% of the 
sample).  
14. Finally, key informant interviews were conducted in Somaliland state with the Ministry of Employment, 
Social Affairs, and Family, the Ministry of Livestock, and a civil society organization called PENHA, a 
women -led network that supports livelihood activities in Odw eyne district.  
15. The survey questions administered to farmers tried to capture information on gender relations in 
agriculture, including the participation of men and women in various agricultural activities; their access 
to extension services, inputs, and markets; their ro les in decision -making over agricultural activities and 
income; and the distribution of responsibilities for unpaid care work.  
16. The key informant interview questionnaire was used to capture more qualitative information about 
gender relations in agriculture. Key informants were asked about the livelihood activities that men and 
women engage in and the kind of challenges they face; h ow farmers are targeted for the provision of 
various agricultural services, such as extension services and credit; the existence of farmers' 
organizations and barriers to participation in the organizations; and the needs of men and women 
farmers in livesto ck and crop agriculture.


---
*Page 114*
---

 
7 Part 3. Legal and Institutional Framework  
3.1. National gender policy framework and implications for the project  
17. Provisions that protect the rights of women were first included in the Federal Republic of Somalia’s 
provisional constitution when it was formulated in 2012. The constitution recognized the need to ensure 
the representation of women in national institution s and the three branches of government, protect their 
social and economic rights, protect women from violence, and eliminate discrimination against women 
in the workplace. Consequent national development plans also integrated gender equality provisions. 
The New Deal framework developed in 2013 included commitments to address gender disparity in 
various sectors. 2 
18. The 9th National Development Plan of Somalia (2020 -2024) had adopted strengthening gender, human 
rights and social equity as one of its cross -cutting policy objectives. The four pillars of the National 
Development Plan: Inclusive and accountable politics, improve d security and the rule of law, inclusive 
economic growth and improved social development have each gender related targets and indicators. 
Under the inclusive and accountable politics pilar, increasing the representation of women in district 
council s and local governance institutions is set as one target. Under the economic development pillar, 
investment in livestock and agriculture sectors to create employment opportunities for rural women and 
youth is prioritized. In order to diversify the economy,  investment in in skills training in TVETs targeting 
sectors where women are overrepresented is encouraged. Under the social protection and human 
development pilar national policies and strategies are developed to protect vulnerable groups. Among 
these are  the development of the Somali Women’s Charter, the FGM Act and the National Gender 
Policy.3  
19. Somalia has made good progress regarding Women Pea ce and Security (WPS)/ National Action Plans  
(NAPs), having launched its NAP in September 2022, led by the Ministry of Women and Human Rights 
Development, supported by the Government of Sweden through UN Women Somalia. The NAP 
acknowledges inclusion and participation of Somali women in peacebuilding and decision -making at all 
levels as a critical foundation for effective governance, sustainable peace, and development. In 
addition, the NAP seeks to address issues that plague women in Somalia such as sexual and gender -
based violence, access to justice, participation in transitional justice mechanisms, as well as climate 
change among others.  
20. A National Gender Policy  was adopted by the Federal Government of Somalia in 2016 to guide 
gender integration in its peace and state -building process. The objective of the  gender policy is  to create 
an enabling legal, policy, and institutional environment to achieve gender equality and equal 
opportunities. Specific policy objectives  consist of eliminatin g all forms of gender -based  discrimination 
and reducing  gender inequality, increasing women's  participation in decision making, promoting 
behaviour change t o shift  gender norms  and taking affirmative action as a corrective measure to 
equalize  opportunities.  Other main  objective s of Gender policy include enacting international legal 
frameworks like Convention on Elimination of All Discrimination Against Women ( CEDAW ) and 
introducing new bills against FGM and sexual offenses. It also aims to increase women’s representation 
in political and leadership positions and track public budget allocation to gender equality objectives.4 
21. The National gender policy has four thematic priority areas: economic empowerment, health, education 
and political participation. Under the economic empowerment  thematic  priority area , the policy aims to 
increase the representation of women in national chamber of commerce to address concerns of women 
entrepreneurs. It also aims to establish funds accessible to women, support them to diversify income 
sources , establish a quota for  women’ s emplo yment in decision making positions  in private and public 
sector  and develop national vocational entrepreneurs ’ skills enhancement programme . 5 
22. States such as Puntland and Somaliland also drafted their state gender policies. For example, the 
Somaliland National Gender Policy was developed in 2009 by the Ministry of empl oyment and  social 
 
2 UN Women and AFDB, 2020. Country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context  
3 Somalia National Development Plan, 2020 -2024  
4 UN Women and AFDB, 2020. Country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context  
5 Federal Republic of Somali, 2015. National gender policy.


---
*Page 115*
---

 
8 affairs and family. Th e overall goal of the policy is to facilitate the mainstreaming of the needs and 
concerns of women , men, girls and boys in all areas of sustainable development and poverty 
eradication. The policy has several priority areas  covering different sectors. It s specific objectives 
include elimination of inequality in access to resources, ensuring equal partici pation in deci sion making 
in social , political and economic life, chang ing attitudes and practices that are discrim inatory and 
mainstreaming gender in all sectors of development. Under its poverty reduction and economic 
empowerment and livelihoods thematic area, the policy aims to create an enabling environment  for 
women to partic ipate in natural r esource s management and suppor t small scale entrepreneurs to create 
jobs and adult literacy.6  
23. At the Federal level, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development  (MWHRD) of the Federal 
Government of Somalia is mandated to advance the promotion and protection of gender equality and 
human rights, including the rights of women, children and other vulnerable groups. The Ministry of 
Women and Human Rights Development was established by the federal government in 2013 to lead 
the development of laws and policies that help to implement the National Gender Policy and coordinate 
the efforts of various se ctor ministries and development partners.  Gender focal points are expected to 
be established in all sector ministries. Periodic stakeholder forums are expe cted to be carried out for 
consultation and review of the implementation  of the gender policy.  7  
24. The states of Puntland and Somaliland set up similar state -level women’s machineries. The Ministry of 
Family Affairs in Puntland is responsible for mainstreaming gender in different sectors, and  in 
Somaliland, this responsibility is taken by the Ministry of Employment , Social Af fairs and Family 
(MESAF) .8 The mandate is to serve specific target groups of the society, especially women, children, 
people with disabilities, and other socially disadvantaged groups including refugees, asylum seekers, 
IDPs, returnees, and minorities to ensure their rights of acces sing basic services, fair employment 
opportunities, and protection support are protected . MESAF is expected to set up multi -sectoral 
commi ttees from national to district levels  to ensure gender mainstreaming , coordination  and 
impleme ntation of a multi -sectoral approach. Gender focal points are expected to be created in each 
gover nment ministry  to enha nce coordinatio n and mainst reaming across sectors . Implementation of 
the gender policy will be in a collaborative effort between gover nment, NGOs and UN agencies and 
development part ners.9 
25.   However, despite the development of the Federa l and state level National Gender Polic ies and the 
efforts , in national development plans, the implementation leaves a lot to be desired.  
26. National Climate Change Policy  of the Federal Gover nment of Somali developed in 2020 recognizes 
that gender equality is an important precondition for successful cli mate change adaptation and 
mitigation response. The policy  states the need to generate data on gender to understand gender 
specific needs and impacts  of climate change. It highlights the importance of collaborating with women 
rights organizations and brin ging them to the table in climate change discussi ons and processes. It 
stresses the imp ortance  of building the capacity of relev ant institutions to mainst ream gender in climate 
change policy formulation and the need for gender equi table financing to integr ate gender di mensions 
in the design of climate funds. The policy commi ts to increase t he resilience of vu lnerable groups 
including w omen through community led adaptation, livelihood di versification and better access to basic  
services and social protection.10 In the state of Somaliland National Climate change policy developed 
in 2023 as well gender mainstreaming is stated as one of the policy priority areas.11 
27. The National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change  developed in 2013 recognized 
women, youth, and pastoralist communities as the most vulnerable to climate change. Women and 
youth groups participated in the consultations that led to the identification of priority areas for adaptation 
both at the federal l evel and in the states of Puntland and Somaliland. However, in the actual adaptation 
plans of both the federal government and the state of Somaliland, there are no specific strategies 
 
6 The Republic of Somaliland, National gender policy, 2009.  
7  Federal Republic of Somali, 2015. National gender policy.  
8 FAO. 2021. National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods – Somalia. Mogadishu. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en  
9 The Republic of Somaliland, National gender policy, 2009.  
10 Somalia National Climate Change Policy, 2020  
11 Somaliland National Climate Change Policy, 2023


---
*Page 116*
---

 
9 developed to target and address the needs of women. The only document that specifically references 
women is the adaptation plan of the state of Puntland, which mentions “providing training and support 
to women given their large role in agriculture.”12  
28. The National ly Determined Contributions (NDC)  of Somali updated in 2021 recognizes that women 
are at a disadvantage compared to  men in all socio -economic and human development indicators and 
that the impact of  climate change disproportionately affects women because of their lack of access and 
control to critical resources to adapt to changing climate conditions. The NDC calls for gender equality 
and the empowerment of women in climate change decision making. Specif ic gender targets developed 
under the NDC c onsist of allocatio n of a quota of 30% for represen tation of women in climate change 
decision - making, making the Ministry of G ender and Human Rights part of the NDC gover nance 
structure,  and m ainstre aming gender in national and sub -national climate change policy frameworks. 
The document also co mmits to undertaking gender analysis to inform climate ada ptation and miti gation 
sector’ s gender needs, to strengthening  the of the most vulnerable including women through social 
safety nets  and promoting meaningful access and tr ansfer of climate fi nance to pr omote gender 
responsive technology.  Finaly, the document also hi ghlights the need for developing insurance systems 
to enable vulnerable groups, including women to rebuild economic life following exposure to disaster 
and support vulnerable groups , particularly women in climate change adaptation effo rts.13  
29. Overall,  the assessment  of the national  policy  framework  and institutions  indicates  that there  is a 
strong  political  will to promote  gender  equality  in climate  change.  However,  there  are gaps  in the 
institutional  capacity  of the government  to turn this commitment  into action.  The project  needs  to build  
the capacity  of national  partners  on gender -sensitive  agriculture  program  delivery  to ensure  the 
project’s  interventions  reach  and benefit  both men and women.  The gender  action  plan needs  to include  
further  assessments  and capacity -building  plans  on gender  for ministries  of agriculture  at federal,  state,  
regional,  and district  levels.   
3.2. Gender legal framework and implications for the project  
30. Somalia has ratified both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights as of January 24, 1990. Article 3 in both covenants 
calls for states to ensure the equal rights of wo men and men in the enjoyment of the rights outlined in 
the covenants. However, Somalia has yet to ratify major international conventions that protect the rights 
of women and girls. For example, Somalia has signed the Convention on the Elimination of 
Discri mination Against Women (CEDAW) and the Protocol of the African Charter on Human and People 
Rights and the Rights of Women in Africa. However, both conventions have not been ratified by the 
state to become part of the national legislation. The Federal Minis try of Women and Human Rights 
established a CEDAW ratification and advocacy committee in 2019 to fast -track the process. However, 
ratification has not taken place to date.  
31. Somalia has also signed and recognized the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action on Gender 
Equality and Women’s Empowerment, which is the first comprehensive and transformative global 
agenda for the achievement of gender equality and the empowerm ent of women and girls.  
32. New national laws that protect women’s rights are under development. The Federal Government of 
Somalia and the states of Somaliland and Puntland have developed bills on FGM/C and sexual 
offenses that are waiting for approval by the states. The federal gove rnment and both states have also 
introduced quotas for women’s representation in national leadership positions. In the federal 
government and Puntland state, a 30% quota for women’s representation in leadership positions has 
been instituted, while in Somal iland, a 25% quota is assigned .14  
33. The assessment of the legal frameworks shows that fundamental laws that protect rural women’s rights 
to own assets and access services are not yet in place in Somalia. For example, ratification of the 
CEDAW convention would have required states to implemen t Article 14 of the convention, which 
 
12 Federal Republic of Somalia, 2013. National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change (NAPA)  
13 Draft Somalia NDC Implementation Plan and Institutional Frameworks, Resource Mobilization and Monitoring & Evaluation Plan, 
2024 
14 UN Women and AFDB, 2020. Country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context


---
*Page 117*
---

 
10 compels states to provide equal opportunities to women in rural areas and take measures that achieve 
gender equality in the agriculture sector. Therefore, the project needs to engage traditional and clan 
leaders and communities to sensitize them on the imp ortance of ensuring women’s participation and 
representation in landscape and natural resource governance committees in the absence of legislation 
that can mandate these measures .  
Part 4. Overview of Gender Inequalities in the Country  
4.1. Poverty and demography  
34. Women make up 49% of the  population  in Somalia , according to the 2014 population  estimation  survey 
carried out by the UNFPA and the Somalia Ministry  of Planning . Women -headed  households make up 
32% of total households . Male migration due to drought and conflict has resulted in an increased trend 
of female household headship. There is a high level of poverty  in Somalia , especially among nomadic 
communities and rural dwellers.15 The Human Development Index (HDI) of Somalia is one of the lowest 
in the world , with a value of  0.380 , putting the country  in the lowest human development category in 
2022. A higher proportion of w omen -headed households in nomadic communities and urban areas live 
in poverty as compared to male -headed households.16 FAO’s food security and nutrition analysis shows 
that female -headed households are overrepresented in the category of households with poor food 
consumption and have fewer assets.17 
35. Various  global measures show the prevalence of a high level of gender inequality in Somalia. The 
Gender Inequality Index (GII) for Somalia is 0.776 (with a maximum of 1 denoting complete inequality), 
placing the country  as the fourth -lowest country for gender equality globally. The Social Institutions and 
Gender Index  (SIGI) in Somalia for 2014 was 0.4594, categorizing the country as highly discriminatory 
against women.18  
36. Women’s participation in the labor force and employment is lower than that of men. A 2016, UNFPA 
data showed that the labor force participation rate is 64% for men and 37% for women, while the 
employment rate is 49% for men and 27% for women. Reasons for w omen’s low labor force 
participation include women’s unpaid care work responsibility, enrolment in schools, and lack of 
permission from male members of the family, according to a 2017 World Bank report. For men, the 
reasons include enrolment  in schools, di sability or illness, and conflict .19 Sixty percent of men and 68% 
of women are employed in the agriculture sector. Most employed women are self -employed (55%) or 
employed by a family member  (28%)  in both agricultur al and non -agricultur al sectors . And 43% of 
women employed in the agriculture sector are not paid.20 
37. Young people  in Somalia have fewer livelihood opportunities, and they are affected by unemployment 
and low access to resources such as land, livestock, and credit. A 2016 UNDP survey showed that 
40.2% of young people between the ages of 25 and 29 (54% men and 29.5% wo men) are employed. 
Over 45% of young people were economically inactive, not working or looking for work. Young people, 
especially young women, face difficulty securing livelihoods due to a lack of available jobs, poorly 
developed skills, and li mited access to credit and capital assets. Young women’s employment options 
are lower than men’s because of lower levels of education, discrimination, and social and family 
pressure to marry early. Lack of livelihood opportunities leads poor young women to  engage in 
prostitution, while young men migrate or get involved in extremist militant groups.21 
38. Young men own less land than older men because ancestral land is becoming less and less with each 
sub-division, and existing portions are now almost too small to sub -divide. Young men are given few 
 
15 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey.  
16 Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, 2023. Somalia Poverty Report.  
17 FAO. 2021. National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods – Somalia. Mogadishu. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en  
18 FAO. 2021. National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods – Somalia. Mogadishu. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en  
19 UN Women and AFDB, 2020. Country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context  
20 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey.  
21 Somalia country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context, AFDB & UN Women


---
*Page 118*
---

 
11 heads of livestock when they marry, and the livestock ownership of younger men is less than that of 
older men. Young women have even less access to land and livestock.22 
39. Elderly people  aged 60 and above made up 4.5% of the population in 2020. There is a lack of data on 
the situation of elderly people and their vulnerability to poverty in Somalia. A study conducted by 
HelpAge International among internally displaced people (IDP) in Somal ia showed elderly people make 
up 15% of those living in IDP settlements. The majority of the elderly people were women who were 
widowed or divorced and single heads of households. There were few programs that specifically target 
and support e lderly people and address their needs. The study also found declining community support 
for older people. There was limited consultation with elderly people in program development and the 
provision of support to IDP communities. Older women were often vict ims of sexual and gender -based 
violence. Many older women worked as sanitation workers or maids in host communities, were poorly 
paid, and suffered from health problems like chronic back pain because of the tasks associated with 
their work. Older men did n ot work and depended on their wives for support. There was no system of 
home delivery of food rations for vulnerable people because food is distributed through blanket general 
distribution centres.23 
40. Women headed households  
41. Four in 10 households in Somalia are headed by women. The proportion of women -headed households 
is high in Mogadishu and other urban centers (52%) and IDPs (54%), compared to rural households 
(37%). Women -headed households are grouped into two categories: de jure wom en household heads, 
who are divorced, separated, or widowed, and de facto female household heads, who are married but 
their husbands are living away from the family home.24 
42. A World Bank survey in 2019 showed that the incidence of poverty is higher for male -headed 
households than for female -headed households in IDPs and non -displaced communities. However, the 
difference in incidence of poverty between male and female -headed ho useholds is smaller in non -
displaced communities (3%), while it is higher in IDPs (11 –14%). Among the non -displaced community, 
widow -headed households have a higher risk of poverty. IDP families with children with single female 
caregivers experience higher  poverty than IDP families without children. In IDP households, where 
there are more female income earners, the risk of poverty is lower. The study suggested looking beyond 
the gender of the household head to several other factors, like the number of child ren and the number 
of income earners in a family, to understand vulnerability to poverty. It also highlighted that the 
association between a household's demographic composition and its income profile shows women’s 
lack of economic empowerment and caring re sponsibility elevates poverty risk, even in the context 
where male -headed households have an overall higher risk of poverty.25 
43. Other vulnerable groups  
44. Poverty rates are high in Somalia, with 7 out of 10 households living below the poverty line. However, 
some communities are more affected and deprived. Three -fourths of the population in rural areas, ID P 
settlements , and households living among nomadic communities live in deeper levels of poverty. For 
example, IDP households are 10% more likely to be poor than non -IDP households.  
45. Twenty -six percent of the population in Somalia lives in nomadic areas. Twenty -eight percent of 
nomadic households are headed by women. Looking at multi -dimensional indicators of poverty, 
nomadic households experience more deprivation compared to other hou seholds or communities. 
Ninety percent of nomadic households are in the lowest wealth quantile.  
46. Nomadic households have low access to education. The net enrolment  rate among nomadic 
communities is 12% for primary and secondary education levels. Seventy -three percent of the people 
in nomadic communities live more than 30 minutes away from the nearest school. Only one in five 
people living in nomadic communities can read and write. Seventy -eight percent of nomadic male 
household members and eighty -four percent of female household members have no access to 
 
22 FAO 2024. Gender baseline assessment report for the Somalia information and resilience building action phase II.  
23 Crisis affected older people in Kenya and Somalia, HelpAge International, 2012.  
24 World Bank, 2019. Somali Poverty and vulnerability assessment: findings from wave 2 of the Somali high frequency survey.  
25 World Bank, 2021. Differences in household composition: hidden dimensions of poverty and displacement in Somalia.


---
*Page 119*
---

 
12 education. They have low access to health services, and most women receive no assistance from 
health professionals during childbirth.  
47. Nomadic households have poor access to water supply and sanitation services. Only 35% of nomadic 
households have access to water, compared to 55% of rural households and 76% of urban households. 
A higher proportion of nomadic households need to travel long er than 30 minutes t to fetch drinking 
water  compared to rural and urban households. No nomadic household uses appropriate water 
treatment before drinking. Only 1% of nomadic households have access to improved sanitation, 
compared to 26% of rural and 23% of  urban households. Less than 1% of nomadic households use 
electricity for lighting.  
4.2. Health  
48. The health system  in Somalia is fragmented and under -resourced to meet the healthcare needs of the 
population. Various health measurements indicate the general low health status of  the population , 
including  women . Life expectancy at birth was 53 in 20 21, which is lower than the average of 71 years 
for the Arab world . The infant  mortality rate of 71 per 1,000 live births is high  compared with the Arab 
world average of 26  per 1,000 live births .26 Maternal mortality at 6 92 per 100,000 live births in 202 0 is 
one of the highest in the world.  Only 32% of births are assisted by a healthcare  provider and 31% of 
mothers receive antenatal care. The main obstacles for women to access health services include lack 
of money (65%), distance of health facilities (62%) , and lack of permission to access health services 
(42%). Poor women and women living in nomadic communities are most affected by a lack of health 
services.27  
49. Women and children are affected by poor nutrition and the prevalence of diseases. Twenty -eight 
percent of children under the age of five and 12%, respectively, are affected by stunting and wasting. 
Twenty -six percent of women in nomadic communities and 16%  in rural communities are underweight. 
Diseases such as acute respiratory disease due to the high use of firewood and shrubs for cooking in 
households and diarrhoea  affect children the most .28  
50. The prevalence of HIV/AIDS is low in Somalia (0.55%). Sixty -six percent of women aged 15 –49 have 
heard of HIV/AIDS. The proportion of women who have heard of HIV/AIDS is lower among those in 
nomadic and rural areas (45 percent and 69 percent, respectively)  than in urban areas (81 percent) .29 
51. Early marriage and teen pregnancy are prevalent in Somalia. The 2020 DHS found that 16% of ever -
married women were married by the age of 15, and 34% were married by the age of 18. Fourteen 
percent of women between the ages of 15 and 19 have given birth or are pregnant with their first child. 
Teen pregnancy is highest among the lowest -income groups. Sixty -two percent of women between the 
ages of 15 and 49 know about modern contraception methods. However, despite the high level of 
knowledge, actual use of mod ern contraception methods is low (7%). There is a high level of unmet 
contraception needs (37%) in rural and nomadic areas .30  
52. More than half of the population in Somalia has access to improved drinking water and sanitation 
facilities . Sixty -five percent of households use improved sources  of drinking water . Access , however , is 
low for nomadic communities (34%) and rural communities (55%) . Forty -five percent of nomadic 
households and 13% of rural households have to travel more than 30 minutes to get improved drinking 
water. Few households (16%) treat water before drinking. Fifty-seven  percent of households  have 
access to improved sanitation facilities . However, access to improved  sanitation facilities  is low among 
rural households  (49%) and inexistent among nomadic communities.31  
 
 
26 World Bank Database  
27 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey  
28 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey  
29 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey  
30 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey  
31 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey


---
*Page 120*
---

 
13 4.3. Literacy and education  
53. Educational attainment among women is very low. Overall, 75% of women aged 15 –49 have not 
attended any formal schooling. Twelve percent of women have some level of primary education, but 
only 3% completed primary schooling. Moreover, 5% of women attended s econdary school, but only 
3% completed secondary education. Three percent of women have completed higher levels of 
education.  
54. Literacy among women aged 15 –49 varies by place of residence. Among women residing in urban 
areas, 50% are literate, compared to 37% among those living in rural areas and 5% among women 
living in nomadic areas .32 
 
4.4. Voice and Representation  
55. A patriarchal  culture prevails in Somalia , and women are often excluded from political decision -making 
at national and community levels . At the national level, women  hold 25% of the seats  in the federal 
parliament through a quota  system . In the states of Puntland and Somaliland , women hold only 1% of 
the parliament seats. Twenty percent of the federal government  cabinet positions  are held by women,  
while in Somaliland , women  make up only 4% of the cabinet positions , and in Puntland,  only 1 out of 
18 cabinet  positions are held by women.  
56. Women’s limited representation  in leadership and national decision -making  positions is one of the 
reasons for the slow implementation of gender commitments included in the national gender policy and 
development plans and for the slow ratification of international conventions protecting the rights of 
women. There is high resistance from traditional clan and religious leaders to implement ing the political 
office quotas assigned to women.33 At the community level , in rural areas, most decisions are made by 
clan-based  committees  that are  entirely composed of men , excluding women.34 
57. Women’s decision -making at the household level is low compared to men. In the 2020 DHS, 90% and 
60% of women, respectively, reported that they take part in decisions about how to spend the cash they 
and their spouses earn. However, 45% said husbands alone make decisions on major household 
purchases. A significant proportion of women respondents also said decisions on their health care and 
mobility are made by their spouses. Forty -five percent of women said their spouses decide whether 
they should seek healt h care, and 48% said their spouses decide whether they can visit family members 
and relatives .35   
4.5 Entrepreneurship  
58. In the economic sector, women are overrepresented in the informal sector. Women’s entrepreneurship 
is constrained by low levels of literacy and access to support services and networks. Women have 
limited access to financial literacy, vocational, and busine ss skills training. They have low access to 
formal credit due to their limited ownership of property and productive assets, including land. A study 
commissioned by FAO and UNDP in sorghum, maize and sesame value chains in Somalia showed 
that women’ s partic ipation in the value chain s is con strained by their limited acces s to land and finance. 
Sevent y one percen t of women partic ipating in the study expressed la ck of finance to buy drought 
resist ant improved seeds and to access irrigation water by clearing or desilting water canals that pass 
through their farm.36 Although there is an emergence of micro -finance institutions, such as Micro Dahab, 
which provide loans to MSMEs, and a growing trend in the development of village -level saving and loan 
associations (VSLAs), women’s main source of capital to start their businesses is remittance. Most 
women entrepreneurs are engaged in petty trading  ventures as a survivalist -oriented business activity. 
Women’s limited mobility due to  shortage of time because of their  unpaid care  and domestic  work 
 
32 Somalia Health and Demography Survey, 2020  
33 UN Women and AFDB, 2020. Country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context  
34 FAO. 2021. National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods – Somalia. Mogadishu. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en  
35 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey.  
36 SCALA Private Sector Engagement Facility Report 2024


---
*Page 121*
---

 
14 responsib ility or socio -cultural norms  that restrict women from moving freely in public spaces  constrains 
the development of their businesses37￼  
4.6. Access to and control over resources  
59. Women in Somalia play a key role in both livestock and crop agriculture activities. They are responsible 
for the production of smaller livestock, dairy processing, and marketing, while men are responsible for 
the herding, slaughtering, and selling of large r animals. In crop agriculture, women are responsible for 
labour -intensive  tasks such as sowing, weeding, harvesting, threshing, and dehusking, while men are 
responsible for tasks such as land preparation and ploughing . In the fisheries sector, women parti cipate 
in processing. Women are also fully responsible for unpaid care work activities, such as fuelwood 
collection, which is time -consuming and exposes them to security risks, especially for women living in 
internally displaced people’s (IDP) camps. In ma rketing, men are involved in agriculture export 
activities, while women engage in selling small amounts of produce (cereals and vegetables) in local 
markets. Women also participate in the sale of fodder and grass .38 
60. Despite their role  in the household economy , women have limited access to and control over land and 
other assets. Results from the 2020 DHS show only 15% and 35% of women own land and a house, 
respectively, jointly with their spouses or alone.  Older women are more likely to have ownership of 
land and a house compared to younger women. For example, 60 percent of women  aged  45-49 years 
own a house, compared to 10 percent of women aged 15 -19. Twenty -six percent of women aged 45 -
49 own land, compared to 4 percent of women aged 15 -19.39 
61. Land is communally owned in Somalia and assigned to households for specific use by elders. Women’s 
access to land is curtailed by discriminatory customary practices. Customary laws do not consider 
women as independent legal people, and they are excluded fr om owning land. Women don’t own land, 
but they can have access rights through their husbands or brothers. However, they can easily lose their 
access to land when they become widows if they have no children or if they remarry outside of the 
family. Land gra bbing by male relatives after the death of a husband or father is very common in south -
central Somalia. Traditional land dispute settlement mechanisms usually do not favour  women’s land 
claims, as traditional and religious leaders often resist women’s land rights. Land insecurity is especially 
high among women -headed households .40  
62. Women have control over smaller livestock, such as goats, sheep, and chickens, while men have 
control over larger cattle and camels. However, the formal ownership rights of all livestock lie with the 
male heads of households. The marketing of livestock is usually controlled by men, who also decide 
on the income earned from the sale. Women have control only over the income earned from selling 
milk. 
4.7 Access to information  
63. Women’s access to agriculture extension services is limited due to time and mobility constraints as a 
result of unpaid care work responsibilities and social norms. Women often don’t participate in technical 
and vocational training as they tend to be organi zed far away from their village. Low levels of education 
and literacy among women are also a constraint on their participation. Women are not able to access 
veterinary services offered by the government, such as livestock vaccination services. Agriculture 
extension agents or animal health workers tend to be mainly dominated by men because it is 
considered socially unacceptable for women to move around without supervision .41  
64. Ninety -three percent of women in Somalia do not access any form of media, including newspapers, 
radio, and TV, at least once a week. Media access is especially low among the poorest category of 
women. TV is relatively more used by women in the highest weal th category to access information, 
while for the poorest households, radio is the most frequently used source of information. The use of 
 
37 UN Women and AFDB, 2020. Country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context  
38 FAO. 2021. National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods – Somalia. Mogadishu. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en  
39 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey  
40 FAO, 2016. Women’s land rights and territorial rights of Somali minorities in Somaliland.  
41 FAO. 2021. National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods – Somalia. Mogadishu. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en


---
*Page 122*
---

 
15 the internet is very low. Only 17% of women have ever used the internet. Among rural women, only 
12% have ever used the Internet, while in nomadic communities, only 1% have used the internet before.  
Mobile ownership is high among women with 75% of women owning a mobile phone. Mobile ownership 
is slightly less among women with no education (72%) co mpared to women with higher education 
(98%).  Sixty -seven percent of rural women and 59% of women living in nomadic communities own a 
mobile phone.  42 
4.8. Access to finance  
65. Women’s access to and control over credit is limited.  A study commissioned by FAO and UNDP in 
sorghum, maize and sesame value chains in Somalia found that 71% percent of women participating 
in the study expressed lack of finance. The reason for lack of finance for 44% was their inability to 
qualify for loan from banks. This was due to limited financial literacy for 29% of the respondents, 
because banks require a male guarantor for 25% of the respondents and lack of security to access 
loans for 20% of the r espondents. Sixteen  percent of the respondents also said they were not allowed 
to take loan and another 16% said capping the amount money women can access from banks was a 
problem for them .43 
66. Only 4% of women in Somalia have bank accounts, according to the 2020 DHS.  Although very few 
women own bank accounts,  the introduction of mobile money has enabled women to have a level of 
financial control. Sixty -four percent of women use their mobile phones for financial transactions.44   
4.9. Sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEAH)  
67. Conflict and displacement have heightened the risk of sexual and gender -based violence (SGBV) 
against women and girls. Men die due to the conflict or migrate from home, leaving women to assume 
headship roles. Women -headed households, especially those livin g in areas under the control of 
extremist groups, are displaced due to the loss of economic opportunities. Women and children make 
up 70 –80% of the population in IDPs .45 SGBV is common in IDPs because of instability, social 
breakdown, and limited leadership and control. Single women and women from minority groups are 
especially vulnerable to abuse because of the lack of clan protection. The persistence of clan mediation 
in SGBV cases exempts men and boys from facing prosecution, and there is a tendency to stigmatize 
and shame victims. Women in IDPs have little access to formal legal recourse .46  
4.10. Other forms of GBV  
68. Spousal violence is prevalent in Somalia. In the 2020 DHS, 12% of ever -married women reported that 
they had been abused physically by a spouse, while 4 percent reported emotional abuse by a spouse. 
The prevalence of spousal violence is high in urban areas (20%), compared to rural (14%), and 
Nomadic areas (11%). Few women (17%) out of those who experienced spousal violence have sought 
help. Thirty -six percent of women believe a husband is justified in beating his wife for a given number 
of reasons. The attit ude that justifies spousal violence is especially high (44%) among women in poorer 
households.  
69. FGM is highly prevalent in Somalia. Among  women aged 15 –49 years, 99 percent  have been 
circumcised . Out of these, 64% have gone through  pharaonic  circumcision, which  is the most severe 
form of circumcision . A huge proportion of women respondents  (76%) in the 2020 DHS said they want 
the practice to continue, while 72% believed that it is a religious obligation.47  
  
 
42 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey  
43 SCALA Private Sector Engagement Facility Report 2024  
44 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey  
45 FAO. 2021. National gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihoods – Somalia. Mogadishu. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en  
46 UN Women and AFDB, 2020. Country gender profile: trends of change in a fragile and fragmented context  
47 The federal democratic republic of Somalia, 2020. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey


---
*Page 123*
---

 
16 Part 5. Gender Inequalities Exacerbated by Climate Change   
70. The Somalia National Adaptation Plan of Action describes pastoralist communities, IDPs, and women 
as the most vulnerable groups to climate change. Although most communities must face climate risks 
and impacts, vulnerability of individuals varies depending on their adaptive capacity which is influenced 
by their gender, geography, types of livelihoods, and age.  
71. Pastoralists depend on range land grazing for their livestock and have very few fixed assets, which 
makes them vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. People living in IDP camps due to conflict or 
drought are vulnerable due to limited livelihood oppor tunities and pressure put on natural resources 
around IDP settlements. Women are vulnerable because of the gender division of labor, their unequal 
access to material and nonmaterial resources, and their low participation in decision -making. Women  
play a vi tal role in the management of natural resources and are often the most affected when negative 
impacts of climate variability and associated conflicts strikes. Conflicts disrupt social, economic, and 
natural systems, with devastating impacts on women’s live lihoods, household poverty, and agricultural 
productivity. Gender inequality and disempowerment among women further exposes women to 
vulnerability given their lack equal rights of ownership and control over land, property and other 
productive assets compar ed to their male counterparts. Their lack of participation in decision -making 
on the above matters undermines their capacities to cope, recover and adapt to climate change shocks, 
the situation is further compounded when gender roles and household structur es are altered, for 
example when men die in conflict, or migrate with livestock in search of pasture and water, women 
assume the role of heads of households - forced to provide for their homes despite the customary 
disempowerment.  
72. During a drought, while men migrate in search of employment, women are forced to become heads of 
households and primary breadwinners with limited assets and resources at their disposal. In crises, 
women must find solutions to feed their families. They must  walk long distances, 5 -8 km at times, to 
get water. They have challenges accessing fuelwood for household use and face security risks as they 
travel in search of fuelwood. When community elders meet to resolve issues around natural resources 
and disasters , women are not represented.  
73. FAO’s recent publication has revealed that e xtreme weather events would reduce the incomes of 
female -headed households significantly more than those of male -headed households48. Due to  
women’s  limited participation in economic sectors including non -farm employment, female -headed 
households have less opportunities to compensate on -farm income loss by off -farm earnings, 
compared to men.  
74. Women play a key role for food security in Somalia . Women are forced to adopt negative coping 
strategies when food is limited during droughts due to limited resources. They cope by limiting food 
consumption and prioritizing other members of the household, which exposes them to malnutrition.  
75. Climate change would increase the vulnerability and exposure of women and girls to GBV  and SEAH. 
Young girls are forced to go into commercial sex work for survival  in the event of droughts . Women are 
also exposed to an increased risk of sexual and gender -based violence in IDP camps during 
migration .49   
76. Increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events could  increase the risk of families 
undertaking early marriage for their female children. As families are anxious to secure economic 
security in case of extreme weather events, there has been an increased trend in cases of  FGM to 
ensure marriageability of their female children50.  
 
 
48 FAO. 2024. The unjust climate – Measuring the impacts of climate change on rural poor, women and youth. Rome.  
49 Federal Republic of Somalia, 2013. National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change (NAPA)  
50 UNFPA Somalia, 2021, Situation of Women and Girls - Drought in Somalia


---
*Page 124*
---

 
17 Part 6 . Gender Issues in the project implementation sites  
6.1. Gender profile of the implementation sites  
77. The project implementation sites are located in six states of Somalia, namely, South West, Hirsabel le, 
Puntland, Galmudug, Jubaland, and Somaliland. Most of the households in the implementation districts 
can be categorized as poor (74%), while about 26% are categorized as being in the middle wealth 
group.  
 
Table  Population in target districts  
Region  District  Children  Men Women  Elderly  Total  
Lower Juba  Kismayo  201,831  46,777  43,510  11,581  303,700  
Lower Shabelle  Afgooye  289,821  83,436  81,201  17,766  472,223  
Baraawe  34,657  9,203  9,662  1,253  54,775  
Kurtunwaarey  42,617  10,188  9,454  2,209  64,467  
Qoryooley  81,036  21,419  20,264  3,824  126,545  
Middle Shabelle  Cadale  45,884  10,958  11,714  2,370  70,925  
Jowhar  241,759  57,966  53,777  12,398  365,900  
Mudug  Hobyo  99,265  27,968  25,622  6,161  159,016  
Nugaal  Eyl 87,316  22,738  22,028  11,752  143,834  
Garowe  173,307  49,628  45,802  11,820  280,557  
Togdheer  Owdweyne  50,341  14,009  14,440  4,099  82,889  
Source: UNFPA, 2014, Somalia - Subnational Population Statistics  
 
78. The main sources of income for households in the project sites are farming (51%), followed by livestock 
sales and cash assistance (28%), and humanitarian cash support (14%). Very few households (7%) 
rely on income from small businesses. The main crops cult ivated by households include maize, 
sorghum, cowpeas, mug beans, and vegetables. Fodder production is also common in Somaliland.  
79. Women are more involved in crop farming activities, carrying out tasks such as planting, weeding, 
harvesting, and collecting. Men are responsible for watering crops or irrigation. In livestock production, 
women are responsible for the production of smaller  livestock like goats and sheep and dairy 
processing and marketing, while men are responsible for moving livestock to range lands and selling 
large quantities of livestock.  
80. Gender roles and relationships on the project sites are similar to gender relations in the broader country 
context described in the previous sections. A strong patriarchal culture based on a clan system 
predominates in the project sites. There are huge gen der inequalities in various aspects of life. Women 
and girls have limited rights under customary laws, and they are excluded from decision -making 
institutions in the community .  
6.2. Gender gaps identified  
81. The project sites are largely agro -pastoral areas where households rely both on crop and livestock 
production for their livelihoods. Most farm decisions, such as the type of seed varieties to cultivate, farm 
inputs and technologies to use, or the type of l ivestock breeds to rear, are made by men. According to 
survey respondents, these decisions are made by men alone in 50% of the cases or in consultation 
with women in their households in 30% of the cases. In the survey, women made decisions alone in 
12% of the cases where the households were led by single women.  
82. Survey respondents in the project sites mentioned that women are reached by agricultural extension 
and nutrition training in 83% of the cases. However, previous assessments carried out by FAO and UN 
Women show women’s access to agriculture extension servic es is limited due to time and mobility 
constraints as a result of unpaid care work responsibilities and social norms. A qualitative assessment 
carried out with key informants in Somaliland also indicated that women’s time is limited by unpaid care


---
*Page 125*
---

 
18 work responsibilities in addition to their roles in agriculture production. Men typically perform less than 
1 hour of work on domestic and unpaid care work activities and usually work for half a day on productive 
activities. Women, on the other hand, work from 5 a.m. to 10 p.m. in various productive and care 
activities. This can limit their ability to participate in agricultural training, visit marketplaces, develop 
their network, and access information.  
83. Access to credit is limited for both men and women in the project sites. The most common sources of 
credit are vendors. Households get goods and services on credit from stores and pay them off in kind. 
Mobile financial transactions are common. There is als o an emergence of village -level saving and loan 
associations organized with the support of NGOs. Women are engaged in VSLAs and able to pool 
small funds.  
84. VSLA  (Village Saving and Loan Association)  is a self help  group of women  who come together, form 
groups, save small amount of money every month and take small loans from those savings . The groups 
are trained on the VSLA methodology and life skills. The g roups have five management committees 
and a guiding constitution. Through VSLAs,  group members would learn the culture of saving. This 
would give women the opportunity to access loans that can be used to start or improve an existing 
business, cover emergencies since access to formal loans is a challeng e and it requires 
documentations.  FAO works towards linking these VSLA groups to formal financial services and this 
would give women the opportunity to access ample amount of loans that can be used to improve and 
diversify their incom e 
85. Both men and women engage in the marketing of agricultural products. However, their level of 
engagement is hugely different. Men usually sell large quantities of livestock in local and export 
markets, while women sell livestock products such as meat and da iry in local markets. Income from the 
sale of livestock is controlled by men, while women can control income earned from the sale of dairy 
and meat.  
86. Key informants interviewed indicated that women in the project sites have needs for training on livestock 
production, information about markets, support to access markets, and extension services such as 
vaccination services, fodder, feed, and water for liv estock. Women also indicated the need to improve 
their control over income from livestock production. Men indicated a need for access to fodder, feed, 
and water.   
6.3. Barriers  
87. The barriers to gender equality in agriculture in the target areas are socio -cultural norms and capacity 
gaps at institutional and policy levels.  
88. Socio -cultural norms influence various aspects of life that contribute to limiting women’s roles, 
opportunities, and the benefits they can enjoy in agriculture. Gender -based social norms assign almost 
all unpaid care work to women, which limits the time th ey have to engage in productive work, participate 
in agricultural trainings and meetings, participate in political activities, or spend time on their 
businesses. Social norms also restrict women’s ability to travel to access various agricultural services, 
inputs, and markets. Social norms influence who makes decisions in the household on agricultural 
inputs and technologies, the use of assets like land and livestock, and the use of income from 
agricultural production. Most of these decisions are made by men  with very limited consultation with 
women. Women’s ability to make decisions on a wide variety of issues, starting from their engagement 
in economic activities to mobility and their health, is curtailed by social norms.   
89. Gender -based social norms also indirectly restrict women’s ability to access agriculture extension 
advisory services. Various studies show women’s access to agricultural extension is improved when 
there are female extension agents. Literature review and key informant interviews in the project districts 
show there are no or a very limited number of female extension agents because of the belief that it is 
inappropriate for women to move from place to place without supervision.  
90. At the institutional level, there are capacity gaps in agriculture advisory services to provide gender -
sensitive services. Extension services don’t take into account women’s mobility restrictions or unpaid 
care work responsibilities. There is limited entre preneurship training support for women engaged in the


---
*Page 126*
---

 
19 off-farm segment of agrifood systems. Although there are some positive developments, financial 
institutions do not have products that are responsive to the needs of women entrepreneurs.  
91. At the national level, there are challenges in turning policy commitments into action. Gender targets set 
in national development plans are not turned into implementation programs backed by budget. Policy 
documents like the NAPA, while recognizing women’s vulnerability to climate change, fail to identify 
specific measures to reduce their vulnerability in the action plan. Women’s land and property rights are 
challenged because of the failure or slow process to ratify international legal instruments that prot ect 
women’s rights, like the CEDAW, and enact national laws that can check the customary practices that 
discriminate against women.  
 
6.4. Gender roles and barriers in maize, sesame, sorghum and fodder value chains  
6.4.1. Sorghum value chain  
92. About 80% of the sorghum production in the project districts is produced by subsistent smallholder 
producers who grow sorghum mostly for their own consumption, with little surplus sold directly to 
consumers, middlemen, or retailers. Sorghum is used by smal lholders for household consumption and 
as fodder for livestock in agro -pastoralist areas.  
93. Smallholder producers usually use family labor for production and rarely use inputs such as certified 
seeds and fertilizers for sorghum production. They usually use their own seeds saved from the previous 
harvest or emergency seed provided by NGOs. Most of  the production activities and harvesting are 
done using hand tools.  
94. Women are involved at all stages of the value chain in production, processing, and marketing. In some 
production areas, they own about 50% of the total sorghum production. Women are involved in planting 
sorghum, weeding, harvesting, winnowing, storing, and  processing it into flour. Men are responsible for 
land preparation and threshing, and they also participate in plating, weeding, harvesting, and 
transporting together with women. Women are solely responsible for processing, taking sorghum to 
mills in smal l towns.  
95. Women make up most of the retail vendors in local cereal markets, working in open -air stores and 
selling sorghum grains with the husk removed or as flour. They buy the sorghum from whole sellers in 
off-seasons or directly from producers in harvest seasons.  Young people are mostly involved in the 
marketing and distribution of sorghum.  
96. The profit margins of retailers and wholesalers are low compared to other actors who participate in the 
value chain, such as producers and middlemen. Due to the high quality of imported sorghum, retailers 
of locally produced sorghum don’t make much money.  
97. Farmers access production information on best practices of sorghum cultivation, land preparation, 
planting, climate -related information, pest management, and harvesting from extension workers or 
other farmers. They get information on market demand, consumer preference, and pricing from traders 
and middlemen.51 
 
6.4.2. Maize value chains  
98. About 70% of the maize production in the project districts comes from smallholder producers with an 
average land size of 0.2 –3 hectares. Maize production systems are irrigated, but rain failure in the 
Shebel le river basin affects farmers ability to irrigate their farms. Climate -related temperature variations 
are also increasing the risk of pests.  
 
51 FAO 2024, Sorghum, Maize and Sesame value chains in Somalia, Scala private sector engagement facility report.


---
*Page 127*
---

 
20 99. Both men and women participate in maize value chains in production and marketing. Men are 
responsible for the purchase and application of inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides. Both men and 
women participate in planting, irrigating, weeding, and harves ting. 
100. Women are involved in trading maize, selling small volumes of maize in local markets. They also 
sell maize stalks for fodder. Men are involved in transporting large quantities of maize to markets to sell 
to commercial traders.52 
 
6.4.3. Sesame value chain  
101. Sesame is a commercial crop in the project district s. Smallholder producers and commercial 
farmers are involved in sesame production. Most of the producers are smallholders with 1 –2.5 hectares 
of land. Commercial production accounts for only 20% of the total sesame production. Sesame is 
produced in both ir rigation and rain -fed systems.  
102. Village traders buy from small producers and aggregate and sell to whole sellers, oil millers, and 
exporters. Oil millers or processors are mostly located in the capital city of Mogadishu, with a few 
processors also located in towns like Baido a and Jowhar. Retailers serve as links between processors 
and local consumers. About 25% of the production is exported. Waste from the processed oil is used 
as animal feed.  
103. Women play a key role in the sesame value chain. Women make up 70% of the work force in the 
sesame value chain. At the production stage, while land preparation and planting are done by men, 
most other activities are undertaken by women and youth. Women are  engaged in processing, cleaning, 
salting, and drying. Women dominate small -scale se same  trading and oil processing cooperatives.  
104. There are projects that support women in accessing information about good farming practices in 
sesame production through farmer field schools and demonstration plots and by hiring female extension 
agents to reach women farmers.53 
 
6.4.4.  Fodder Value chain  
105. The fodder value chain in the project districts includes fresh cut green grass, maize, and sorghum 
chopped and fed to animals, as well as whole dry sorghum stalks stacked, milled, and fed to animals.  
106. Both men and women participate in the fodder value chain. Men are responsible for planting 
sorghum, maize, and millet that will be used for fodder, applying pesticides to fodder crops, and cutting 
and stacking sorghum stover. Women are responsible for pres erving seed for the new season, 
preparing irrigation trenches in fodder farms, doing the weeding, harvesting green sorghum and maize 
fodder, and, together with men, transporting sorghum stovers on a donkey to markets. Organized 
women groups participate in the fodder value chain by leasing land to grow sorghum for use as green 
or dry fodder and engaging in fodder processing, such as milling, adding grain, and packing.  
107. Women are also fully responsible for feeding and fattening livestock and milk production and 
marketing. However, their control over livestock is limited. Women usually own only goats and sheep 
that have been given to them as gifts. However, they have contr ol over the money from all milk 
production. They particularly control sheep and goats.54 
 
52 FAO 2024, Sorghum, Maize and Sesame value chains in Somalia, Scala private sector engagement facility report.  
53 FAO 2024, Sorghum, Maize and Sesame value chains in Somalia, Scala private sector engagement facility report.  
54 FAO, 2024. Gender baseline assessment report for the Somalia Information and Resilience Building Action Phase II.


---
*Page 128*
---

 
21 6.4.5.  Challenges and gender related barriers  in the value chains  
108. The challenges smallholder farmers face in the sorghum, maize, sesame  and fodder  value chains 
are similar. In all three value chains, a lack of inputs for producers, such as improved certified seeds, 
low use of fertilizers, and mechanization services, is a challenge for smallholders. It contributes to low 
productivity.  
109. The absence of adequate extension and research services to support farmers in making decisions 
on the selection of appropriate seeds and farming techniques is another challenge.  Access to credit for 
smallholders is also limited. Middle men provide credit to farmers, sometimes accepting surplus grain 
as profit.  
110. Lack of access to market information and market opportunities is a challenge for women 
cooperatives engaged in sesame and fodder production. A project on promoting inclusive markets in 
Somalia has tried to address the gaps in market access by developing a digitalized market information 
system that provides real -time data on market prices, demand, and supply.  
111. Women participating in the value chains face additional barriers due to gender relationships. For 
example, women have limited access to land or face land tenure insecurity arising from socio -cultural 
norms and a lack of legal systems that protect their rig ht to land. Land is passed through patrilineal 
lines. Women don’t inherit land. Widows with children may have control over land and decide on it 
together with male relatives and grown -up children. Women can be allocated land to grow fodder and 
vegetables b y their husbands.  
112. Women have challenges accessing extension services due to their unpaid care work 
responsibilities, which limit the time they have , to participate in agricultural trainings and meetings.  
113. Although both men and women farmers lack access to credit, women’s access is further 
constrained because they are not able to meet the requirements for credit, such as collateral. Socio -
cultural norms do not allow women to take out loans from financial ins titutions. Banks ask women who 
apply for loans to prove a male guarantor or cap the amount of loan women can access. Banks consider 
women borrowers to be at high risk. Poor literacy levels also prohibit women from borrowing.  
 
6.5. Intersectional nature of gender inequality  
114. While the gender assessment showed women as a group have limited access to assets and 
resources, livelihood opportunities, and decision -making power as a result of gender relationships, it 
also indicated that other factors such as geographic location, age, household demographics, and 
wealth status contribute to the social and economic empowerment and wellbeing outcomes of 
individuals and households. People can experience de privation and inequality as a result of their age, 
wealth, geographic location, and household composition. These other forms of inequality, however, 
interact with gender inequality to create multiple layers of vulnerability and deeper levels of deprivation  
for women and girls.  
115. In the project districts and in the country at large, most households are poor and live below or close 
to poverty lines. However, men and women living in rural areas, IDPs, and nomadic communities 
experience deeper levels of poverty. Multidimensional indic ators of poverty show nomadic communities 
have the highest level of deprivation, with low access to education, health, water supply and sanitation, 
electricity, and internet services.  
116. Age is a factor affecting the economic and social wellbeing of individuals, with young and elderly 
people experiencing discrimination and inequality. Young people have lower access to land, livestock, 
and other assets and have limited livelihood opportunit ies. However, the situation of young women is 
even more vulnerable than that of young men because, in addition to age, gender -based socio -cultural


---
*Page 129*
---

 
22 norms restrict their livelihood opportunities. Young women are even less likely to own assets such as 
land or livestock. They have fewer opportunities for employment due to discrimination. They face 
pressure to marry early. Young women  from poorer households are vulnerable to engaging in 
commercial sex work. Elderly men and women are increasingly experiencing vulnerability due to 
weakening community support mechanisms and the absence of targeted programs that address their 
needs. Elderl y women living in IDP s experience deeper levels of vulnerability. Age combined with 
household status can create worse outcomes for elderly women. Elderly widows are vulnerable to 
poverty, and they are often victims of sexual, gender -based violence in IDPs.  
117. Household size and composition affect households’ vulnerability to poverty. Female -headed 
households are not necessarily poorer than male -headed households. However, looking beyond the 
gender of the household head at other household dynamics reveals that d ifferent household 
demographic factors combined with gender heighten households’ vulnerability. For example, widow -
headed households have a higher risk of poverty. Families with single female heads, a large number 
of children, and a lower number of people earning income in the household are at greater risk of poverty. 
Land insecurity is higher among women -headed households. Women -headed households living in 
areas controlled by extremist groups have lower economic opportunities and are vulnerable to 
displace ment. Single women and women from minority clan groups are vulnerable to SGBV in IDPs 
and have little option for formal legal recourse.  
 
Part 7. Strategies to integrate gender into the project  
7.1. Formulation and implementation  
118. The gender action plan in this section is developed by analyzing how the gender relationships 
described above will affect the way men and women can participate and benefit from the project 
intervention. The section below provides gender -based  constraints that can affect the realization of the 
objectives of the project under each of the project components. This is followed by strategies and 
actions that can be adopted by the project to address these gender -based  constraints.  The final section 
also includes inward -looking  strategies  that will help the project staff and partners develop the 
capacities needed to deliver a gender -sensitive  project.  
119. The gender action plan  takes account of the deeper levels of inequality and deprivation experienced 
by women  in IDPs and rural communities and widowed women who are heads of households as well 
as women headed households with larger number of children and lower number of economically active 
memb ers in the household. The gender action plan  also recognizes the limited livelihood opportunities 
and discrimination affecting young w omen and the specific vulnerabilities experienced by elderly 
women. Al l of these factors will be taken into account in targeting and selection of beneficiaries under 
the different components of the project. The project will ensure the inclusion of women from minority 
clan/ ethnic groups in all consultation activities.  The implementation of the gender action plan will be 
led by an international Gender, Social Inclusion and IP Specialist  (part time) and a national Gender 
Specialist (full time)  in collaboration with the National Project Coordinator, international Technical 
Advis or as well as relevant technical experts . 
120. Under component one , the project aims to establish participatory landscape and natural resources 
management and governance systems at sub-watershed levels. Due to social norms that restrict 
women’s mobility and representation in the public sphere, women are likely to be excluded from the 
consultation  process and management committees. Young people, especially young women are also 
likely to be excluded from the consultation processes and management committees. The project  will 
address the barrier to women’s participation by organizing community dialogues targeting clan and 
traditional leaders, men and women , on the importance of including women in landscape management 
committees and in consultations to design landscape management plans. The project will also set  
quotas for the representation of women  and young people  in landscape management committees  at 
various levels  as well as for proportion of women who will participate in landscape management


---
*Page 130*
---

 
23 consultations. In addition, gender assessment (including SEAH/GBV related risks) will be included in a 
detailed conflict sensitivity assessment to be conducted under sub -activity 1.1.2.2 , which will inform the 
project implementation approach .  
121. Component two of the project aims to develop the resilience of local livelihoods to climate change 
by improving the management of water supply systems, building capacities on climate -resilient 
agriculture practices, and supporting farmers to develop climat e-resilient value chains. Existing gender 
relations can pose various challenges that affect the achievement of the project objectives under this 
component. While the involvement of women in Water User Association  Committee s (WUAC)  can 
improve the sustainab le management of water supply schemes, traditional norms can restrict the 
participation of women in WUACs . Women’s ability to benefit from the trainings on climate -resilient 
agriculture practices may be limited due to time and mobility restrictions and a culture of exclusion by 
agriculture extension agents who do not consider women as clients. A gender -blind value chain 
development intervention can limit women’s ability to benefit from value chain development activities 
as women have limited access to entre preneurship support services and credit due to structural 
barriers.  
122. The project will address these barriers in the following ways: The project will set a quota to increase 
the representation of women in WUACs  and train women committee members on scheme management 
and basic maintenance. The training on scheme  management and basic maintenance will also target 
young people, especially young women . Training and supporting women to engage in traditionally male -
dominated roles has the potential to shift attitudes within the community about gender roles, and the 
trained women can also become role models for other women in the community. To ensure women’ s 
access to advisory support in climate -resilient agriculture prac tices, the project will make a conscious 
effort to select women among the lead farmers / facilitators  who will receive TOT and facilitato rs training 
by setting a quota system.  Effort will also be made to include young people, especially women among 
the trainees to become facilitators on climate resilient  agriculture extension practices. Women 
extension agents and facilitators are better able to reach other women farmers. Each lead farmer and 
facilitator will be expected to reach from 15 to 30 other farmers.   
123. The project will also include a gender assessment of the rural advisory services system to identify 
barriers and good practices to improve women’s access to advisory services in the country and develop 
a gender strategy for the agriculture extension departm ent. The gender and rural advisory services 
assessment will be conducted in partnership with the ministry of agriculture using a tool developed by 
FAO, Gender Sensitive  Rural Advisory Services Assessment Tool (GRAST ).  
124. Following the assessment, capacity -building training on how to develop and deliver gender -
sensitive advisory services will be cascaded down, targeting agriculture extension staff at various 
levels.  The training will be  based on the gaps identified in the gender and rural advisory services 
assessment. The training will be conducted using  a training manua l developed by FAO for agriculture 
extension agents. The topics that will be covered in the training include: basic gender concepts and 
why gender equality m atters; gender gaps in Somalia in agriculture and extension services; the role of 
women in agriculture production and the gaps in access to assets and advisory services; gender 
analysis tools that can be used by extension agents, such as, the use of season al calendars and daily 
activity chart to plan and deliver agriculture extension activities; gender division of labour  in agriculture 
and extension advisory services using different scenarios as examples on how extension agents can 
reach and provide service s to women farmers; institutional mapping of extension service providing 
organizations and women’s access to these organizations; gender sensitive stakeholder analysis and 
gender sensitive agriculture value chains development.  At the end of the training, the extension agents 
will be asked to develop short - and long -term action plans that will help them address the challenges 
they face in reaching women farmers in extension advisory services and the support and resources 
they need to implement the action pl an. 
125. The training will be conducted at the national level to train national and state agriculture department 
staff on a TOT of gender -sensitive advisory services. Then the training will be conducted in each of the 
six project states, inviting extension agents f rom the project districts in collaboration with national 
agriculture experts who have received the ToT. The results of the training and changes in the 
knowledge and practice of extension agents will be monitored using the action plans developed at the


---
*Page 131*
---

 
24 end of the training. The training will also have a KAP assessment that will be administered at the 
beginning and end of the training.   
126. Under component 2, the project will support women candidates for being elected as board 
members of WUACs through capacity building for the WUACs including raising awareness of the 
importance of women as women representation in the decision making positions need to be enhanced .  
Under Activity 2.1.2, the project will rehabilitate and restore irrigation and water supply infrastructures 
based on a detained needs assessment. The project will also consult with WUACs  to develop 
frameworks for equitable access to water and conflict prevention mechanisms. In addition, the project 
will deploy water -saving techniques to farmers, such as drip irrigation kits and solar -operated pumping 
systems, and provide training to increase water use efficiency. In this activity, it is important to ensure 
that the water infrastructure constructed and rehabilitated is also informed by the water use needs of 
men and women. For example, in addition to using water for productive purposes, women also shoulder 
the responsibility of securing  water for cropping and for livestock.  The training on water -saving 
technologies should include women and youth farmers. Women and youth farmers should also be 
supported to access drip irrigation kits and solar operating pumping systems organized in farmer 
groups.  
127. The project will undertake several activities to ensure the benefit of women from value chain 
development interventions. A gender -sensitive seed value chain analysis will be conducted to 
understand sources of seed for women and men, their ability to pay, a nd storage capacity to develop 
a subsidy system that takes account of the needs of both men and women.   Women’s groups engaged 
in seed production will be identified and supported through training to engage in the seed multiplication 
business. The project w ill also identify value chains where women are overrepresented and have a 
potential for growth to provide support to women entrepreneurs in vocational and business skills 
development and investment readiness, linking them with financing institutions  and markets . In 
targeting of beneficiaries in value chain development interventions the project will target groups of 
women  who are vulnerable to poverty, such as, single women heads of households with large family 
size and fewer number of economically active ho usehold members and widowed women hea ds of 
households with limited ownership of assets. The targeting will also focus on young people, especially 
young women with limited livelihood opportunities.    
128. The success of women entrepreneurs supported by the project will be measured through indicators 
such as the number of women entrepreneurs who have been able to enter into new and more lucrative 
value chains and the number of women entrepreneurs who have be en able to access new markets and 
increase their sales and income.  
129. The project will engage financial institutions to influence the development /improvement  of financial 
products that are suitable for women agripreneurs, such as non -collateral -based credit systems, for 
example, loans through group guarantee systems. Selected women agripreneurs will be supported to 
develop business plans using FAO’s Rural Inve st Tool. B2B meetings will be organized between 
women business owners and financial institutions to help them present their business plans and identify 
funding opportuni ties. Finally, the project will also train women entrepreneurs on financial readiness 
and provide them with small grants to register their businesses, carry out audits, and fulfil other 
requirements that prepare them to access credit.  In targeting and selectin of women entrepreneurs for 
support attention will be paid to include young women and single women heads of households  
supporting large families and widowed women heads of households as much as possible.  
130. Under activity 2.3.4, the project will support the rehabilitation of market infrastructure, including 
rural roads and cattle corridors, to ensure that access is un -interrupted even during climate extremes. 
Furthermore, the project also creates new market p oles to promote local exchanges and increase 
economic activity among local users. Given that women play a significant role in agriculture trade, 
especially in local markets, it will be important to ensure that they are consulted in the construction of 
mark et infrastructure, such as rural roads and district and village -level regrouping points for small 
ruminants. Gender -sensitive market infrastructure would include sex -segregated sanitation facilities 
and measures to ensure safety and security in the market.  
131. Component three of the project focuses on developing an institutional enabling environment for 
sustainable landscape management and climate -resilient agriculture at the state and federal levels.


---
*Page 132*
---

 
25 One of the outputs to realize this outcome is increasing farmer and livestock producers' access to 
climate information through digital early warning and decision -making tools through agreements with 
cell phone service providers. Although a significant prop ortion of women in the project sites have mobile 
phones, most women don’t access the internet. There is no evidence of the use of mobile devices to 
access information for agriculture. The project will conduct a gender assessment on how men and 
women farmer s access information on agriculture and the barriers to using digital services to access 
information on agriculture, including good practices and approaches that facilitate access and use of 
digital information for agriculture decision -making by men and wo men farmers. The assessment will 
inform the development of the early warning system and other digital agriculture advisory services. 
Care will be taken to ensure the information shared through the digital platform is relevant to women 
and the value chains they are engaged in, and the format is accessible to women with low levels of 
literacy. The project will also organize sensitization events to encourage the use of digital tools by 
women to access information on agriculture.  
132. Finally , the project will organize a gender capacity -building  training for FAO and partner s’ staff to 
enable them to deliver the project activities and outputs in an inclusive manner. The training will cover 
topics such as basic ge nder concepts, how to undertake gender analysis  and use information from 
gender analysis to inform the project cycle, sector -specific  approaches , and strategies that can be used 
to integrate gender in climate change  programs and projects. The training will also strengthen  the 
capa city of participants  to become fully aware of  SEAH/GBV risks a nd involved in preventing and 
responding to SEAH/GBV related issues . An annual gender review will be carried out by the country's  
gender focal point to monitor the progress in gender mainstreaming  in the project and to bring partners 
together to review progress and share experiences around gender mainstreaming.  
133. The project team will ensure that female field staff either from FAO field offices or from the Service 
Providers will be involved when the project engages with communities and provide trainings. The 
project team will make sure, with the support of local au thorities and village elders, that women will be 
invited to trainings, meetings and FFS sessions in target communities by raising awareness of local 
authorities and village elders on the importance of gender equality. Female field staff with the support 
of international and national gender specialists will assess in each of the target districts whether 
separate training sessions/meetings need to be organized for women or whether mixed groups of 
women and men can be targeted.  Female field staff  will play a role  on influencing an individual’s self -
confidence or self -awareness while enhancing a woman’s capacity to speak and to be able to determine 
what is more likely to work in their situation.  Any barriers for women to participate in the project activities 
will be further assessed by field staff and international/national gender specialists  at the inception phase 
and throughout the project implementation . 
134. The project will address GBV / SEAH  and gender inequality  using an integrated approach that will 
enhance the interaction among Gender on economic activities. The project will use approaches such 
as the Gender Action Learning System  as part of operationalization of VSLAs under sub-activity 2.3.3.1 . 
Gender Action Learning System (GALS) is a community -led empowerment methodology using specific 
participatory processes and diagram tools that aims to give women as well as men more control over 
their lives as the basis for individual, household, community and org anizational development55. The 
methodology as well as the steps of the GALS methodology are described in a manual described by 
IFAD56. This methodology includes 5 phases : (i) Change catalyst  starts with a change catalyst 
workshop whi ch is an introduction to GALS basic tools (1 to 2 months), (ii) Community Action 
Learning  starts after the catalyst workshop, and includes implementation of desired change, upscaling 
through pee r sharing, monitoring and documentation (12 months), (iii) Participatory Gender Review  
which is a qualitative and quantitative assessment of achievements in terms of gender relations, (iv) 
Livelihoods and Value Chain Development  which focus is to increase income, production and access 
to market and mainstreaming into  economic and social dynamics  and, (v) Sustainability which includes 
linking into natio nal institutions public and private actors with c ommunity volunteers.  
 
55 https://p4cda.net/gender -action -learning -system -gals/  
56 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/45173373/htdn_gals.pdf/38ec05a9 -d0a9 -3559 -6306 -
d73b5db550dc?t=1648470620545


---
*Page 133*
---

 
26 7.2. Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting  
135. The project will collect sex -disaggregated data throughout  the log  frame where relevant. Gender -
sensitive  quantitative and qualitative indicators will be used to monitor and measure the progress of 
outputs included in the gender action plan.  The section below  provides a list of gender indicators 
included under different project outputs and outcomes.  
136. Under component one , the project will collect data on the proportion of wome n and young people  
who are included in landscape management committees. The project will also monitor the number of 
dialogue meeti ngs organized with traditional and clan leaders and other members of the community to 
sensitize people about the importance of including women  and young people  in consultation processes 
during the participatory design of landscape management plans and the need to ensure they are 
represented  in community structures  established for landscape and natural resources management.   
137. Under component two, the project will collect quantitative data on the proportion of women  and 
young people  represented in WUACs  and the proportion of women lead farmers selected and trained 
in climate -resilient agriculture practices. Data will also be collected on the number of trainings organized 
and the number of agriculture extension agents trained in gender -sensitive extension advisory services. 
On the developm ent of climate -resilient value chains, the project will collect data on the number of 
women’s groups supported to organize in seed multiplication groups and the num ber of women  and 
youth  entrepreneurs trained in business skills development, financial management, and vocational 
training. The project will collect data on the number of women and youth entrepreneurs who have been 
able to enter into new and more lucrative value chains and the number of women  and youth  
entrepreneurs who have been able to access new markets and increase their sales and income. The 
project will also collect data on the number of dialogue meetings organized between financial 
institutions and w omen  and youth  entrepreneurs, the number of women  and young people  who are 
supported to develop business plans, and the number of women -led businesses  and businesses owned 
by young people  that received credit.  The project will also monitor the number of gender sensitive 
financial products and services developed by financial institutions engaged by the project.  
138. Under  component three , the project will monitor the proportion of women users out of the total users 
of digital early warning  and agricultural advisory services . Various gender assessments will also be 
conducted throughout  the project, which will help to capture qualitative information.  
139. Under output 3.1, improving legal frameworks and implementation  modalities on natural resource 
management, the project will conduct a gender review of the legal and institutional framework on 
sustainable land management to identify gaps. Following the review, policy dialogues will be conducted 
to address gaps identified in the gender review of the l egal and institutional frameworks of sustainable 
land management and to improve coordination between different sectors.  
140. There will be a participatory  annual  project  review to assess the progress  made  in mainstreaming 
gender in the project implementation . The  review will also be used as an opportunity to bring 
implementing partners together  and share experiences on what is working well and what needs to be 
improved in gender mainstreaming in the project.   
7.3. Mitigation of the risks related to SEAH and  GBV  
141. The project will be guided by FAO’s guidelines on gender equality and the prevention of gender -
based violence, which are included in the organization's Framework for Environmental and Social 
Management. The guideline aims to strengthen capacity to prevent,  mitigate, and respond to GBV and 
abuse that may occur in connection with any FAO -supported activity. It also aims to prevent and 
minimize the unintended negative effects that can increase vulnerability and exposure to GBV, heighten 
tension between men and  women, and ensure proper and timely referral to relevant services for cases 
of disclosure of GBV and other abuse, including sexual exploitation and abuse, that may occur in 
connection with any FAO -supported activity.  
142. The project will raise the awareness of stakeholders participating in the project about the links 
between GBV /SEAH  and food insecurity in the context of the project in Somalia and opportunities for 
FAO to prevent GBV /SEAH  and contribute to the protection of vulnerable individuals. The project will


---
*Page 134*
---

 
27 build the capacity of staff and other project stakeholders on the rights of serviced communities and the 
responsibilities of FAO personnel, implementing partners, and suppliers. It will also build their capacity 
on the guiding principles outlined below, wh ich will be implemented by the project.  
143. The guiding principles that will be implemented by the project to address the risks of gender -based 
violence include:  (1) Understand local context and build on local capacities, respect to local culture ; (2) 
Ensure safety and dignity of all people and avoid causing harm ; (3) Ensure  inclusive access paying 
attention to issues that prevent people from accessing services and support provided by the project ; 
(4) Ensuring participation and empowerment of men and women by communicating the program 
activities and engaging the m in the project cycle using locally appropriate channels ; (5) Coordination 
and partnership with organizations with GBV /SEAH  expertise within the project areas ; (6) Ensuring 
accountability to targ et population by setting up mechanisms to receive feedback on adequacy of 
interventions and to understand and address concerns  
144. The project will also adhere to a zero -tolerance policy for sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and 
sexual harassment. The project will adopt victim -centered feedback, a compliant mechanism, and 
referral services.  
145. FAO Somalia has a dedicated unit dealing with GRM and in -house developed GRM system (Co -
Compliance, Complaint and Feedback) to handle complaints and feedback, and associated policies. 
CoCO is a system that integrates and manages the data on compliance, com plaints and feedback 
gathered via the different tools available (hotline, call centre, TiMO -monitoring via digital solution, SMS 
surveys, emails, etc). The CoCo system enables FAO to respond to communities’ concerns 
systematically and timely, thus increasi ng community voice and power. CoCO is accessible and 
responsive to vulnerable people, including women, people with disabilities and other minority groups.  
FAO Somalia Staff who handle the CoCO system are trained in gender sensitivity as well as on 
Prevent ion of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA/PSEA).  
146. Beneficiaries are made aware of FAO’s toll -free Hotline number, operating on 24hours basis, that 
they can call at any time to provide feedback, complaint and report cases of fraud, diversion, sexual 
exploitation, and abuse. Beneficiaries can also lodge com plaints or give feedback regarding FAO 
activities in the field via FAO’s Implementing Partners and Local Representatives who are recorded in 
FAO’s E -Platform. Hotline is communicated via several means such as during sensitization and 
communication sessions , in the consent form, radio campaigns, leaflet, call centre and mandatory bulk 
SMS Voice messages. FAO’s Hotline is in FAO Hargeisa field office and is handled by two FAO staff 
members who are Somali speakers and speak also local dialect. The Hotline numb er is toll -free to the 
callers and covers the entire Somalia thus allowing the most vulnerable to call without cost.  
147. Awareness/radio campaigns are launched to accompany all major activities to inform the population 
at large and beneficiaries specifically of activities, criteria and entitlements associated with participation 
in FAO projects. Bulk SMS (text and voice) are sent systematically to beneficiaries before activity starts 
to provide FAO Hotline and entitlement. FAO conducts regular radio Public Service Announcements 
specific to PSEA/GBV to encourage beneficiaries and communities to report incidents to FAO and 
provi des FAO’s Hotline number and information where else to denounce it.  
148. FAO Somalia established clear reporting channels and response mechanisms for beneficiaries and 
community members and favors the direct contact with beneficiaries via the Call Centre, FAO’s toll -free 
hotline, Voice SMS and AAP staff handling CoCo; however o ther mechanisms are available to 
communities via elders, implementing partners, district authorities, other platforms managed by other 
organizations (TalktoLoop, Radio Ergo), and anonymous emails.  
149. The GRM will be survivor -centered and gender -responsive and will have specific procedures for 
SEAH, including confidential reporting and safe and ethical documenting. To ensure the GRM is 
accessible, inclusive, and survivor -centered, clear information on h ow to access the GRM will be widely 
disseminated among stakeholders. The GRM will be designed to be easily accessible to all project 
stakeholders. Training and awareness -raising sessions will be conducted to ensure all personnel 
involved in the grievance p rocess understand the importance of a survivor -centered and gender -
responsive approach. There will be set timelines to monitor timely responses to grievances submitted. 
This includes a 10 -day period to acknowledge receipt of a grievance and a 30 -day resolu tion period,


---
*Page 135*
---

 
28 during which time efforts will be made to resolve the grievance comprehensively.  Detailed information 
on the mechanisms that will be set up for the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, harassment, 
and grievance response mechanisms is provided in Annex 6 and 7 of the proposal.


---
*Page 136*
---

 
29 Part 8 . Gender Action Plan (GAP)  
 
Gender Action Plan of the project "  Climate Resilient Agriculture in Somalia  "  
Project Expected Results  Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget  
GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience   
ARA1 Most vulnerable people and 
communities  Core 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries reached  
 
1,152,142 direct beneficiaries (576,071 women)  
972,689 indirect beneficiaries (486,344 women)   By the end of the project 
(Y7) FAO Reaching women 
beneficiaries requires  50% 
of total project budget, i.e. 
USD 47,450,749  
ARA2 Health, well -being, food and 
water security  Core 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries reached  
 
1,152,142 direct beneficiaries (576,071 women)  
972,689 indirect beneficiaries (486,344 women)   By the end of the project 
(Y7) FAO Reaching women 
beneficiaries requires  50% 
of total project budget, i.e. 
USD 47,450,749  
ARA1 Most vulnerable people and 
communities  Supplementary 2.1: Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or new climate -resilient 
livelihood options  
 
629,612 direct beneficiaries  (314,806 women)  By the end of the project 
(Y7) FAO Reaching women 
beneficiaries requires  50% 
of the project budget for 
outcome 1 and 2, i.e.  USD 
38,167,345  
ARA2 Health, well -being, food and 
water security  Supplementary 2.3: Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with more climate -resilient water security  
 
899,300 (449,650) direct beneficiaries 
benefitting from improved access to water  By the end of the project 
(Y7) FAO Reaching women 
beneficiaries requires  50% 
of the project budget for 
output 1.2 and 2.1, i.e. USD 
27,150,434


---
*Page 137*
---

 
30 ARA1 Most vulnerable people and 
communities  Supplementary 2.4: Beneficiaries (female/male) 
covered by new or improved early warning 
systems  
 
949,799 direct beneficiaries (474,900 women)  By the end of the project 
(Y7) FAO Reaching women 
beneficiaries requires  50% 
of the project budget for 
outcome 3, i.e. USD 
3,036,191  
 GAP Expected Outcomes, Activities and Targets  Cost  
Project 
activity/ 
sub-
activity  GAP activity  Indicator  Baseli
ne Target  Y 
1 Y 
2 Y 
3 Y 
4 Y 
5 Y
6 Y 
7 Responsibility  Exclusiv
ely 
dedicate
d for 
GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
Component 1:  
Outcome 1:  Restored landscapes are resilient and sustainably managed  
Expected gender outcomes: Landscape and natural resource management and governance structures are responsive to the needs of women as well as men 
in the community  
Output 1.1 Improved participatory landscape and natural resources management and governance are established at watershed and village lev els 
1.1.1 
Strengthen 
the 
information 
base for 
climate -
informed 
local land 
use 
planning  N/A          
    
1.1.2. 
Develop 
climate -
informed 
inclusive 
landscape 
manageme
nt plans  Organize community 
dialogues targeting 
clan leaders, 
traditional leaders, 
men, and women on 
the importance of 
including women in 
landscape 
management # of dialogue 
meetings 
organized  0 31 X X     
 FAO 6,000


---
*Page 138*
---

 
31 committees and in 
consultations to 
design landscape 
management plans as 
well as issues related 
to SEAH/GBV.  
Conduct a gender 
assessment (taking 
SEAH/GBV risks into 
account) as part of 
conflict sensitivity 
assessment  # of conflict 
sensitivity 
assessment 
including gender 
assessment  0 1 X      
 FAO  119,089  
Set quotas for 
representation of 
women and young 
people in consultation 
meetings on 
landscape 
management  Proportion of 
women and 
young people 
participating in 
landscape 
management 
consultation 
meetings  0 50% for women  
30% for young 
people, half of 
whom are women  X X X X   
 FAO  1,236,038.8  
Set quotas for the 
representation of 
women and young 
people in landscape 
management 
committees  and for 
participation of 
women in meaningful 
positions  Proportion of 
women and 
young people in 
landscape 
management 
committees  and 
proportion of 
women in 
meaningful 
positions.  0 50% women  
30% young 
people, half of 
whom are women  X X X X   
 FAO  Already 
included in the 
project budget, 
GAP activity 
not require  
significant 
specific budget   
Output 1.2. Agricultural and Agro -pastoral Landscapes are restored and under sustainable management  
1.2.1. 
Conduct 
landscape 
restoration 
through 
local  Ensure women 
receive  material and 
technical support for 
the implementation of 
landscape 
management  Promotion of 
women and 
young people 
receiving material 
and technical 
support  0 50% for women  
30% for young 
people, half of 
whom are women   X X X X X X FAO  Already 
included in the 
project budget


---
*Page 139*
---

 
32 landscape 
manageme
nt 
committees 
and 
community -
based 
association
s Set a quota to 
increase the 
representation of 
women in the 
landscape 
management 
Committees for 
participation in 
training  The proportion of 
women in 
Landscape 
Management 
committees   
 0 50% for women  
30% for young 
people, half of 
whom are women   X X X X X X FAO  Already 
included in the 
project budget  
 
Component 2:  
Outcome 2: Local livelihoods are resilient to climate change  
Expected gender outcomes: Women in the project districts have improved resilience to climate change  
Output 2.1. Resilient water supply is secured and sustainably managed  
2.1.1 
Strengthen 
water 
manageme
nt capacity 
at State 
and local 
level Set quota to increase 
the representation of 
women in water user 
association 
committees (WUAC) 
and train women on 
scheme management 
and basic 
maintenance, 
(preventative 
maintenance)  Proportion of 
women and 
young people in 
water users 
committees  0 50% women,  
30% young 
people of whom 
half are women        
 FAO  Already 
included in the 
project budget, 
GAP activity 
not requiring 
significant 
specific budget  
Training for women in 
leadership and 
community dialogues 
with WUACs on the 
importance of 
women’s 
representation and 
participation . The 
trainings will focus on 
influencing an 
individual’s self -
confidence, 
knowledge, or self -
awareness while 
enhancing a woman’s 
capacity to speak and # of leadership 
trainings 
organized for 
women WUAC 
members  0 31 X X X X   
 FAO 5,000  311,250


---
*Page 140*
---

 
33 to be able to 
determine what is 
more likely to work in 
their situation  
2.1.2. 
Increase 
access to 
water 
resources 
and 
climate -
smart 
irrigation 
infrastructur
e  
 Women will be  
consulted in the 
development and 
rehabilitation of water 
infrastructures  Proportion of 
women 
participating in 
consultation 
meetings in the 
development and 
rehabilitation of 
water 
infrastructures  0 50% of those 
participating in 
water 
infrastructure 
consultation 
meetings  X X     
 FAO  
Already 
included in the 
project budget, 
GAP activity 
not requiring 
significant 
specific budget  Quotas are set for 
representation of 
women and young 
people in consultation 
on equitable access 
of water and conflict 
prevention 
mechanisms 
organized with water 
users associations  Proportion of 
women and 
young people 
participating in 
consultation 
meetings on 
equitable access 
to water and 
conflict 
prevention  0 50% women,  
30% young 
people of whom 
at least half are 
women  X X     
 FAO  
Quotas are set for the 
number of women 
and young farmers 
trained in water 
saving technologies 
and efficient use of 
water in different 
cropping systems  
Quotas are set for the 
number of women 
and young farmers 
groups who will be 
supported to acquire 
drip irrigation kits and 
solar operated Proportion of 
women and 
young frames 
trained in water 
saving 
technologies  
# of women and 
youth farmers 
groups who have 
acquired drip 
irrigation kits or 
solar pumps  0 50% women 
trained,  
30% young 
people trained of 
whom half are 
women  X X X X X X  FAO  149,042


---
*Page 141*
---

 
34 pumping systems 
through the project  
Output 2.2. Local communities practice locally -specific Climate Resilient Agriculture   
2.2.1 
Disseminat
e CRA 
practices to 
farmers  Make a conscious 
effort to select women 
and young people 
among the lead 
farmers who will 
receive TOT and 
facilitators training, by 
setting a quota 
system, as they are 
better able to reach 
other women farmers.  Proportion of 
women and youth 
lead farmers 
trained  
 
# of additional 
women and youth 
farmers reached 
per trained lead 
farmers  0 50% women  
20% youth of 
whom half are 
women  
 
20 addition 
women and youth 
farmers reach per 
trained lead 
farmer/facilitators  X X X X X  
 
 
 
X 
 FAO  1,848,116  
2.2.2 Build 
the 
capacity of 
MoA at 
Local, State 
and 
Federal 
level to 
support 
communitie
s in the 
adoption of 
CRA 
practices  Conduct a gender 
assessment of the 
rural advisory 
services to identify 
barriers and good 
practices to improve 
women’s access to 
advisory services in 
the country and 
develop a gender 
strategy for the 
agriculture extension 
department.  # of gender and 
rural advisory 
services 
assessment 
conducted  0 1 X      
 FAO   8,000  
Organize cascading 
down capacity -
building training of 
agriculture extension 
staff at national state 
and regional levels on 
how to develop and 
deliver gender -
sensitive advisory 
services.  # of trainings 
organized  
 
# proportion of 
women farmers 
reached by 
trained extension 
agents as a 
percentage of the 
total farmers they 
have reached  0 7 trainings 
organized  
 
At least a 20% 
increase in 
proportion of 
women farmers 
reached by 
trained extension 
agents out of the 
total farmers they 
have reached   X X X X X  FAO  20,000  
Output 2.3. Farmers derive additional income from climate resilient value chains


---
*Page 142*
---

 
35 2.3.1 
Improve 
access to 
climate 
resilient 
inputs for 
crop and 
livestock 
production  Conduct a gender 
seed value chain 
analysis to 
understand sources 
of seed for women 
and men, ability to 
pay, and storage 
capacity in order to 
develop a subsidy 
system that takes 
account of the needs 
of both men and 
women.   # of gender -
sensitive  seed 
value chain 
studies 
conducted  0 1 X      
 FAO 30,000   
Identify/ organize 
women groups to 
engage in seed 
multiplication, 
nurseries and feed 
production 
cooperatives and 
provide them with 
training  # of women seed 
multiplication/ 
nurseries/ feed 
production 
groups supported  0 30  X X X   
 FAO  1,203,980  
2.3.2. Build 
the 
capacity of 
producer 
groups to 
develop 
sustainable 
climate -
informed 
business 
plans  Identify value chains 
where women and 
youth are 
overrepresented and 
have a potential for 
growth and provide 
support to women 
and youth 
entrepreneurs in 
vocational and 
business skills 
development, and 
investment readiness 
and link them to 
financing institutions 
and markets  # of women 
entrepreneurs 
supported by the 
project  
 
# of youth 
entrepreneurs 
supported by the 
project  
 
# of women and 
youth 
entrepreneurs 
joining new value 
chains  
# of women and 
youth 
entrepreneurs 0 50% of the total 
target number of 
entrepreneurs 
(for women)  
 
30% of total 
target number of 
entrepreneurs 
half of whom are 
women (for 
youth)   X X X X X X FAO  1,641,558


---
*Page 143*
---

 
36 accessing new 
markets  
# of women and 
youth 
entrepreneurs 
who have 
increased their 
sales and income  
2.3.3 
Increase 
MSME, 
cooperative
s and 
farming 
group 
access to 
agricultural 
credit  Engage financial 
institutions to 
influence 
development of 
financial products that 
are suitable for 
women and youth 
agripreneurs, such as 
non-collateral based 
credit systems, for 
example loans 
through group 
guarantee systems.  # of dialogue 
meetings 
organized with 
financial 
institutions and 
women and youth 
entrepreneurs  0 6   X X X  
 FAO  6000  
Support women and 
youth agripreneurs to 
develop business 
plans using FAO’s 
rural invest tool and 
Organize meetings 
between women 
business owners and 
financial institutions to 
help them present 
their business plans.  % of women and 
youth 
agripreneurs 
supported to 
develop business 
plans  0 60    X X X  FAO  36,000  
Train women and 
youth 
entrepreneurs/cooper
ative members/VSLA 
members on financial 
readiness that # of women and 
youth trained on 
financial 
readiness  0 50% of the total 
target number of 
entrepreneurs/ 
cooperative/VSL
A members 
(2,100 women)   X X X X   FAO             319,376


---
*Page 144*
---

 
37 prepares them to 
access credit  
# women who are 
accessing finance  0 50% of the total 
target number of 
entrepreneurs/ 
cooperative/VSL
A members 
(1,750)   X X X X   FAO  
Train communities 
(including SEAH/GBV 
issues) by using 
GALS approach  % of VSLA 
members 
received training  
(including 
SEAH/GBV 
issues)  0 100   X X X   FAO 200,000   
2.3.4 
Increase 
all-season 
access to 
market for 
smallholder 
producers, 
cooperative
s and 
farmer 
groups   consultations will be 
organized with 
women groups on the 
construction of market 
infrastructure, such as 
rural roads and 
district and village -
level regrouping 
points for small 
ruminants  
 
Gender -sensitive 
market infrastructure 
such as sex -
segregated sanitation 
facilities and 
measures to ensure 
safety and security in 
the market place will 
be implemented  # of consultation 
meetings held 
with women 
groups on 
construction of 
the market 
infrastructures  
 
Evidence of 
measures taken 
to ensure gender 
sensitivity of the 
market 
infrastructures   
 0 10    X X X X FAO  Already 
included in the 
project budget, 
GAP activity 
not requiring 
significant 
specific budget  
 Component 3  
Outcome 3 : An improved institutional enabling environment for sustainable landscape management and climate -resilient agriculture is in place at State and 
Federal Levels  
Expected gender outcomes: Early warning systems and services are more sensitive to the needs of women farmers  
Output 3.1. NRM legal frameworks and implementation  modalities are improved  
3.1.1 
Update 
legal and 
institutional conduct a gender 
review of the legal 
and institutional 
framework on # of reviews 
conducted  - 1 X      
 FAO 30,000


---
*Page 145*
---

 
38 frameworks 
for 
sustainable 
landscape 
manageme
nt sustainable land 
management to 
identify gaps  
3.1.2 
Strengthen 
policy 
dialogue 
and 
coordinatio
n between 
sectoral 
ministries 
at State 
levels  conduct policy 
dialogues to address 
gaps identified in the 
gender review of the 
legal and institutions 
frameworks of 
sustainable land 
management and to 
improve coordination 
between different 
sectors  # of dialogues 
conducted  - 6 (one policy 
dialogue meeting 
per state)   X X    
 FAO  12,000  
3.1.3 
Strengthen 
the 
capacity of 
the MoECC 
to access 
and 
channel 
climate 
finance  Promote women’s 
staff participation in 
training  % of women 
participants  0 30 % women     X X X  FAO  496,722  
3.1.4 Build 
capacity for 
the 
monitoring, 
assessmen
t, analysis 
and early 
warning 
related to 
the impacts 
of climate 
on food and 
nutrition 
security  Promote women’s 
staff participation in 
training  % of women 
participants  0 30 % women  X X X    
 FAO  164,390


---
*Page 146*
---

 
39 3.1.5 Build 
capacity of 
MoAI for 
climate 
informed 
irrigation 
planning  Promote women57’s 
participation in 
consultation  % of women and 
youth participants  0 50 % women    X X   
 FAO  10,000  
Output 3.2. Increased access to climate information among last mile users  
3.2.1 
Collect, 
disseminat
e and share 
relevant 
climate and 
land data to 
support 
decision 
making at 
all levels  Conduct a gender 
assessment on how 
men and women 
farmers access 
information on 
agriculture and the 
barriers to use digital 
services to access 
information on 
agriculture, including 
good practices and 
approaches that 
facilitates access and 
use of digital 
information for 
agriculture decision 
making by men and 
women farmers.  # of assessment 
on gender and 
digital services in 
agriculture  0 1  X     
 FAO 18,000   
Use the gender 
assessment to inform 
the development of 
the early warning 
system and other 
digital agriculture 
advisory services. 
Ensure the 
information shared 
through the digital 
platform is relevant to 
women and the value 
chains they are Proportion of 
women users out 
of the total users 
of the early 
warning and 
digital advisory 
service  0 50% of total 
users    X X X   FAO  500,000  
 
57 Including female youth


---
*Page 147*
---

 
40 engaged in and the 
format is accessible. 
Organize sensitization 
events to encourage 
the use of digital tools 
by women to access 
information on 
agriculture.  
Project management  
 Conduct training on 
gender 
mainstreaming in 
projects, gender -
based violence and 
links with food 
insecurity, FAO’s 
guideline and key 
principles on 
prevention of sexual 
exploitation, abuse 
and harassment, 
responsibilities of 
FAO personnel, 
partners and 
suppliers under the 
guideline for FAO 
staff and 
implementing 
partners  # of trainings 
(including 
SEAH/GBV 
related risks) 
organized  0 6 trainings  X X X X X X  FAO 72,000   
 Setup a project 
grievance response 
mechanism and train 
project staff and 
partners involved in 
grievance response 
process  # of trainings 
organized  
# of cases SEAH 
and GBV cases 
reported  
# of reported 
SEAH and GBV 
cases resolved/ 
addressed in a 
timely manner  0 6 trainings  X X X X X X  FAO 72,000


---
*Page 148*
---

 
41  Raise awareness of 
various community 
groups participating in 
the project activities 
(e.g. natural resource 
management 
committees, Wash 
committees, 
cooperatives etc) on 
GBV, prevention of 
sexual exploitation 
and abuse and 
grievance response 
mechanisms  # of sensitization 
events conducted  0 24  X X X X X X  FAO 7,200   
 # of SEAH and 
GBV cases 
reported using 
the grievance 
response 
mechanism  0 TBD X X X X X X X FAO 70.000   
… Conduct annual 
gender reviews to 
review progress in 
mainstreaming 
gender in the project 
and share lessons on 
what is working well 
and what needs 
improvement  
Annual gender 
reviews will be used 
to revise the training 
on prevention of 
sexual exploitation 
and abuse  # of gender 
review reports 
produced  
 
# of review 
meetings 
organized  0 5  X X X X X X FAO 30,000   
 Engagement of 
International Gender, 
Social Inclusion and 
IP Specialist (part 
time) & National 
Gender Specialist (full 
time)     X X X X X X X FAO 578,676   
TOTAL  1,118,876  8,082,562


---
*Page 149*
---

 
42 APPENDIX 1: FIELD CONSULTATIONS : PARTNERS AND QUESTIONS  
1. Consultation Partners  
 
Federal 
Member 
State  Region  District  Location  Date  Type of 
Stakeholders  Female 
Partici
pants  Male 
Participa
nts 
Galmudug  Mudug  Galmudug, 
Mudug, 
Hobyo  Hobyo  March 
6 Communities  3 7 
(2 Youth)  
Hirshabelle  Middle 
Shabelle  Hirshabelle, 
Middle 
Shabelle, 
Cadale  Cadale    Communities      
Jubaland  Lower Juba  Jubaland, 
Lower Juba, 
Kismayo  Jeerinley    Communities  1 9 
Puntland  Nugaal  Puntland, 
Nugaal, Eyl  Eyl   Communities  
Smallholder 
farmers    6 
Puntland  Nugaal   Eyl Godobjiran    Farmers’ 
cooperative      
Puntland  Nugaal  Puntland, 
Nugaal, 
Garowe  Cuun Village    Communities : 
Cuun 
Cooperative  1 4 
Puntland  Nugaal   Garowe  Cuun Village    Small farmers’ 
community  3 13 
Puntland  Nugaal   Garowe  Dangoroyo 
village     Farmers’ 
cooperatives, 
small holder 
farmers  4 10 
Toghdeer  Odweyne  Somaliland, , 
OdweyneOd
weyne  Qaloocato 
and Abdi 
Farah 
Villages  March 
11 Communities  10 20 
  
 
2. Questionnaire for telephone calls  
 
Series Number   
2. Date   
3. Name of Provider   
4. Telephone Number   
5. Call Status     Reached - participated in survey


---
*Page 150*
---

 
43    Reached - not willing to be interviewed   
   Wrong number   
   Not answering   
   Switched off   
   Inexistent   
6. Beneficiary name provided   
7. What is your name as registered by the NGO?   
8. Name match     No      Yes      N/A   
9. Gender of respondent     Female      Male   
10 Age of the respondent?  
11. What is the relationship of the respondent with the head of the household? A) Respondent is the head 
of the household.  B) The respondent is the spouse of the head of the household C) The 
respondent is the child of the head of the household D) The respondent a sibling or relative of the head of 
the household E) others, specify  
10. District provided   
11. Which district do you live in?   
12. District match     No      Yes      N/A   
13. Village provided   
14. Which village do you live in?   
15. Village match     No      Yes      N/A   
16. Are you the owner of this phone number?     Yes      No   
17. Are you a farmer?  
18. do you own land for farming?  
19. which member of the household has the ownership right? (the male head of the household, the 
spouse, children?) Do different members of the household have ownership rights over different plots of 
land?  
19. What type of seeds did you grow?  
20. Who in the household makes the decision about the type of seeds to grow? (the male head of the 
household, the spouse, children?) And why?  
20. What are the main types of wealth in your community (for example, rich, middle -class, or poor 
households)?  
21. what are the Main sources of household income?  
22. Who in the household controls each of the different sources of household income? (the male head of 
the household, the spouse, children) Are specific income sources solely controlled by the male head of 
household? Why?  Are there specific sources of income controlled solely by women in the household? 
Why?  
22. Which breed of livestock do you prefer? Which breed of livestock is preferred by men in the 
household? Which breed is preferred by women in  the household?  
23. Do you received any livestock and agriculture trainings?


---
*Page 151*
---

 
44 24. Which member of the household usually participates in livestock and agriculture training? Why?  
24 If yes, do you receive any GAP and nutritional training ? 
25. Which member of the household usually receives the GAP and nutritional training? Why?  
25 If yes, do you receive any treatment and vaccination training?  
26. which member of the household usually receives treatment and vaccination training? Why?  
26 Do you have any market to sell livestock and livestock products in your villages?  
27. Which member of the household usually sells livestock and livestock products in the village? 
What kind of livestock and livestock products are sold by male members of the household? Why? 
Which type of livestock and livestock products are sold by female  members of the household? Why?  
27 if yes, how frequently do you visit the market? How frequently do men in the household visit the 
marketplace? How about women?  
28. On average, how much do you take to sell per visit?  
29. Is there a difference between the amount sold by male and female members of the household 
per visit? Can you explain the difference?  
29. On average, how much do you sell annually?  
30 How much do women members of the household sell on average annually? How about male 
members of the household?  
30. How do you transport the produce to market? How do men in the household transport produce to 
market? How about women?  
31. Who does unpaid care work activities in the household, for example, looking after children and 
the elderly, cooking, fetching firewood and water, cleaning and washing? How many hours per day 
do women spend doing these activities? How about men?  
32. What are the kinds of activities performed by women in crop and livestock production and 
processing in the household?  
 
 
 
__________