=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20240624193745+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.2.20857
/ModDate: D:20240625142749+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.2.20857


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
15 – 18 July 2024 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 10 GCF/B.3 9/02/Add. 17 
24 June  202 4 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XVII 
Funding proposal package f or FP242  
Summary 
This addendum contains the following s ix parts:  
a)A funding proposal  summary  titled “ Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private
Sector ” submitted by Inter -American Investment Corporation (IDB Invest) ;
b)No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure ;
d)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
e)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
f)Gender documentation  of the funding proposal .
Thes e documents are presented as submitted by th e accredited entity and th e national d esignated 
authority(ies) or f ocal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Caribbean Net-Zero and Resilient Private Sector” 
submitted by Inter-American Investment Corporation (IDB Invest) is being circulated on a limited 
distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of 
certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.39/02 /Add.17  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3 
No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  91 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure  103 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   106 
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel 's 
assessment  115 
Gender documentation  119


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                   
Project/Programme title:  Caribbean Net-Zero and Resilient Private Sector   
Countries: Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominican Republic, Guyana , 
Jamaica, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago. 
Accredited Entity:  Inter-American Investment Corporation (IDB Invest)   
Date of first submission:  [2023/ 09/06]  
Date of current submission  [2024 /06/21]/ 
Version number  [V.00 5]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill o ut information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT /PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Private  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  Not applicable  
A.4. Result area (s)  
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total 64.1 % 65 % 
☒  Energy generation and access 17.1%  25.3 % 
☒  Low -emission transport  16 % 15.8 % 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  24 % 18.7 % 
☒  Forestry and land use  7 % 5.2 % 
Adaptation total 35.9 % 35 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  7 % 5.2 % 
☐  Health and well -being, and food and water 
security  - - 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment  18.9 %  24.9 % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  10 % 4.9 % 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced,  
avoided or removed / 
sequestered)  7,064,470 tCO 2e2 A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached)  22,833 beneficiaries  
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
22,833 Indirect beneficiaries: 0  
Indicate % of direct 
beneficiaries 
vis-à-vis total 
population
3:  
0.129% Indicate % of indirect 
beneficiaries vis -à-vis total 
population3:  
0% 
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co -finance4)  527.176 million  USD   A.9. Project size  Large (Over USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF 
funding requested  118.976 million  USD  
 
For multi -country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17.    
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF 
contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme descr ibed in the 
funding proposal.  
2 A methodological approach for the quantification of the mitigation results is included in annex 22B.  
3 The total population of the eight program countries is 17,642,335.  
4 Refer to the Policy of Co- financing of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 2 
 A.10 . Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8 .  
☒  Grant  $ 18.976 Million 
☒  Loan  $ 50 Million  
☒  Guarantee  $ 25 Million  
☒  Equity  $ 25 Million  
  
 
 
 
A.11. Implementation 
period  a) disbursement period: 5 
years  
b) repayment period, if 
applicable: 20 years5 A.12. Total lifespan  Depending on the underlying 
asset  and technology , project 
impacts will last 10 to 50 years.  6 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/  
programme, if available.  
 
8/1/20247 
 A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
 
I-1 Choose an item.  8 
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF  
support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☒9 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The Accredited Entity will be the Executing Entity under the Programme.  
 
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
 
5 The proposed repayment period would allow for transactions originated towards the end of the investment period to offer tenor s of up to 
20 years, in line with the need of the business models and technologies that the program is expected to support.  
6 Details of estimated lifespan of each technology can be found in Annex 22B.  
7 This is the expected date of AE internal approval, subject to change.  
8 For more information on the ESG profile of the Program, please refer Section G.1. of this Funding Proposal. 
9 As of August 23, 2023, either country programs were not available on the GCF website, or they were published before September  2022, 
and as such do not include this FP in the country programme given that IDB Invest engagement for this FP began in September  2022.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 3 
 Small Island Development States (SIDS10) are particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change. As 
developing economies relying on sectors vulnerable to climate patterns such as tourism, agriculture and fishing, SIDS 
in the Caribbean are expected to be greatly affected by the projected rise in sea levels, changes in rain patterns and 
temperatures, impacts on the natural habitat (i.e., bleaching of coral reefs), and increasing intensity of natural disasters.   
While granular data is lacking, evidence and AE gender teams’ experience and expertise suggests  that women and 
girls face higher levels of vulnerability due to social norms, high levels of participation in the informal sector and sector s 
such as tourism and agriculture, as well as gender blind protocols for disaster management and response. Recurrent 
damage to transport and other public infrastructure often has implications for rural communities' access to health care 
and other essential services.  
 
Furthermore, Small Island Developing States (SIDS) in the Caribbean are presently heavily reliant on costly fossil fuel 
energy imports. This not only diminishes the competitiveness of their economies but also results in high greenhouse 
gas emissions on a per capita basis. Consequently, reducing the dependence on these expensive fossil fuel impo rts 
through the development of renewable electricity generation projects and the advancement of energy efficiency 
initiatives could contribute to boosting economic growth and bolstering the fiscal capacity of Caribbean SIDS 
governments . In fact, the thrust  toward renewable energy sources continues to grow with high projections for job growth. 
This presents an opportunity  for Caribbean SIDS to upskill current workers and shift existing profiles toward more 
significant gender equity in the global energy workforce.  
 
These countries have committed to mitigation and adaptation actions, with estimated costs surpassing USD 52  billion . 
However, existing financial commitments in these countries  only slightly exceed USD 4 billion , resulting in a significant 
90% financing gap, notably 16% higher for adaptation11. Globally, t he private sector m anage s USD 210 trillion, but a 
very small fraction is dedicated to climate investments .12  
 
The debt accumulation by SIDS  in the Caribbean is driven by recurring disaster -induced damages, including from 
climate change, with estimated annual losses of US$3 billion, hampering social and productive sectors. The intersection 
of fiscal constraints and climate impacts makes relying solely on domes tic funds for adaptation and mitigation 
challenging. Thus,  the private sector is critical to  achieving  net-zero and bolstering climate resilience . However, 
the region's  limited private sector capacity in green business and green finance as well as the appr opriate financial  
incentives deter private investments.  
 
The main barriers to paradigm shifting pathways towards net -zero and climate resilience are related to 
macroeconomic constraints, limited access to financing, externalities and associated market failures, lack of knowledge on the required improvements in the regulatory frameworks to support ada
ptation and mitigation technology 
deployment, high cost of access to technology, social inequalities for women as well as other vulnerable populations, 
limited capacities of the financial sector and corporations to as sess climate risks and advance sustainability operations, 
limited sector -wide knowledge on adequate business models and bankable adaptation and mitigation solutions.  
 
In this context, IDB Invest aims to establish the Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector Program (the 
“Program ”). The Program seeks to catalyze funding in support of net-zero climate -resilient private sector 
investments in targeted sectors in SIDS which are IDB Invest borrowing member countries  (the “SIDS Host 
Countries ”), namely : Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, Suriname, Belize, Bahamas, Dominican Republic, Guyana, and 
Jamaica.   
 The Program’s 5 priorit y sectors are: 1) Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU); 2) Sustainable and resilient 
infrastructure; 3) Electricity including renewable energy and energy efficiency; 4) Sustainable transport , and  5) Blue 
Economy
13. 
 The Program will  address identified barriers to conceptualize climate change projects and de- risk investments. This 
Program will support the private sector ’s align ment  with adaptation and mitigation efforts in the SIDS Host Countries 
by providing them with advisory services
14 and fit for purpose blended finance solutions , setting the foundations to 
deploy and demonstrate commercially viable adaptation and mitigation solutions in the region.  Furthermore, across all 
program components and related activities,  gender will be mainstreamed in accordance with IDB Invest's gender 
mainstreaming process  to identif y priority areas for closing gender and/or diversity gaps .  
 
Program components are:


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 4 
 Component 1  - Advisory services to promote gender sensitive  and material sustainable action in the private sector and 
to develop climate investment -readiness ; a facility that offers advisory services, knowledge products and other related 
materials (the “ Grant Instrument ,”); and   
Component 2  - Portfolio of private sector investment in low -carbon and climate resilient Sub- projects in the Caribbean,  
offering concessional financial products, including loans, guarantees and equity investments (the “ Non-Grant 
Instrument ,” and together with the Grant Instrument, the “ Components ”)15.  
 
To achieve the expected outcomes and implement activities the Program will use GCF financing of USD 118.976 
million, and expects to mobilize USD 408.2  million from IDB Invest and third -party entities. IDB Invest will channel GCF 
resources through the Components described in Section B.3 to eligible Recipients16.  
 
The primary Recipients of this Program will be existing or potential IDB Invest clients that, in broad terms, can be 
categorized as: 1) Corporations and project developers of energy and infrastructure projects, including Special 
Purpose Vehicles (SPV) , and 2) Financial intermediaries.  
 The expected outcomes are 1) Projects become bankable and are ready for climate investments; 2) Low carbon and 
climate -resilient investments are implemented in the SIDS Host Countries . Relevant co -benefits will include jobs 
supported, enhanced presence and role of women in climate solutions  and PM 2.5  air pollution emissions  reduced.   
 
Across the program sectors, 7,064,470 tCO
2e are expected to be reduced over the lifetime of the asset and 21,447 
people are expected to benefit from adaptation interventions through the Program.  
 
From the total GCF financing of USD  118.976 million,  USD 11.875  million will be allocated to Component 1  as non-
reimbursable funds , while USD 1 00 million of reimbursable funds will be allocated to Component 2, USD 3.496 million  
will be allocated to Project Management Costs and USD 3.605 million  will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation 
costs.   
 
The Program will be Implemented by IDB Invest as the Accredited Entity, that will also hold the role of Executing Entity.   
 
 
10 According to the UN, SIDS are defined as islands and low- lying coastal countries sharing similar challenges to sustainable development. 
11 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11027 -023-10062 -9 .  
12 Private sector financing | Green Climate Fund  
13 For more information, refer to Section B.3. 
14 For the avoidance of doubt, the use of the term “advisory services” throughout this Funding Proposal encompasses technical as sistance. 
15 The Components are further detailed in Section B.3. 
16 Eligible Recipients are defined in Section B.3.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 5 
 
  
17 Climate change and biodiversity conservation in the Caribbean Islands . William Gould, Jessica Castro- Prieto, Nora Alvarez -Berrios, 
USDA Forest Service International Institute of Tropical Forestry, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico, 2020. 
18 Building Resilience to Climate Change in Small Island Developing States , IADB. Last visit: April 2024. 
19 Ibidem. 
20 JMCE -AADS- LACC conference 2020: EU Caribbean Relations Revisited. Steven J. Green School of International and Public Affairs at 
Florida International University (FIU), February 2020. 
21 World Bank  
22 The decision to group the Blue Economy, Water, and Waste Management sectors together is driven by the close interdependence of 
these factors in small island contexts. These nations face unique challenges due to their limited land area and interconnected activities. By 
combining these sectors, the Program acknowledges the intrinsic links between coastal economies, water resources, and waste 
management.  
23 Blue economy for the purposes of this program encompasses all activities listed under the IFC Blue Finance Guideline 
 PROJECT /PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages ) 
This section summarizes the climate context of the Program. Please refer to Annex 2 for comprehensive information on 
all aspects.  
Key geographic characteristics of the Caribbean Islands  
The majority of the Caribbean Islands are relatively small, only 13 have an area over 1000 km2. The terrestrial land area 
of the Caribbean islands is ca. 230,000 km2 and nearly 87% of this is in the five largest islands of Cuba, Hispaniola, 
Jamaica, Puerto Rico, and Trinidad. Together these have a land area of over 200,000 km2. Key components to the 
biodiversity of the Caribbean include the high level of endemism on individual islands or island groups, the diversity of 
habitats, a long history of human introduction of species, and the tropical climate of the region.”17 
SIDS Host Countries  have an aggregate population of 17.6 million people, with an unequal distribution across the eight  
countries, where approximately 78% of the population is concentrated in the Dominican Republic and Jamaica,  and the 
other six countries each represent less than 10% of the total population in the region.  
Climate change problem  
SIDS are particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change. As developing economies relying on sectors 
vulnerable to climate patterns such as tourism, agriculture and fishing, Caribbean nations would be greatly affected by 
the ongoing rise in sea levels  and increases in sea surface temperature , changes in rain patterns and 
temperatures, impacts on the natural habitat  (i.e., bleaching of coral reefs), and increasing intensity of natural 
disasters  as hurricanes. Average temperatures in the region have increased by 0.1° to 0.2°C per decade over the past 
three decades, and rainfall patterns have shifted, with the number of consecutive dry days expected to increase18. 
Additionally, sea level rise has occurred at a rate of about two to four cm per decade over the past 33 years, a trend which presents risks to the region’s freshwater resources and to its largely coastal population dependent on tourism and 
agriculture. High levels of occupational sex -disaggregation persist in these sectors, with women overrepresented in 
administrative roles and informal employment , adding to the multidimensional vulnerability to risk.  In the climate change 
projections of both GCMs and RCMs, these observed trends in these climate risks are sustained and even significantly 
increased.  Losses could total US$22 billion annually by 2050, roughly a 10% of the current Caribbean economy
19. 
According to the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the region has experienced 
approximately US$135 billion in losses from 165 weather events, mostly storms and floods20.  
Given their small populations, S&I countries’ contributions to global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions  are 
negligible, in absolute terms, but per capita emissions, that reach 5.23 tCO 2 on average  are higher than the world 
average (4.4 tCO 2e21). Even though mitigation interventions in the Caribbean may have a relatively small impact in terms 
of GHG emissions avoided or sequestered (due to the size of the projects and the baseline emissions in absolute terms in SIDS), it is crucial for these count
ries to meet the emissions reductions targets committed in their Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs), as part of the Paris Agreement.  
The subsections below describe 1) the climate rationale for adaptation, including the description of current, observed, and projected climate, and the need for adaptation; and 2) an analysis of the main sectors that emit and have mitigation opportunities. The analysis focuses on the five prioritized sectors for the Program: 1) Agriculture, Forestry and Other 
Land Use (AFOLU); 2) Sustainable and resilient infrastructure; 3) Electricity including renewable energy and energy efficiency; 4) Sustainable transpor t; 5) Blue economy, including water and waste management
2223.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 6 
 
  
24 Selection of key facts from regional overview is taken from: Climate Studies Group Mona (Eds.). 2020. “The State of the Caribbean 
Climate” . Produced for the Caribbean Development Bank. 
25 Historical trends are based on observations made over 1900- 2014.  
26 GCM -generated projections are relative to a 1986- 2005 baseline, RCM -generated projections are relative to a 1961- 1990 baseline.  The current  and observed climate and climate change projections in the Caribbean region  by climate risk24 is 
summarized in the table below. Details per country  are available in Annex 2 Feasibility Study . 
Table 1 Hazard, historical trends, and projections in the Caribbean region 
Hazard  Historical trends25 Projection s26 
Rainfall  In the long -term historical record, 
the Caribbean has not gotten 
wetter or drier (no significant 
observed linear trend).  
Decadal variations account for 
7% of the observed variability, 
while interannual variations 
account 91% of the observed 
rainfall patterns.  
The number of consecutive dry 
days is increasing , as well as 
the amount of rainfall during 
rainfall events.  Global Climate Models (GCMs) suggest that the central and southern 
Caribbean basin is expected to experience a reduction of up to 20%  in 
annual rainfall.  
Projections from Regional Climate Models (RCMs) suggest even more 
substantial declines, ranging from 25% to 35%  by the close of the 
century.  
The GCMs predict a slight decrease of about 2% in the annual mean 
rainfall by the mid-2020s. The region could become drier by up to 6%  
by the 2050s and potentially up to 17% drier by the century's end .  
There are anticipated increases in the number of  consecutive dry 
days across the region, spanning from small to significant increments.  
Air 
temperatures  The majority of the temperature 
changes (~65%) in the Caribbean are linked to a noticeable upward 
trend .  
This is causing an increase in 
warmer days and nights 
throughout the Caribbean region.  Minimum, maximum and mean temperatures increase across all 
seasons of the year irrespective of scenario through the end of the century.  
The mean temperature increase from GCMs will be 0.48-0.56°C by the 2020s; 0.65-0.84°C by the 2030s, 0.86° -1.50°C by the 2050s, and 0.83-
3.05°C by the end of the century with respect to baseline over all four RCPs.  
RCMs suggest higher magnitude increases for the downscaled grid boxes – up to 4°C by end of century.  
Projections based on statistical downscaling show an increase for both 
warm days and warm nights by the end of the century. The trend is for 
a decrease in both cool days and nights . 
Sea Surface 
Temperature 
(SST) Varies between 25°C and 30°C 
throughout the year, following a regular distribution pattern.  
The lowest temperatures occur in December and January, while the 
highest temperatures are 
experienced in July.  Recent warming trend in SST will continue in the future.  
Under a business -as-usual scenario, SSTs increase by 1.76 ± 0.39°C 
per century in the wider Caribbean. The mean annual SST range (~ 
3.3°C) currently observed in the Caribbean Sea is projected to contract 
to 2.9°C in the 2030s, and to 2.3°C in the 2090s. By the end of the 
century, years of coolest project ed SSTs fall within the range of the 
warmest years in the present.  
Sea levels  There is a general increasing 
trend  in the sea level of the 
Caribbean region: A regional rate of increase of 1.8 ± 0.1 mm/year between 1950 and 2009.  
Higher rate of increase in later years
: 1.7 ± 1.3 mm/year 
between 1993 and 2010.  The combined range for projected SLR spans 0.26 -0.82 m by 2100 
relative to 1986-2005 levels. The range is 0.17-0.38 for 2046 –  2065. 
Other recent studies suggest an upper limit for the Caribbean of up to 1.5 m under RCP8.5.  
Regional variation in SLR is small with the north Caribbean tending to have slighter higher projected values than the southern Caribbean. By the end of the century, sea level rise is projected to reach or exceed 1m 
across the Caribbean.  
Hurricanes  Significant increase in 
frequency and duration  of 
Atlantic hurricanes since 1995.  
Increase in category 4 and 5 
hurricanes; rainfall intensity, 
associated peak wind intensities 
and mean rainfall for same 
period.  No change or slight decrease in frequency of hurricanes  
Towards the end of the century, a trend towards more potent storms  
could emerge, with potential increases in maximum wind speeds ranging from 2% to 11%.  
The central region of these hurricanes might experience a notable 
escalation of 20% to 30% in rainfall rates, while the outer areas could see a more modest 10% increase.  
Over the next 80 years, the 
occurrence of the most intense Atlantic hurricanes (categories 4 
and 5) could rise  by about 80%, following the A1B scenario.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 7 
 
  
27 Data builds on country -level profiles for each of the target countries, based on available literature and using Government Reports 
(including national communications to the UNFCCC, NDCs, NAPs, among others), the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal, and 
other studies by international and national organizations working on climate change. 
28 Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago (2011), National Climate Chance Policy  
29 Government of Barbados (2018), Barbados’ Second National Communication 
30 National Climate Change Office (2021), Belize’s Updated Nationally Determined Contribution 
31 The Commonwealth of The Bahamas (2014), The Bahamas Second National Communication.   
32 Government of Suriname (2018), Suriname Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment Report  The climate -related hazards for each of the participant countries are summarized in the table below. Details per country  
are available in Annex 2 Feasibility Study . 
Table 2 Climate -related hazards, by participant country  
Country  River 
flood  Coastal 
flood  Landslid
e Cyclon
e Extreme 
heat Wildfire  Water 
scarcity  
Trinidad and 
Tobago  High Medium  High High Medium  High Low 
Suriname  High High Low Very 
Low Medium  High Very Low  
Guyana  High High Low Low Medium  High Very Low  
Belize  High Medium  Medium  High High High Medium  
Barbados  Very Low  Medium  Medium  n.d. Low Very 
Low n.d. 
Bahamas  Very Low  High Very Low  High Medium  Very 
Low Very Low  
Jamaica  High High High High Medium  High Low 
Dominican 
Republic  High High High High Medium  High Medium  
Source: Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery ( GFDRR), https://thinkhazard.org/27 
 
The need for adaptation  
The following section presents climate threats in the respective countries as well as potential solutions that could be 
employed by private corporations and projects . These are indicative examples and projects will be identified based on 
market demand and analy zed with a gender lens , with relevant KPIs where applicable.  
1. Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU)   
Main Climate threats and impacts for the AFOLU sector  Examples of p otential adaptation solutions  
Water Scarcity and Quality : as temperatures rise across 
the region, decreased precipitation exacerbates water 
scarcity in agriculture. This scarcity is acutely felt in countries 
like Trinidad & Tobago, where soil aridity and limited 
irrigation threaten crop yields.28  Efficient Water Management:  Drip irrigation systems to 
optimize water use; rainwater harvesting techniques to 
capture and store rainwater for agricultural us e; water 
conservation practices to minimize water wastage.  Drought -
resistant crop varieties that require less water; crop 
rotation  strategies to enhance soil health and water retention.  
Extreme Weather Events : The frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events, including hurricanes and tropical 
storms, jeopardize agricultural productivity. Barbados, for 
instance, experiences prolonged droughts and severe 
weather conditions, adversely affecting soil quality,  
livestock, and crops29. Belize foresees a potential decline in 
agricultural production by 10% to 20% by 210030. Early Warning Systems:  early warning systems to provide 
timely alerts for extreme weather events  and which consider 
the gender -differentiated digital divide and use of ICT ; gender 
sensitive emergency response plans for rapid deployment in 
the event of extreme weather incidents.  Agroforestry 
Practices: Integrate trees into agricultural landscapes to 
provide windbreaks and reduce the impact of strong winds ; 
shelterbelt planting to protect crops from extreme weather 
conditions.  
Sea Level Rise and Coastal Vulnerability : Sea level rise 
is a pervasive threat in the Caribbean, impacting coastal 
regions. In the Bahamas, elevated sea levels coupled with 
storm surges lead to economic losses, coastal erosion, and 
crop damage31. Similarly, Suriname grapples with rising sea 
levels, amplifying both coastal and interior flooding 
vulnerabilities, and endangering forests and biodiversity32. Coastal Zone Management:  Develop and implement 
sustainable land-use plans for coastal areas considering sea 
level rise ; establish protective green belts and buffer zones to 
safeguard agricultural lands from coastal erosion.  Promote 
crop varieties that are tolerant to saline conditions in case of 
seawater intrusion; u se climate -resilient seeds that can 
withstand changing coastal conditions.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 8 
 
  
33 Government of Guyana (2016), Guyana’s Revised Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  
34 Office for Climate Change, Ministry of Presidency, Guyana (2019), National Climate Change Policy And Action Plan 2020- 2030  
35 Government of Barbados (2018), Barbados’ Second National Communication  
36 UAAES/MEPyD (2018), Status of Statistics and Indicators on Extreme Events, Disasters, and Disaster Risk Reduction: Regional 
Perspective in the Caribbean and the Dominican Republic. 
37 Office for Climate Change, Ministry of Presidency, Guyana (2019), National Climate Change Policy And Action Plan 2020- 2030  
38 Government of Jamaica (2015), Climate Change Policy framework for Jamaica 
39 Government of Jamaica (2015), Climate Change Policy framework for Jamaica  
40 Government of Barbados (2018), Barbados’ Second National Communication 
41 “An economic analysis of flooding in the Caribbean The case of Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago” (ECLAC), 2019  Biodiversity and Ecosystem Impact : Shifts in weather 
patterns and rising temperatures threaten biodiversity and 
ecosystem stability. Guyana, with its coastal agriculture, 
witnesses alterations in rice production and increasing forest 
vulnerability33, 34. Biodiversity Conservation Practices: Implement 
agroecological practices, such as organic farming, to promote biodiversity ; e
stablish protected areas to conserve natural 
habitats and ecosystems.  Support the development of land -
use plans and where feasible,  with gender equitable 
access to land, credit and other productive resources . 
Implement reforestation and afforestation  projects to 
restore ecosystems.  
 
2. Sustainable and resilient infrastructure .  
Main Climate threats and impacts for the infrastructure  
sector  Examples of p otential adaptation solutions  
Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability : Rising sea levels, 
intensified storm surges, and increased frequency of tropical 
storms threaten to devastate coastal facilities.  In Barbados, 
Bridgetown's commercial center grapples with the 
vulnerability of vital service infrastructure35  Reinforced Sea Defenses:  Coastal protection measures, such 
as seawalls and breakwaters, to mitigate the impacts of storm 
surges and rising sea levels. R esilient coastal infrastructure 
designs  that consider future climate scenarios.  Green 
Infrastructure, such as mangroves and natural buffers, to 
reduce coastal erosion and enhance overall resilience.  
Inland Impact and Drainage Strain : Intense precipitation 
and heavy rainfall exacerbate flooding, impacting human 
settlements, commerce, and transportation. T he Dominican 
Republic's 2016-2017 rains caused direct losses of USD 862 million, with housing and infrastructure damage
36. In 
Guyana, escalating floods and intense precipitation affect housing, energy transmission networks, and fisher landing 
sites
37.  Improved Drainage Systems:  to effectively manage intense 
precipitation and heavy rainfall, reducing the risk of inland 
flooding. Smart drainage solutions that incorporate real -time 
monitoring and adaptive management.   
Climate -Driven Resource Scarcity : Elevated temperatures 
threaten Jamaica's energy and water consumption, demanding energy -efficient strategies
38. The Bahamas' 
agriculture, impacted by storm surges and temperature 
shifts, suffers infrastructure damage from extreme events like 
Hurricane Wilma.  Energy -Efficient Strategies:  to mitigate the impact of elevated 
temperatures on energy consumption, especially in critical 
sectors like water supply and infrastructure operations.  
Diversification of Water Sources and invest in water 
conservation measures to address potential scarcity and 
vulnerabilities  caused by climate-driven shifts in precipitation 
patterns.  
Investment and Resilience : Addressing these challenges 
necessitates substantial investments and enhanced 
resilience strategies. In Jamaica, where natural disasters 
cost approximately USD 1.5B from 2001 to 2012, a focus on 
rationalized land use planning and regulations is pivotal39. 
Barbados emphasizes the importance of resilient strategies to safeguard against escalating maintenance costs and 
ensure infrastructure longevity
4041. Incorporation of resilient designs  and materials in 
infrastructure development and maintenance to withstand 
extreme weather events , and which harness the involvement of 
women in gender -smart infrastructure design.  Comprehensive 
risk management strategies that consider climate threats and 
prioritize investments to enhance overall infrastructure 
resilience.   
 
3. Electricity including renewable energy and energy efficiency.  
Main Climate threats and impacts for the energy sector  Examples of potential adaptation solutions  
Disruption of energy generation and supply , with Trinidad 
and Tobago experiencing power outages during intense 
rainfall, emphasizing the necessity for robust emergency Diversification of Renewable Energy Sources , to increase 
resilience in the face of changing weather patterns. Smart Grids and Energy Storage:  to enhance the resilience of 
energy distribution and storage systems, allowing for better


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 9 
 
  
42 Ministry of Planning and Development (2021 b), Third National Communication of T&T  
43 BID (2022), Climate Change Impacts on Hydropower and Electricity Demand in Suriname 
44 The Commonwealth of The Bahamas (2014), The Bahamas Second National Communication.   
45 Government of Belize (2013), National Climate Resilience Investment Plan 
46 Government of Barbados (2018), Barbados’ Second National Communication 
47 Berigüete et al. (2020), Energy Transition in the Dominican Republic: How Decarbonization Strategies in the Electricity Sector Accelerate 
Private Sector Participation in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  
48 Berigüete et al. (2020), Energy Transition in the Dominican Republic: How Decarbonization Strategies in the Electricity Sector Accelerate 
Private Sector Participation in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  
49 Government of Belize (2013), National Climate Resilience Investment Plan 
50 Ministry of Economic Growth & Job Creation, Climate Change Division (2018), Third National Communication of Jamaica to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
51 IDB Invest will build on the S&I component of the IDB’s GCF E -Mobility Program for Sustainable Cities in Latin America and the 
Caribbean  
52 EuropeAid (2018), Vulnerability and Capacity Assessment (VCA) Report Trinidad & Tobago.  
53 Government of Barbados (2018), Barbados’ Second National Communication 
54 Government of Guyana (2012),  Second National Communication 
55 Republic of Suriname (2021), Multi -Annual Development Plan 2022 -2026 systems42. In Suriname, the susceptibility of its hydropower 
sector to altered precipitation patterns poses a risk of reduced 
water inflow to energy plants43. management during disruptions caused by heavy rainfall or 
extreme weather events . 
Erosion and infrastructure vulnerability . In the Bahamas, 
saltwater intrusion corrodes electrical infrastructure, while 
erosion jeopardizes energy facilities and the Bahamas 
Electricity Corporation's operations44. Similarly, Belize 
contends with coastal erosion, weakening energy 
infrastructure and storage facilities, undermining stability45. Coastal Protection Measures:  such as seawalls and green 
infrastructure to mitigate the impact of saltwater intrusion and 
coastal erosion on energy infrastructure.  Elevated 
Infrastructure Designs:  energy infrastructure with elevated 
foundations and materials resistant to saltwater corrosion to 
minimize vulnerability to rising sea levels.  
Increasing energy demand  emerges as a pressing challenge 
in the face of rising temperatures. Barbados faces elevated 
energy requirements during heatwaves46. Similarly, the 
Dominican Republic grapples with amplified energy demand, 
notably for cooling systems, under the intense heat47. Energy Efficiency Measures:  to mitigate the impact of 
elevated energy demand during heatwaves.  Encourage 
Demand -Side Management  strategies, such as peak -load 
shifting and energy conservation programs, to optimize energy 
consumption during periods of high demand.  Basic sex-
disaggregated data could be employed to understand differentiated patterns of energy use and support gender -
sensitive policies in service delivery  of programs.  
Increase of extreme weather events  adds a layer of 
uncertainty to the energy sector. T he Dominican Republic 
wrestles with the aftermath of extreme weather, which disrupts 
power generation efficiency, damages transmission lines, and 
necessitates costly restoration efforts48. Develop and implement climate -resilient infrastructure 
plans  that consider the potential impacts of extreme weather 
events on power generation and transmission.  Establish and 
regularly update emergency response and recovery plans  
to minimize downtime and facilitate rapid recovery.  
Hydropower vulnerability  surfaces as a shared concern in 
countries like Belize and Jamaica49, 50.  Implement adaptive water management strategies  to 
address hydropower vulnerabilities, including reservoir level 
management during droughts.  
 
4. Sustainable transport .51  
Main Climate threats and impacts for the transport sector  Examples of potential adaptation solutions  
Sea level rise and coastal hazards  are critical concerns, as 
Trinidad and Tobago faces potential damage to access roads 
and critical infrastructure52, while Barbados contends with 
coastal erosion and flooding risks affecting key highways and 
tourism facilities53. Elevate critical transport infrastructure  to mitigate the 
impacts of sea level rise and coastal hazards.  Leverage the 
use of sex -disaggregated data to identify differentiated needs 
and vulnerabilities with transport infrastructure and 
incorporate a gender lens in resilient design  features ; and 
implement green infrastructure solutions , such as coastal 
vegetation and mangroves, to act as natural buffers against coastal hazards.  
Shifts in precipitation patterns  are another formidable 
threat, with Guyana vulnerable to intense rainfall triggering 
landslides, flooding, and road damage54. Suriname's shallow 
draft and potential decrease in precipitation could impact river 
flows and international trade55. Upgrade drainage systems  to handle intense rainfall and 
reduce the risk of landslides, flooding, and road damage.  
Implement sustainable drainage practices to manage water 
runoff effectively.  Landslide Monitoring and Early Warning 
Systems:  ensure timely road closures and public safety.  
Extreme weather events . The Dominican Republic confronts 
damage to transportation infrastructure from hurricanes and Emergency response plans  to manage disruptions caused 
by extreme weather events.  Contingency measures  for


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 10 
 
  
56 UNDP (2009), Increasing Gender Visibility in Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change in the Caribbean: Assessment of the 
Dominican Republic.  
57 Zermoglio, M. F.; Scott, O. (2018), Vulnerability assessment of Jamaica's transport sector  
58 Asariotis, R. Transport and Trade Facilitation Newsletter N°90 -  Second Quarter 2021. Article No. 75  
59 Republic of Suriname (2021), Multi -Annual Development Plan 2022 -2026  
60 Government of Guyana (2012),  Second National Communication 
61 EuropeAid (2018), Vulnerability and Capacity Assessment (VCA) Report Trinidad & Tobago  
62 Government of Guyana (2012),  Second National Communication 
63 Ministry of Economic Growth & Job Creation, Climate Change Division (2018), Third National Communication of Jamaica to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
64 Consejo Nacional para el Cambio Climático y Mecanismo de Desarrollo Limpio (CNCCMDL), Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) with funding from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) (2016), National 
Adaptation Plan for Climate Change in the Dominican Republic 2015- 2030  
65 Ministry of Economic Growth & Job Creation, Climate Change Division (2018), Third National Communication of Jamaica to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
66 Government of Guyana (2012),  Second National Communication storms, impacting connectivity and mobility. The storm Noel in 
2007 caused damages worth USD 439 million, with 
transportation sector damages accounting for 9.7% of the total
56.  rerouting  transportation during weather -related disturbances , 
which take into account gender -differentiated experiences of 
men and women due to damaged transport infrastructure.  
Infrastructure Resilience Assessments to identify 
vulnerabilities and prioritize resilience measures.  
Temperature increases . Heat can compromise vehicle 
efficiency, increasing energy demand and raising concerns for 
the safety of road users. Jamaica faces challenges such as 
pavement buckling and flight cancellations due to elevated 
temperatures, directly affecting the tourism i ndustry57. The 
Bahamas, heavily reliant on maritime transport networks, faces disruptions from heatwaves, heavy rainfall, and 
extreme winds, impacting economic activities and trade
58. Heat-resistant pavement materials  to mitigate the risk of 
pavement buckling and deterioration in response to rising 
temperatures.  Cool pavement technologies  to reduce heat 
absorption.  Upgrade public transportation systems to be 
climate -adaptive, considering increased temperatures that 
may affect vehicle efficiency and passenger comfort.  
Isolation and accessibility  emerge as critical issues. 
Suriname faces threats of sea level rise and floods, which 
could isolate regions and disrupt land roads59. Similarly, 
Guyana's concentration of highways along the coast places these vital routes at risk from sea level rise and storm surges
60. Resilient road networks  that can withstand and recover from 
disruptions.  Enhance the resilience of water transport 
systems, such as ferries, to maintain accessibility between 
islands and coastal regions during floods.  
 
5. Blue economy  
Main Climate threats and impacts for the blue economy, 
water and waste management sector  Examples of potential adaptation solutions  
Coastal Vulnerabilities and Erosion : Coastal areas are 
vulnerable due to rising sea levels and intensifying storm 
events. In Trinidad and Tobago, sea level rise leads to erosion, 
loss of coastal areas, destruction of beaches , and loss of 
livelihoods61. Guyana anticipates significant land inundation, 
impacting rice and sugar -cane cultivation62. Beach restoration  projects to mitigate the loss of coastal 
areas , which provide opportunities for collaboration and job 
creation to coastal  and rural communities . Resilient coastal 
protection measures such as dunes, vegetation, and 
seawalls.   
Marine Ecosystem Degradation : Coral reefs, vital for marine 
biodiversity and tourism, are under threat from coral bleaching 
resulting from rising sea surface temperatures and ocean 
acidification. Jamaica's reefs suffer from poor health due to 
these factors63; the Dominican Republic experiences coral 
bleaching, affecting ecosystems and coastal populations64. Marine protected areas and conservation initiatives  to 
safeguard coral reefs from climate-induced stressors.  Coral 
reef restoration  projects to enhance the resilience of these 
ecosystems.  Water quality monitoring  programs to detect 
and address pollution sources that contribute to marine 
ecosystem degradation.  
Impacts on Fisheries , which are affected by changing marine 
conditions. Jamaica, and Guyana report shifts in species 
distribution, reduced fish production, and damage to fishing 
installations due to anthropogenic climate change65, 66.  Climate -resilient fisheries management plans  that account 
for shifts in species distribution and reduced fish production.  
Promote sustainable fishing practices to mitigate the 
impact of climate change on fisheries  and address gender -
specific challenges within fishing communities . 
Impacts on Tourism , with extreme weather damaging 
infrastructure and affecting attraction sites. Additionally, vector -
borne diseases and reduced water flow impact eco-resorts and the attractiveness of destinations.  Tourism infrastructure with climate resilience in mind  to 
withstand extreme weather events.  Contingency plans  for 
the rapid recovery of tourist sites following climate-related 
disruptions.  Diversified tourism offerings  with equitable


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 11 
 
  
67 Ministry of Economic Growth & Job Creation, Climate Change Division (2018), Third National Communication of Jamaica to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
68 IPCC Sith Assessment Report –  Chapter 15: Small Islands: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/chapter/chapter -15/ 
69 Karlsson, M. and E. McLean, 2020: Caribbean Small -Scale Fishers’ Strategies for Extreme Weather Events: Lessons for Adaptive 
Capacity from the Dominican Republic and Belize. Coast. Manag., 48(5), 456–480, doi:10.1080/0892075 3.2020.1795971. 
70 Popke, J., S. Curtis  and D. Gamble, 2016: A social justice framing of climate change discourse and policy: Adaptation, resilience and 
vulnerability in a Jamaican agricultural landscape. Geoforum, 73, 70–80, doi:10.1016/j. geoforum.2014.11.003.  
71 Mohan (2022) and Mohan, P.S (2023), Financing needs to achieve Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement in 
Caribbean Small Island Developing States. Mitig Adapt Strategy  Glob Change 28, 26.  opportunities for both men and women to reduce dependency 
on specific attractions vulnerable to climate impacts.  
Water Scarcity and Quality:  Water resources are strained 
due to prolonged droughts, reduced river flow, and saltwater 
intrusion. Jamaica faces changes in rainfall patterns and 
increased temperatures, causing reduced water quality and 
quantity, as well as sedimentation in reservoirs and coastal 
areas67. Implement water conservation measure s, including efficient 
water use in aquaculture and tourism -related activities.  
Upgrade wastewater treatment systems to protect water 
quality and promote recycling in water -intensive sectors like 
tourism.  Diversify water sources for various blue economy 
activities, reducing dependency on single water sources and 
mitigating the impact of water scarcity.  
 
Current capacity to anticipate or respond to the climate hazard and its impacts : 
According to IPCC AR668, small islands have experimented with new adaptation options, which has increased the 
lessons learnt from on- the-ground practices in these settings. The most common adaptation actions and approaches 
across small islands are related to: 1) Hard protection (seawalls, breakwater structures, coastal protection units – the 
report highlights that hard protection for coastal protection will become increasingly ineffective in the future, 
demonstrating the need for adaptation along most island coasts to become mor e transformative than has been the case 
over the past few decades). 2) Accommodation and Advance  (raising of dwellings, land reclamation); 3) Migration  
(including planned resettlement –  with limited evidence and low agreement in the liter ature as to whether it is an effective 
strategy). 4) Ecosystem -based measures (EbA) : traditionally, these initiatives  in SIDS have mainly focused on coastal 
and marine ecosystems, with less attention given to inland forests. However, there is a rising trend in incorporating 
forests into projects like ridge to reef initiatives. These efforts aim at integrated watershed management , promoting 
downstream water security, erosion control, and the preservation of coral reef ecosystems. Some islands are adopting climate -smart development plans, which include managing protected areas, restoring riparian zones, expanding urban 
forests, promoting home gardening, and improving agroforestry practices. These measures aim to enhance resilience to climate change and reduce food insecurity. Artificial reefs have seen growing utilization in small island settings to aid 
in reef rehabilitation and mitigate beach erosion, particularly in the Caribbean region, with notable examples in the 
Dominican Republic. Beach nourishment has been increasingly used in countries such as Barbados. 5) Community -
based adaptation (CBA) , with successful experiences referenced with coastal fisheries in the Dominican Republic
69 
and with farmers in Jamaica70, where adaptation strategies have included varying expenditure on inputs, expanding or 
prioritizing other cash crops, or investing in irrigation technologies. Tourism has become increasingly vital as a primary 
source of income for local livelihoods in small island communities. 6) Disaster Risk Management, Early Warning 
Systems (EWS) and Climate Services.  While improvements have been made in EWS for weather, water, and climate 
events in the Caribbean, progress is uneven across hazards and governance levels. Key deficiencies include gaps in 
disaster risk knowledge and variability in interpreting scientific warnings, highlighting the need for enhanced 
communication of warning messages to vulnerable populations.  
Section B.5 describes the significant adaptation finance gap in Latin America and the Caribbean, emphasizing the urgent 
need for additional investments, particularly in areas such as coastal protection, infrastructure, energy, water 
management, disaster risk management, agriculture, forestry, and land use. Also , please refer to section 3.1 of Annex 
2- Feasibility Study, for further details on the financing gaps to implement the Caribbean countries’ NDCs.  Two recent 
studies71 revealed large gaps in estimating the climate finance needs of the region. Adaptation NDC financing needs 
and of Belize, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago amount to US$ 11,518  billion, while 
the Bahama, Barbados and Jamaica must still define their NDC costs.  
Contribution to mitigation  
Across the eight  SIDS Host Countries  and considering the aggregated data (Figure 1), the energy and infrastructure 
sector emerges as the primary contributor to GHG emissions in the region, representing 65 % of total emissions. This 
sector encompasses activities such as energy production, industry and infrastructure in several countries. Specific 
activities in the transport sector account for 1 8% of the aggregate GHG emissions in the region. AFOLU sector activities,


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 12 
 
 including changes in land use and agricultural practices, contribute 1 2% of emissions. Additionally, the blue economy 
and waste sector, notably solid waste management, constitute 7% of total emissions.  
Figure 1 Targeted countries aggregate emissions per sector.  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on NDCs, Updated NDCs and Biennial Update Reports (BUR) from the targeted countries  
 
In Table 3, the total annual emissions by country are detailed across various sectors. In the Bahamas, nearly half of 
emissions are attributed to the AFOLU sector. Barbados exhibits 59% of emissions linked to the energy and infrastructure 
sector, with ener gy industries and cement/HFC refrigeration being primary contributors. Belize, despite being a carbon 
sink, has 70% of emissions from the energy, infrastructure, and transport sectors. The Dominican Republic's emissions 
are primarily from fuel combustion and electricity/heat generation in the energy and infrastructure sector (49.5%) and 
the transport sector (21.5%). Trinidad & Tobago's emissions are dominated by the energy and infrastructure sector 
(84%), exploiting oil & gas and LNG. Jamaica's emissions ar e mainly from the AFOLU sector (46.1%) and the energy 
sector (40%). Suriname, another carbon sink, has 82% of emissions in the energy, infrastructure, and transport sectors, 
primarily fueled by oil, gasoline, kerosene, diesel, electricity, and liquefied petroleum gas. Guyana, also a carbon sink, 
sees 44% of emissions from agriculture and approximately 40% from the energy sector, given the absence of a robust 
manufacturing or industry sector.  
Table 3 Total annual  GHG  emissions per country and contribution per sector (%) . 
Country  Total GHG 
emissions 
(MtCO2e)  
NDCs  Energy  Infras -
tructure  Transport  AFOLU  Blue 
Economy  
Waste  
Bahamas  6.26 36% 11% 48% 5% 
Barbados   1.816  59% 23% 3% 15% 
Belize (*)  1.19 (without FOLU)  
-5.28 (with FOLU)  70% 25% 2% 
Dominican 
Republic  24.634  49,50%  21,50%  13% 16% 
Trinidad & Tobago 41.63  36% 48% 6% -5% 5% 
Jamaica  14.9 40% 11,70%  46,10%  N/d


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 13 
 
  
72 National NDCs and BURs: The Bahamas Updated NDC(2022) , Barbados Update of the First Nationally Determined Contribution (2021) , 
Belize Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (2021) , First Biennial Update Report of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago (2021) , 
The Second National Communication of Jamaica, Republic of Suriname Third National Communication, Guyana’s Second National 
Communication (2012)   
73 Trinidad and Tobago 2021 BUR and Bahamas 2022 BUR.  Suriname  3.591  40% 42,00%  14,98%  3% 
Guyana (*)  3.330  40,33%  9,43%  44% 7% 
Source: Own elaboration based on NDCs, Updated NDCs and Biennial Update Reports (BUR) from the targeted countries . 
(*) Percentage of GHG emissions have considered the emissions without FOLU.  
 
Some of the current mitigation practices72 across the targeted countries are as follows.  
The current practices in the energy sector  encompass a diverse array of initiatives aimed at sustainability and efficiency. 
Firstly, there’s a notable emphasis on solar energy deployment, evidenced by projects like the installation of solar 
photovoltaic (PV) systems at key locations across the 8  countries analyzed. Additionally, efforts extend to rural 
electrification programs targeting communities beyond the national grid, promoting accessibility and inclusivity with mini grid programs in Trinidad &Tobago, Guyana and Belize. Concurrently, polici es and action plans, such as Trinidad and 
Tobago’s Energy Conservation and Efficiency Policy, prioritize energy efficiency measures across sectors to curtail 
consumption. Moreover, the integration of renewable energy sources into national grids, facilitated by initiatives like the 
Feed -in Tariff (FIT) Policy implemented in Trinidad & Tobago, underlines a strategic shift towards cleaner energy 
generation. Lastly, initiatives across 5 countries extend beyond electricity generation to encompass energy conservati on 
measures, including widespread light bulb replacement programs and the promotion of energy -efficient appliances.  
Investment in  sustainable and resilient infrastructure  development in the Caribbean region is not as strong as in 
other sectors. Current practices being implemented in Barbados, Dominican Republic and Jamaica include a focused 
effort to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and shifting to more renewable options, aiming for greater energy efficiency 
performance in buildings as well as in the Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU) sector.  
In the transport sector  across the eight  SIDS Host Countries  there’s a concerted effort towards fuel -switching to more 
carbon neutral sources. Additionally, there is a focus on transitioning public buses and light -duty vehicles to electric or 
hybrid models in T&T, Barbados, Bahamas and Belize. Trinidad and Tobago is working on a policy on e- mobility with 
the aim of phasing in electric vehicles in the public and private transport sectors showcases a strong commitment aiming 
to reduce emissions, though these measures are not enough to avoid the reliance on traditional fossil fuels. Furthermore , 
energy conservation is pursued through parking management initiatives in Trinidad and Tobago. Upgrading and 
replacement of aircraft is prioritized across several countries to improve fleet efficiency. There's a push for promoting 
energy efficiency in water transport in Trinidad & Tobago, while alternative fuels are being introduced to the marine 
navigation sector in the Bahamas. 5 out of 8 countries have introduced alter native fuels in the transport sector.  
Current mitigation practices in the AFOLU  sector across the region involve various strategies aimed at sustainable land 
management and carbon sequestration in 6 of the countries (Bahamas, Belize, Dominican Republic, Trinidad & Tobago, 
Suriname and Guyana) . These initiatives include the development of agroforestry programs for commercial lumber 
production, efforts to improve forest fire protection capacity, and the promotion of sustainable management of wetland 
resources. Additionally, actions are being tak en to conserve natural forests, reverse deforestation trends, and reforest 
denuded areas of land. Sustainable agroforestry practices, such as improving pasture quality and implementing crop cover strategies, are also being encouraged.  
Lastly, for Blue Economy  and waste sector, where solid waste tends to be the main emitter of the sector the current 
practices reviewed in 7 out of 8 countries revolve around waste management and waste landfills management systems 
and programs that include recycling and composting
73. 
The specific mitigation objectives outlined in their NDCs  primarily targeted transitioning from fossil fuel -based energy 
sources to renewable alternatives, as well as reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture and land use 
changes . Countries outlined both conditional and unconditional mitigation targets. Barbados aims for a 70% reduction 
in GHG by 2030, contingent on international financial support, and a 35% reduction without it. The Dominican Republic 
committed to a 20% emissions reduction by 2030, conditional on external finance, and a 7% reduction unconditionally. 
Jamaica pledged a 28.5% reduction with international finance and a 25.4% reduction without support. Guyana aims to 
provide 52 Mt of carbon dioxide equivalent by 2025, increase renewable energy share by 20% unc onditionally, and 
reach 100% with conditional support. Suriname set conditional targets for 93% forest cover and an unconditional goal 
for renewable electricity above 35% by 2030. Trinidad and Tobago targets a 15% reduction with international finance 
and a  30% reduction in public transportation emissions unconditionally by 2030. Belize's mitigation targets are fully


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 14 
 
  
74 Mohan, P.S (2023), Financing needs to achieve Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement in Caribbean Small 
Island Developing States. Mitig Adapt Strategy  Glob Change 28, 26. 
75 Mohan (2022) and Mohan, P.S (2023), Financing needs to achieve Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement in 
Caribbean Small Island Developing States. Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change 28, 26.  
76 CDB. 2014. USD30 billion needed to modernise Caribbean infrastructure over next decade; CDB. 2022. CDB focused on increasing the 
region’s access to financing. 
77 Latin America IEA Outlook 2023  
78 World Bank Group (2020) FUTURE FOODSCAPES Re- imagining Agriculture in Latin America and the Caribbean  
79 UNEP (2018) Waste Management Outlook for Latin America and the Caribbean  dependent on external financial support, while the Bahamas and Guyana stated that their goals are partly conditional 
on external finance.74 
Two recent studies75 revealed large gaps in estimating the climate finance needs of the region. Mitigation NDC financing 
needs in the of Belize, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago amount to US$ 14.8 billion, 
while the Bahama, Barbados and Jamaica must still define their NDC costs. In the context of climate finance and 
mitigation efforts from 2015 to 2020, the Dominican Republic received the highest funding of US$ 0.86 billion, followed 
by Jamaica (US $ 0.166 billion), and Guyana (US$ 0.115 billion). Estimated mitigation financing gap according to these 
studies amount to US$ 21.867 billion. Additionally, The Caribbean Development Bank estimates that Caribbean SIDS 
Countries require US$ 30 to US$ 40 bill ion over the next 3 to 10 years for renewable electricity and sustainable 
transport76. The region faces challenges due to its high- income status, making it a low priority for international climate 
finance allocation. According to these studies, the shortfall in international climate finance necessitates Caribbean SIDS 
Countries to adopt innovative and diversified finance options to achieve their climate goals . 
Suitable technologies to contribute to mitigation efforts in the priority sectors encompass, among others the following.   
Energy sector  There is an opportunity to incentivize innovation, strengthen utilities’ capacity to transition to renewable 
sources and work with SMEs to implement and scale distributed energy generation (DEG) models and energy efficiency 
programs. DEG and new sources of clean energy carriers, such as green ammonia and green hydrogen, present new 
opportunities for climate change mitigation at scale.77 At the social level, the transition to renewable energy sources 
represents an opportunity to capitalize  on job creation, upskill current workers and shift gender norms surrounding 
employment in the sector.  
Transport : Mitigation efforts encompass a range of strategies, such as promoting electric or alternative- fueled vehicles, 
improving maintenance practices, enhancing public transportation systems, and implementing emission controls. Host 
Countries have targets around passenger electric or alternative- fuel vehicles usage. IDB Invest can work with 
corporations to define feasibility for electric vehicles (EV) among their fleets and value chains, and to conduct market studies among car leasing companies for electric vehicl es to help mobilize the private sector toward EV fleets. To scale 
EVs, developers of the charging infrastructure will be key players to offer it at scale. With concessional capital, the right 
incentives can be implemented at the transaction level to accelerate the adoption by first movers, creating spillovers for further adoption.  
AFOLU : Climate -smart agriculture (CSA) and sustainable forestry practices can offer a key solution to prevent 
deforestation. CSA practices include avoiding further deforestation, restoring land, increasing soil productivity, 
preserving natural resources, livestoc k management, resilient crops water management, reduction of agrochemical 
runoff, energy management, and overall emissions reductions. Also modernize agri -logistics infrastructure, including 
information and communications technology.78 
Blue Economy and Waste sector  Investments in waste management, methane capture, and circular economies reduce 
waste and emissions. Preventing waste contamination and sustainable production meet blue carbon goals. The fishing sector can modernize vessels, embrace sustainable practices,  and innovate processing to lower emissions and waste.
79 
The estimated contribution to GHG reduced or avoided achieved over a lifetime period of 20 years for this 
Programme is estimated at 7,064,470 tCO 2e. Figure 2 shows the estimated percentage of emissions reduced or avoided 
with respect to the program goal broken down by sector.


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 15 
 
  
 
Figure 2 % Emissions Reduced/Avoided over Lifetime of the Program per priority sector.  
 
  
This proposal prioritizes the above- mentioned five sectors based on the analysis of the NDC objectives of participating 
countries. These sectors are comprehensive enough to address widely mentioned NDC needs and align with areas 
where the private sector has expressed interest in involvement, as identified through exploration with key stakeholders. Please see Table 4, which includes the NDC priorities for adaptation and mitigation and the alignment with the priority 
sectors of the proposed program.  
Table 4 SIDS Host Countries Adaptation and Mitigation NDCs and proposal alignment  
Country  NDC focus – Adaptation  NDC focus - Mitigation  Proposal alignment to 
each country NDC  Additional needs 
identified during 
Stakeholder 
Engagement (SE) 
Trinidad & 
Tobago  No adaptation in NDCs. 
Climate risks mentioned 
include floods, storms, 
landslides, sea level rise, 
and temperature 
increases. • Industry , 
• Power generation, 
• Transport  • Renewable energy and 
energy efficiency    
• Sustainable transport 
 • AFOLU  
• Sustainable and 
resilient 
Infrastructure  
• Blue economy and 
water and waste 
management  
Barbados  • Roofs -to-roofs 
program (R2RP)  
• Resilient homes  
• Water resource 
management   
• Resilient infrastructure   
• Coastal zone 
management   • Electricity 
(renewable energy 
+ energy 
efficiency),  
• Transport,  
• Waste 
management.   
• Blue economy 
(including circular)   
 • Renewable energy and 
energy efficiency    
• Sustainable transport 
• Blue economy and 
water and waste 
management  
• AFOLU  
 • Sustainable and 
resilient 
Infrastructure  
 
Suriname  • AFOLU   
• Resilient urban infrastructure  
• Data and information 
collection system  
•  Technical capacities   • Electricity  
• Road transport  
• Agriculture, and 
forests.  
• Transport  
 • AFOLU  
• Renewable energy and 
energy efficiency    
• Sustainable transport 
• Blue economy and 
water and waste 
management  
• Sustainable and 
resilient Infrastructure 
•   
Belize  • Coastal zone 
management   
• AFOLU  • FOLU,  • AFOLU  
• Renewable energy and 
energy efficiency


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 16 
 
 • Fisheries 
diversification  
• Biodiversity   
• Resilient buildings 
and infrastructure   
• Water resource 
management   • Electricity 
(renewable energy 
+ energy efficiency)  
• Transport and  
• Waste 
management.  
 
 • Sustainable transport  
• Blue economy and water and waste 
management  
• Sustainable and 
resilient Infrastructure 
Bahamas  • Water resource 
management   
• Protect at risk groups. 
• Disaster insurance  
• AFOLU  
• Tourism  
• Resilient buildings 
and infrastructure   • Electricity  
• Transport  
• LULUCF  • Renewable energy and 
energy efficiency    
• Sustainable transport 
• AFOLU  
• Blue economy and 
water and waste 
management  
• Sustainable and 
resilient Infrastructure 
 
  
Dominican 
Republic  • Water resource 
management  
• Power Generation 
• Protected areas and ecosystem -based 
adaptation  
• AFOLU  
• Infrastructure  
• Climate Resilient 
Cities  
• Tourism  
• Coastal management  
 • Energy sector 
(renewable energy, 
energy efficiency, 
and transportation),  
• product use and 
industrial 
processes sector 
(cement production),  
• AFOLU sector (various activities),  
• waste sector (solid 
waste disposal)  • AFOLU  
• Sustainable and 
resilient Infrastructure 
• Renewable energy and energy efficiency    
• Blue economy and 
water and waste 
management  
• Sustainable transport  
  
Guyana  • AFOLU  
• Coastal zone 
management  
• Resilient 
infrastructure  
• Innovative financial 
risk management and 
insurance measures  
• Early warning 
systems  
• Enhanced weather 
forecasting  • AFOLU  
• Energy sectors.  
• Waste sector. 
 
 • AFOLU  
• Renewable energy and 
energy efficiency    
• Blue economy and 
water and waste 
management  
• Sustainable and 
resilient Infrastructure  
 • Sustainable 
transport  
 
Jamaica  AFOLU  
Aquaculture  • Land use sector, 
land use change and forestry  
• Energy  • AFOLU  
• Renewable energy and 
energy efficiency  
• Blue economy and 
water and waste 
management   
 • Sustainable and 
resilient 
Infrastructure  
• Sustainable 
transport  
Source: own elaboration based on NDCs, NDC updates of the targeted countries.  
 
Potential IDB Invest program projects for the targeted countries are outlined in section 4.3: Indicative Pipeline included 
in the Feasibility Study and section 5, non-exhaustive list of investments to be financed under the Program. (Please refer 
to Annex 2: Feasibility Study).  
 
Challenges faced by the Private sector companies in the Caribbean  
Caribbean countries present high levels of public debt, large current accounts, and fiscal deficits, while offering limited 
economies of scale for private sector actors that need to operate in small markets with high exposure to external 
economic shocks.  When it comes to climate action, access to financing faces additional barriers, such as market inertia 
from a lack of awareness of climate change risks  and/or climate -related investment opportunities, or information


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 17 
 
  
80 A preliminary review of policy responses to enhance SME access to trade financing in the Caribbean. ECLAC -  Studies and Perspectives 
series -The Caribbean No. 88.  
81 Idem  
82 (Caribbean Economics Quarterly) Finance for Firms: options for improving access and inclusion  
83 “No net Zero without SMEs: Exploring the key issues for greening SMEs and green entrepreneurship”, OECD SME and Entrepreneurship 
Papers No.30  
84 Country Infrastructure Briefs: Caribbean Region | Publications (iadb.org)  asymmetries  as local and international lenders fail to correctly assess the risks in these projects and to offer adequate 
and affordable terms and conditions.  
Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) : Private sector companies in the Caribbean face several structural challenges, 
such as limited economies of scale, small domestic markets and limited capital.80 The limited access to finance and the 
high costs of financing are significant obstacles for the performance and productivity of companies operating in the 
Caribbean. These challenges are considerably more pronounced for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) . Even 
though they generate about 40% of the Caribbean Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and constitute over 95% of companies 
in this region, they have difficulty accessing business -related lines of credit in general, and trade financing from 
commercial banks.81 Many of the region's MSMEs are owned or led by women, with even fewer employees than those 
owned or led by their male counterparts and who face additional barriers. Despite being a driver of entrepreneurships, 
WMSMEs are more likely to rely on short term financing – accessing circa 20% of the volume of short -term credit yet 
only 1.3% of medium to long term financing in the last 2 decades.  At least half of the WMSMEs in 6 Caribbean countries 
(Barbados, Guyana, Jamaica, Suriname, The Bahamas, and Trinidad and Tobago)  found accessing credit to be a 
significant hurdle, complicated by  unfavorable interest rates , lack of collateral or lack of capacity to apply for business 
financing82. Some barriers for SMEs t o becoming net -zero are complexity around business cases, lack of awareness, 
information and knowledge on changing environmental requirements among other challenges. SMEs te nd to have les s 
resources for greening such as skills, technology, finance, and need to be agile to market and policy changes.83 They 
further face barriers toward their decarbonization effort, such as lack of knowledge and technology, limited time, and lack of standardized guidance on emissions reporting. In addition,  SMEs face a disadvantage with respect  to large 
corporation s due to opacity, under -collateralization, and high transaction cost.  
Financial Institution  (FIs) : Financial Institution  (FIs) in the Caribbean face similar challenges as the private sector in 
general, including geographic reality of relatively small, fragmented markets that are strongly dependent on tourism and 
commodity exports. Also, FIs in the Caribbean have general ly been slower in adopting climate- related risk disclosure,  
integrating green financial products than their peers globally , and systematically using sex-disaggregated data to 
strategically address the needs of women in these areas.  For instance, apart from the Stock Market of the Dominican 
Republic (BVR), no Caribbean financial institution is currently listed as a supporter of the Task Force on Climate- Related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD). Within green finance, a limited number of F Is offer green finance solutions  (further details 
in Annex 2: the Feasibility and Market Study ). These offerings predominantly encompass sectors such as solar energy, 
renewable energy, energy efficiency, and sustainable practices. Different types of financ ial instruments, including loans 
and leasing options, are available to support these sectors. Interest rates, financing terms, and incentives vary across 
institutions and countries, reflecting an emerging and diverse landscape. While progress is evident, t here are areas of 
improvement and expansion, as certain hard- to-abate sectors and more advanced climate technologies remain less 
addressed.  
Corporates : Corporate clients in the Caribbean face similar challenges to those faced by SMEs. Particularly, operating 
in small domestic markets and access to limited capital , which, when available, often comes at a high cost. Small 
domestic markets means that larger  corporates tend to spread over several Caribbean countries to achieve sustained 
growth, which provides a unique challenge in the sense that corporates are forced to quickly become multinational 
companies once local markets are coped, and the readiness  and maturity to do so may not be fully there once regional 
expansion is undertaken.  Caribbean corporates is general are lagging behind their regional peers in terms of adopting 
aggressive net-zero strategies or embedding sustainable value chain practices. As is the case with SMEs, this may be 
mostly attributed to  lack of awareness, information and knowledge on changing environmental requirements as well as 
limited  resources for greening operations.  
Infrastructure and SPVs : Challenges to developing new climate -resilient infrastructure tend to be highly dependent on 
the local context where assets are going to be located. For instance, in Bahamas, “critical challenges for infrastructure 
are aging maritime, airport and energy systems requiring modernization to deliver timely service. Furthermore, the 
nation’s island geography demands climate resilient infrastructure to protect fragile ecosystems84. High vulnerability of 
energy and transport infrastructure in the Caribbean is of particular concern, but embedding and adopting resilie ncy-


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 18 
 
  
85 B. A. Jafino et al., “Revised Estimates of the Impact of Climate Change on Extreme Poverty by 2030”, Delft University of Technology, 
Global Facility for Disaster Risk and Recovery, The World Ban, 2020. 
86 L. Aguilar Revelo, “Women’s autonomy and gender equality at the centre of climate action in Latin America and the Caribbean”, Project 
Documents (LC/TS.2022/64), Santiago, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2022.  
87 https://www.acu.ac.uk/our -work/projects -and-programmes/universities -for-our-planet/climate- change- adaptation- strategies -in-the-
caribbean/  
88 https://wrd.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2022-
02/EnGenDER_Gender%20Inequality%20CC%20DRR%20Brief_Guyana_20220204.pdf  oriented design has been a slow process in the region, due to local developers, engineering firms, and EPC companies 
still lacking some technical know -how about the economic valuation of embedded resiliency, and low willingness to 
spend in seemingly “invisible” technologies in terms of ROI.  
Some emerging economies in the Caribbean, particularly Guyana and Suriname face significant infrastructure gaps, 
especially  in social infrastructure (health and education). While interest in mobilizing private capital to develop such 
projects has increased since 2020, the development challenges are quite significant, so closing the gap not only to the 
regional average but also to more developed Caribbean nations remains a priority.   
Vulnerable groups  
Climate change presents uneven impacts among vulnerable populations, and these disparities are closely linked to 
socio -economic inequality and the persistence of poverty. For instance, residents of informal settlements and 
marginalized neighborhoods in urban areas face additional risks due to a lack of resilient infrastructure and basic 
services such as adequate drainage and early warning systems. Extreme weather events, like heatwaves and floods, can have devastating consequences in these communities by af fecting housing, workplaces, and livelihoods.  
People in extreme poverty are particularly vulnerable to climate change due to their limited access to resources, 
infrastructure, and basic services. Climatic variations can negatively impact their food security, access to clean water, health and housing. According to research from the World Bank (2020)
85, in the most critical scenarios, climate change 
could lead to an increase of up to 300% in extreme poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean by 2030.  
Within the impoverished population, certain groups face a higher incidence of poverty, such as women, children, people 
with disabilities, and indigenous communities. For example, data from the Observatory for Gender Equality in Latin America and the Caribbean (OIG by  its acronym in Spanish) shows that in 2019, for every 100 men living in poor 
households, there were 112.7 women in similar situations, highlighting their lack of economic autonomy. Climate change can exacerbate this situation by directly and severely affecting access to livelihoods, pushing these groups towards 
chronic poverty.  
The impacts of climate change are also reflected in essential natural resources for daily life, such as water, fisheries, 
availability of energy sources and biodiversity. Scarcity or difficulty in accessing these resources can have serious implications fro m a gender perspective and time use. Surveys on time use conducted in various countries in the region 
confirm the persistent and unbalanced division of labor by gender and the unfair social organization of care (ECLAC, 2022)
86. Women, especially rural, Indigenous, and women in subsistence farming , are primarily responsible for family 
food provision, as well as for gathering basic resources for household subsistence such as water and firewood.  
In the Caribbean, there are several indigenous populations, and they are among the most vulnerable to climate change. 
From the First peoples of Trinidad and Tobago to the maroons of Jamaica, and with at least nine main ethnic groups 
identified only in Guya na, these groups rely on the natural environment for their sustenance and have deep traditional 
knowledge about the environment (The Association of Commonwealth Universities, 2021)87. However, changes in 
climate patterns are altering their environments, affecting their ability to maintain their ways of life and cultures.  
For example, the policy report "Gender Inequality in Climate Change and Disaster Risk in Guyana" (2021)88 points out 
that Indigenous women are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of floods and droughts due to their dependence on 
natural resources, both in their reproductive and productive roles, to ensure water, food, and fuel security, as well as 
their limited mobility.  
Finally, people with disabilities face additional challenges during extreme weather events and in subsequent adaptation and recovery situations. The lack of accessibility in infrastructure and services increases their vulnerability.  
Non-climatic drivers further exacerbating climate change problems.


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 19 
 
  
89 Rull, V. 2022. Responses of Caribbean mangroves to Quaternary climatic, eustatic and anthropogenic drivers of ecological change. 
Plants 11, 3502.  
90 Linton D M, & Warner G F, 2003, Biological indicators in the Caribbean coastal zone and their role in integrated coastal management, 
Ocean and coastal management 46:261- 276 
91 http://pdf.wri.org/reefs_caribbean_chap4.pdf  
92 Global Environment Facility Independent Evaluation Offi ce. (2017). Land degradation focal area study. 
https://www.gefeo.org/evaluations/ land- degradation- focal -area-ldfa-study -2017  
93 Del Río L, Navarro- Martínez ZM, Cobián- Rojas D, Chevalier -Monteagudo PP, Angulo- Valdes JA, Rodriguez -Viera L. Biology and 
ecology of the lionfish Pterois volitans/Pterois miles as invasive alien species: a review. PeerJ. 2023 Jul 25;11:e15728. doi : 
10.7717/peerj.15728. PMID: 37520263; PMCID: PMC10377442.  
94 Siung- Chang A, 1997, A review of pollution issues in the Caribbean. Environmental Geochemistry and Health, 19(2): 45- 55 
95 https://carbonpricingdashboard.worldbank.org/  Some of the additional challenges of targeted countries further exacerbating climate change problems include  (refer to 
Annex 2, section 2.10 for further information.  
• Tourism exploitation poses a significant threat, with the development of tourist facilities leading to the 
degradation of coral reefs and mangroves. For instance, the Dominican Republic has lost over a third of its 
mangroves in the past 50 years due to coastal development89.  
• Inadequate waste management exacerbates the issue, as solid waste accumulates on land and finds its way 
into coastal ecosystems, contaminating beaches and harming marine life. Barbados has experienced coral reef damage due to eutrophication caused by waste disposal.
90  
• Fishing exploitation further strains marine resources, with unsustainable practices like overfishing and pollution 
threatening coral reefs, as seen in the Dominican Republic where 80% of reefs are at risk. 91 
• Agricultural and livestock unsustainable practices  worsen land degradation through practices like slash- and-
burn agriculture and deforestation, affecting millions in Latin America and the Caribbean SIDS annually.92 
• Invasive alien species pose a threat to island ecosystems, affecting water supply and agricultural productivity. 
The presence of invasive plants and animals, such as the lionfish in the Caribbean, disrupts local ecosystems 
and threatens biodiversity. 93 
• Wastewater Treatment is insufficient, with untreated sewage contaminating coastal waters and aquifers.94 
The market and regulation gaps identified both above and in more detail in annex 2, along with short and medium -term 
business demand can support identification of  component 1 “advisory services” to be covered in each country, creating 
an enabling environment for investments.   
Barriers  
While countries in the Caribbean have shown political will and leadership advancing their pledges towards carbon emissions reductions and pushing the international community forward, they face structural challenges that prevent the 
private sector from adva ncing towards more resilient and sustainable production models. Please refer to section B.2 
Theory of Change to see how the activities of the Program will address each of these barriers.  
• Macroeconomic constraints . The current macroeconomic conditions with high inflation and interest rates, 
together with a very fragmented private sector where about 95% of companies are SMEs limit the appetite for 
international investors to invest in small projects with higher transaction costs, companies with limited borrowing 
track record and/or a high exposure of their business to the potential impact of climate change.  
• Limited access to financing.  Private sector companies in the Caribbean face several structural challenges, such 
as limited economies of scale, small domestic markets and limited capital.99 The limited access to finance and 
the high costs of financing are significant obstacles for the performance and productivity of companies operating 
in the Caribbean. These challenges are considerably more pronounced for small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) . Even though they generate about 40% of the Caribbean Gross Domesti c Product (GDP) and constitute 
over 95% of companies in this region, they have difficulty accessing business -related lines of credit in general, 
and trade financing from commercial banks100.  
 
• Externalities and associated market failures . Currently, no Caribbean country has implemented carbon pricing 
mechanisms, including direct taxation or emissions trading systems 95. The non- taxation of externalities from 
carbon emissions in the Caribbean acts as barrier to increased investments into low -carbon projects that are 
not competitive under currently distorted market conditions.  
• Limited knowledge on the required improvements in the regulatory frameworks to support adaptation and 
mitigation technology deployment . Regulatory frameworks fail to define the right incentives to promote low -
carbon business models and operations (e.g., adequate regulation for the deployment of distributed energy


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 20 
 
 generation) or prevent further damage to the existing natural assets (e.g., clearing of wetland near coasts and 
deforestation driven by small -scale farming and charcoal production continue to be prevalent albeit laws 
designated protected areas or prohibiti ng practices fail to be enforced).  Businesses, especially trade groups, 
are vital in pointing out these issues and raising awareness among government and the public. For instance, 
they can organize workshops where the government and private sector discuss these barriers together.  
• High cost of access to technology : Importing clean technologies to the Caribbean often entails considering high 
import costs due to less developed supply chains for importing heavy equipment to small and island countries, 
but more importantly, there is significant lack of after -sales support. Since Caribbean markets are small in terms 
of volume and revenue, Operations and Maintenance (O&M) of different technologies don’t often have 
representation of sales agents, spare parts, and other post -purchase facilities to ensure that technologies have 
minimal downtime and proper customer support. This therefore impacts the off  taker’s bottom line and results 
in higher operational costs and levelized costs associated to the technologies. Furthermore, particularly in the case of renewable power and zero- emission mobility, government subsidies to fuels disincentivize investing in 
decarbonization technologies. Blended finance addresses this barrier.  
• Social inequalities for women and vulnerable populations (including gender -based inequality ). The most 
vulnerable communities tend to not be represented in decision- making roles at private sector companies  and 
FIs, constraining the perspective and sense of urgency to invest in adaptation and climate resilience to better 
protect the long- term sustainability of the company while offering opportunities to underrepresented 
communities.  
• Limited capacities of the financial sector  and corporations  to assess climate risks and advance sustainability 
operations . Most NDCs mention the challenges of accessing financing to implement the needed actions and 
achieve their targets. Private financial systems and corporations need support and capacity building to assess 
climate risks in their portfolios and identify growth opportunities in new market segments that are aligned with their countries’ NDC priorities. They also need adequate financial terms to support the growth of green and 
resilient portfolios within local financial institutions that are expected to continue financing sustainable and 
resilient projects, beyond the scope and tenor of this Program.  
• Limited sector -wide knowledge on adequate business models and bankable adaptation and mitigation solutions : 
Currently there is limited evidence on the effectiveness and cost -efficiency of various strategies and 
technologies as well as sectoral studies specifically of the Caribbean SIDS.  
Complementarity  
(Please refer to Complementarity section in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, for further details).  
In the framework of the development needs of the Caribbean nations there are multiple bilateral and multilateral actors 
that are active in providing finance to promote the development of climate resilient investments in both the public and 
private sector, most notably the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), the IDB Group, the World Bank Group, the 
European Union (EU), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the Government of Canada, the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), Climate Investment Funds (CIFs), among others.  
The GCF is funding a number of  projects & programs targeting the prioritized sectors in the region. An overview of these  
can be found in section 6 of Annex 2: Feasibility and Market Study.  This Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector 
Program will seek to complement these  existing project’s foundational work. This will be done by building on lessons 
learned, track record created through them  to further scale climate projects and close the climate finance gap by 1. 
Supporting sub- projects to become bankable and FI preparation to channel climate finance, as well as by 2. 
implementing low -carbon and climate -resilient projects in the SIDS Host co untries.  
Additionally, upon the request of the countries, IDBG’s has developed a regional operational programme to improve the 
living conditions of citizens in the region - this program is “ONE Caribbean”. “One Caribbean embraces and aligns with 
the Bank Group’s newly outlined Institutional Strategy 2030, with a focus on four interconnected regional priorities: 
climate adaptation, citizen and business security, private sector growth, and food security .  
The region's susceptibility to climate- related events underscores the need for modern infrastructure to mitigate adverse 
impacts. The program calls for  interventions involv ing innovative financing for climate adaptation infrastructure, and a 
shift towards green energy. ONE Caribbean also aims to enhance sustainable development through private sector 
engagement , and to address food security , recognizing the persistent challenge of low productivity in the agriculture 
sector and pre -existing dependence on food imports in the region, especially before the pandemic. This ONE Caribbean 
program that was requested by the countries complements this GCF FP.


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 21 
 
  
96 S. McLean and others, “Promoting debt sustainability to facilitate financing sustainable. 
development in selected Caribbean countries: a scenario analysis of the ECLAC debt for climate adaptation swap initiative”, 
Studies and Perspectives series -ECLAC Subregional Headquarters for the Caribbean, No. 89 (LC/TS.2020/5- LC/CAR/TS.2019/12),  
Santiago, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2020. 
97 Ibidem. 
98 World Bank (2021), Enabling Private Investment In Climate Adaptation & Resilience  
99 TCFD. 2022. 2022 Status Report  
100 UNEP, CAF (2020), How the Banks of Latin America and the Caribbean incorporate climate change in their risk management  
101 For the avoidance of doubt, “advisory services” encompasses technical assistance, market studies, knowledge products, and all  other 
eligible activities under Component 1. B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
Climate change problem  
SIDS are recognized among UN institutions as being particularly at risk of climate change.  Caribbean SIDS have high 
fiscal debt. In 2018, the total debt burden of the Caribbean stood at US$56.2 billion; representing over 70.5 % of 
subregional GDP.96 Additionally, many of the Caribbean countries are ranked as medium to high income countries, 
which often restricts their access to concessional loans , as many sources of concessional funding require the project to 
be in countries that are eligible for ODA funding. This result in a high -risk categorization of these countries with high 
interest rates applied to debt -based financial instruments, which in turn exacerbates existing debt levels.  The 
accumulation of debt is caused mainly due to the  repeated destruction of physical and social infrastructure and 
productive capacity caused by disasters, including climate change. Regular annual disaster losses in the Caribbean are 
estimated at US$3 billion, with significant impacts on the social and productive sectors. Disaster -related costs are 
expected to escalate in the Caribbean due to population growth and rapid urbanization of coastal areas where the impact 
of hydroclimatic events is greatest as well as increased exposure of assets, and climate -change- related phenomena. 97 
The convergence of climate change impacts and fiscal limitations poses a challenge in securing funding solely from domestic and public budgets for adaptation and mitigation efforts. Therefore, achieving net -zero and enhancing climate 
resilience in the SIDS Host Countries  rely on the involvement of the private sector. However, the distinctive market 
attributes, including substantial debt, project scale, and high vulnerability, hinder the attraction of private investments 
due to the risk -averse nature of most private investors.  
Numerous initiatives are already in place to foster the growth of climate finance markets. One noteworthy example is 
the UN Task Force on Climate- Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), which is dedicated to developing consistent and 
voluntary disclosures concerning financial risks related to climate. These disclosures are designed for utilization by 
companies, banks, and investors to keep stakeholders informed. Additionally, there are established frameworks, such as the Green Bond Principles, Social Bond Pri nciples, and Sustainability Bond Guidelines, which have become the 
prevailing standards worldwide for issuing green, social, and sustainability bonds
98.However, these initiatives are still in 
their early stages and further efforts are needed to achieve their objectives and bridge the gaps99 Approximately 24% of 
FI have established explicit policies for assessing and disclosing climate- related risks and 41% of surveyed institutions 
acknowledged lacking the necessary mechanisms to identify, evaluate, and manage climate risks  in Latin America and 
the Caribbean100. The gaps in companies are similar with only a 28% disclosure rate across the 11 recommended 
disclosures  of the TCFD for the region.  
Consequently, drawing in private sector participation requires  the development of institutional capabilities to embed 
climate risk in decision -making for  investment, conceptualize projects, the establishment of a conducive investment 
environment, and primarily, the creation of 'bankable projects', which can be positioned as offering substantial returns 
on investment.  
Goal Statement  
The purpose of this Program will be to catalyze additional financing and advisory services101 to support the SIDS Host 
Countries’ private sector in better aligning their strategies, operations and investment to transition to an inclusive and 
equitable net -zero and climate- resilient economy.  
The programme goal statement is:  
IF financing solutions, together with de -risking mechanisms and knowledge sharing are offered to private companies 
and financial institutions in the SIDS Host Countries, THEN projects become bankable and are ready for climate 
investments, supporting the be ginning of private sector transitioning to low -emission climate resilient investments, which


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 22 
 
 contributes to reduce vulnerability of livelihood, ecosystems and infrastructure and reduce or avoid emissions from 
energy, infrastructure, transport, and ecosystems of the SIDS Host Countries  BECAUSE private companies and FI will 
access concessional finance and the necessary knowledge to invest in gender -sensitive,  net-zero and climate- resilient 
interventions and will contribute to the deployment and demonstration of its effectiveness attracting additional 
investments for the implementation of NDCs, national adaptation and mitigation priorities thus contributing to the 
transition to a net -zero and climate resilient economy in the region.  
 
 
  
Expected longer term outcomes and co- benefits.  
• Increase gender sensitive  resilience of infrastructure , ecosystems and communities in the SIDS Host 
Countries  to the impacts of climate change: Through the implementation of adaptation S ub-Projects in 
AFOLU, blue economy sector, resilient infrastructure and distributed energy generation to vulnerable 
communities, infrastructure and ecosystems in SIDS Host Countries exposed to climate -change impacts 
are expected to reduce its vulnerability and increase its resiliency.  
• Reduced or avoided GHG emissions : The investment and implementation of low -carbon Sub-Projects in 
the energy efficiency, renewable energy, climate smart agriculture and blue economy sector are expected 
to significantly reduce or avoid GHG emissions.  
• Economic co -benefit: jobs supported, disaggregated by sex : jobs are expected to be supported due to 
the construction and operation jobs created by the renewable energy projects and climate- resilient 
infrastructure  which harness the role women can play as agents of change , and blue economy.


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 23 
 
 • Environmental co -benefit:  PM2.5 reduction: Projects in the sustainable transport category are expected 
to also contribute to this environmental co- benefit of PM2.5 reduction/avoidance.  
Short -term expected outcomes and outputs  
The above -mentioned longer -term outcomes will be achieved by the articulation of the following result chain:  
1. Sustainability practices and standards promoted in the financial sector (output1.1) is expected to be achieved 
by the different activities (advisory services) to support the FI in establishing or advancing its sustainability vision, operations and activiti es.  
2. Sustainable and resilient corporations and real sector projects developed (output 1.2) is expected to be achieved by providing advisory services to identify and create a portfolio of eligible green projects; and the implementation of advisory services.   
3. Market -level guidelines, standards, tools and capacity building (output 1.3) will be delivered through advisory 
services and studies conducted to promote market -level engagement to raise the bar for sustainability with 
industry associations.  
4. Public knowledge products and capacity building reinforced (output 1.4) will be delivered by the creation and 
public dissemination of industry or technology -specific knowledge, the development of market studies for 
financing green and climate technologies,  and case studies, evaluations, dissemination material to share 
lessons learned.  
Short term results of this set of outputs are that Financial Institutions adopt sustainability practices and implement green 
credit lines and Corporations increase sustainability and resiliency practices. This will in turn contribute to Intermediate 
Outcome 1:  Climate Sub -projects became bankable and FIs are prepared to channel climate financ e. 
The concessional financing offered in activities targeting the energy, low -carbon and sustainable transport, blue 
economy, climate smart agriculture, and sustainable and resilient infrastructure will deliver improved financing solutions 
to support private sector -led net -zero and climate resilient Sub- Projects in the Caribbean (output 2.1). This is expected 
to contribute to Intermediate Outcome 2: Low carbon and climate -resilient investments implemented in the SIDS Host 
Countries, with equitable and inclusive participation of women and other vulnerable groups in employment and market 
opportunities, training and leadership opportunities  by de- risking with adequate financial mechanisms the climate change 
investments and creating a track record of bankable and profitable net -zero and climate resilient Sub- Projects.  
Barriers faced in the Caribbean that prevent the private sector from advancing towards more resilient and sustainable 
production models have been described in section B.1. Each of these barriers will be addressed by the activities of the 
Program as follows :  
Barrier  Activities of the Program addressing barrier/risk  
Macroeconomic constraints  Activities under output 2.1  by developing adequate blended finance 
solutions  
Limited access to financing  Activities under output 2.1  by developing adequate blended finance 
solutions  
Externalities and associated market 
failures  Activities under output 2.1 by developing adequate blended finance 
solutions.  
Lack of knowledge on the required 
improvements in the regulatory frameworks to support adaptation and mitigation technology deployment  Activity 1.2.2  will address this barrier by conducting studies, including the 
necessary insights to overcome regulatory gaps which hinder the 
deployment  of technologies. Results from activities under output 2.1  will 
also provide return on experience that can inform subsequent regulatory 
work.  
High cost of access to technology  Activities under output 2.1  by developing adequate blended finance 
solutions.  
Social inequalities for vulnerable 
populations (including gender -
based inequality  Activities 1.1.1 and 1.2.2  will address this barrier by providing technical 
support to FIs and corporations with corporate governance that pertains to 
gender inclusion issues.  
Limited capacities of the financial 
sector and corporations to assess Activities 1.1.1 and 1.2.2  will address this barrier by providing capacity 
building, feasibility studies and support to develop green bankable projects 
for both the corporations and FI.


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 24 
 
 climate risks and advance 
sustainability operations  
Limited sector -wide knowledge on 
adequate business models and 
bankable adaptation and mitigation 
solutions  Activities under output 1.4  will support the development of studies and 
guidelines on implementing cost -effective solutions for mitigation and 
adaptation in specific sectors.   
 
• The identified risks will be addressed by the Program activities as follows:  Macroeconomic  Risks . Projects may 
be exposed to fluctuations in the macroeconomic situation and/or currency exchange rate. The program will 
support technical feasibility and market studies with activity 1.2.2 and activities under output 1.4 as well 
as prepare technical models to assess feasibility and economic sensitivity analysis including the 
identification of mitigation mea sures to reduce the impact of economic shocks.  
• Technology risks. The program aims to leverage the deployment of emerging clean technologies for mitigation 
and adaptation, many of which may not  be considered fully commercially mature in Caribbean markets or  may 
have lower TRL (technology readiness levels) than 8. Thus, technology risks are to be considered in terms of 
O&M considerations that apply to technologies that might not have strong regional support from manufacturers 
or third -party services.  
• Financial Risk . Given the program’s catalytic purpose, concessional investments provided by the program may 
yield less interest and/or be subject to higher risk than the respective IDB Invest financing or other commercial 
capital used to co -finance eligible projects and t hat there is a risk of loss of resources of the program. This risk 
is mitigated through IDB Invest’s due diligence process as well as the contracts and documentation for 
each transaction with activities under output 2.1.  
• Implementation Risk . Clients supported by the grant component of the program may discontinue the Sub- Project 
due to a shift in priorities. This risk is mitigated with activities 1.1.1 and 1.2.2 since IDB Invest signs a client 
beneficiary agreement (“CBA”) with clients where initial commitments are outlined, including, where 
appropriate, a cost -share/client contribution to show commitment.  
Assumptions underpinning to the ToC  
• Political stability enables private sector activity in the countries . 
• Regulatory framework s evolve as more information and relevant benchmarks become available for the region-
specific  context.  
• Advisory services lead to effective adoption of the sustainability vision and operations of FI . 
• Technical studies combined with concessional finance leads to Corporations' uptake of adaptation and 
mitigation Sub-Projects . 
• Corporations, SMEs, FI, and project developers have interest and adequate incentives with the advisory 
services and the concessional finance to participate in the Program . 
• Supply chain s for technological innovations are not disrupted permanently . 
• Component 1 results in financing of climate projects beyond this program.  
The supported adaptation and mitigation technologies are effective to demonstrate the benefits and profitability of investing in adaptation and mitigation and thus contribute to upscaling and replication in S&I countries.  
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
  
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)  
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries , 
appliances  MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2 
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Intermediat
e Outcome 
1: Climate 
Sub-projects 
became ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☒


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 25 
 
 bankable 
and FIs are 
prepared to 
channel 
climate 
financ e 
 
Intermediat
e Outcome 
2: Low 
carbon and 
climate -
resilient 
investments 
implemented 
in the SIDS 
Host 
Countries, 
with 
equitable 
and 
inclusive 
participation 
of women 
and other 
vulnerable 
groups in 
employment 
and market 
opportunities
, training 
and 
leadership 
opportunities  ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☒ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identif ied in section B .2(a), fill in the Co -benefit table below  to map each co -benefit  to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note.  
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 
1:Jobs 
supported, 
disaggregated 
by sex  
  ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2:  
PM2.5 particles 
reduced  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages ) 
Goal . Countries in the Caribbean have a need and an opportunity to include climate change mitigation and adaptation 
in their paths towards further development. The private sector has a central role to play in this process. The purpose of 
this program will be to  catalyze additional financing and investment to support the private sector in better aligning their


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 26 
 
  
102 Investing in Reversing, COP25  
103 A summary of the analysis of the eight countries’ NDC can be found in A nnex 2.  
104 The decision to group the Blue Economy, Water, and Waste Management sectors together is driven by the close interdependence of 
these factors in small island contexts. These nations face unique challenges due to their limited land area and interconnected activities. By 
combining these sectors, the Program acknowledges the intrinsic links between coastal economies, water resources, and waste 
management.  
105 Blue economy for the purposes of this program encompasses all activities listed under the IFC Blue Finance Guideline 
106 References to “advisory services” throughout this document are meant to encompass all activities under Component 1.  strategies, operations and investment plans to transition to an inclusive and equitable net -zero and climate -resilient 
economy. This P rogram will also be aligned with IDB Invest’s “Investing in Reversing” strategy102, which addresses 
climate change mitigation and adaption in a holistic way, as well as the ID B Group’s ( IDBG ) commitment to align all 
operations with the goals of the Paris Agreement. The Program will c omply wit h IDB Invest's gender mainstreaming 
process,  such that 100% of sub- projects will be analyzed to assess the materiality and capacity for  GDI interventions . 
Sex-disaggregated data will be analyses against relevant indicators  to define outcome level KPIs to track implementation 
of identified gaps, where applicable and measure enhanced impact for women in the sub -projects . The five sectors that 
were identified for the Program based on an analysis of the relevant countries NDCs103 are: 1) Agriculture, Forestry and 
Other Land Use (AFOLU); 2) Sustainable and resilient infrastructure; 3) Electricity including renewable energy and 
energy efficiency; 4) Sustainable transport;  and 5) Blue economy, including water and waste management104105 
(collectively, the “Program Sectors” ). The following section presents the main adaptation and mitigation context and 
potential solutions for each of these sectors.  
Components:  The Program expects to address the barriers identified in Section B.2 through the activities of two 
distinct components :  
• Advisory Services106 to promote gender -sensitive , material sustainable action in the private sector and to 
develop climate investment -readiness ; a facility that offers advisory services, knowledge products and other 
related materials (collectively, the “ Advisory Services”), as applicable (“Component 1”  and/or  the “ Grant 
Instrument ,” indistinctly ); and  
• Portfolio of private sector investment in low -carbon and climate resilient projects in the Caribbean,  offering 
concessional financial products, including loans, guarantees and equity investments , that leverage  GCF 
resources  in tandem with adequate C o-financing (the “ Concessional Financings ”), as further de tailed  below  
(“Component 2” and/or the “Non-Grant Instrument ”, indistinctly,  and together with the Grant Instrument, the 
“Components” ). 
The Program has been designed based on IDB Invest expertise and knowledge of the needs of the private sector in the 
relevant countries  and makes use of non -financial advisory services solutions as well as different financing 
instruments, including senior and subordinated loans, equity and risk mitigation instruments such as guarantee 
to help address the identified barriers . Please refer to Annex 2 for details on the green financing baseline and the 
financial demand in the targeted countries.  
 
Recipient Eligibility Criteria for Funded Activity Recipient s: IDB Invest may allocate Program resources through the 
Components to entities organized in a member or non -member country, regardless of the degree of an entity’s private 
or public sector ownership, that do not benefit from a full sovereign guarantee for repayment of IDB Invest’s financing 
as long as the ultimate beneficiary of such  Program  resources is an enterprise located in one or more SIDS Host 
Countries (the “ Recipients ”). Recipient eligibility is assessed by IDB Invest on a case -by-case basis,  following IDB 
Invest’s policies and procedures.  
Primary Recipients:  The primary Recipients of this Program will be existing or potential IDB Invest clients that, in broad 
terms, can be categorized as follows:  
1. Corporations and project developers of energy and infrastructure Projects, including Special 
Purpose Vehicles (SPV) : For a company to qualify for IDB Invest financing, it must be a profitable 
business or growth -stage compan y with  good growth potential, and comply with domestic social and 
environmental regulations  (collectively, the “Corporations” and “Project Developers” , as applicable) .   
Financial intermediaries  (FIs) : IDB Invest financing solutions can be provided to banks; microfinance 
institutions; leasing companies; factoring companies; savings and loans institutions ; investment funds ; 
and other specialized financial institutions  (collectively, the “FIs” ). The FIs are expected to on- lend to 
SMEs, including to  WMSMEs where applicable, corporations and project developers in the Funded 
Activity sectors . FIs must also have demonstrated capacity for gender intervention, including but not 
limited to dedicated financial offerings for WMSMEs; defining criteria for WMSMEs and sizing the


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 27 
 
  
107 https://idbinvest.org/en/solutions/climate- change  women's segment of their portfolio; a clearly defined value proposi tion for women; credit scoring that 
considers gender differences; increasing the presence of women in leadership positions.  To be eligible 
for on- lending through FIs, SMEs must comply with FIs definition of SMEs or official national definition 
and be in one or more SIDS Host Countries.  
The size of the targeted Recipients may vary by country and sector, but they are generally expected to be mature and 
established companies.   
The above list of primary Recipients is indicative and non- exhaustive, and the Accredited Entity may select other types 
of entities as Recipients in accordance with its policies and procedures.  By way of example, other types of entities may 
include stock exchanges, banking associations and other industry -specific associations to conduct the work defined 
under Output  1.3 “Market -level guidelines, standards, tools and capacity building. ” 
 
Description of Program Components  
Component 1: Advisory services to promote gender -sensitive , material sustainable action in the private sector 
and to develop climate investment -readiness (grant instrument)  
The Grant Instrument will be set up as a facility  to provide non- financial solutions aimed at bridging the knowledge gap, 
supporting project preparation and developing local technical capacity.  
The Recipients of Component 1 will be IDB Invest clients and potential  clients in the region who are FIs, Corporations , 
and Project Developers of energy and infrastructure  projects . 
IDB Invest helps its clients implement mitigation and adaptation strategies and operations in their business. Through 
Component  1, IDB Invest will work with clients from various sectors to develop and update their strategy and operations, 
making the most of new climate technologies , identifying present and future climate risks, and discovering and entering 
new green markets. IDB Invest advises its clients on climate- smart solutions adapted to their specific needs  and works 
to have its investments help develop both economically and envi ronmentally sustainable business models107. The total 
Component 1 amounts to USD 1 4.075 million.  
 
• Objective : Through Component  1, the Program will seek to make IDB Invest projects ready for climate 
investment by providing selective advisory services.  
The proposed activities under Component 1 target differentiated stakeholders : 
• Output 1.1 targets FIs  
• Output 1.2 targets Corporations and Project Developers.  
Both outputs offer advisory services directly to IDB Invest’s clients on a one -on-one basis. All projects will be screened 
in accordance with IDB Invest's gender mainstreaming procedures  to assess both gender -related risks and opportunities 
to close gender -specific gaps . 
• Output 1.3 focuses on advisory services targeting industry -specific or association -specific initiatives.   
• Output 1.4 targets the broader public by fostering knowledge sharing and learning.   
 
Output 1.1 Sustainability practices and standards promoted in the financial sector.   
Activity 1.1.1 Support the FI in establishing or advancing in its sustainability vision, operations and financing 
activities  
IDB Invest supports F Is in establishing a first sustainability strategy, or further elaborating its sustainability strategy by 
developing new policies, procedures and green financial products. IDB Invest assesses the bank’s baseline on gender, 
diversity and inclusion with a view to strengthening the GDI commitments, and sustainability best practices and designs


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 a customized advisory services solution that meets their needs. Each advisory services  solution will include some or all 
of the following based on the needs of the client:  
(a) Capacity building and developing a commitment:  
Several sustainability awareness activities can be undertaken. The Program will build awareness among bank and funds’ 
senior management regarding the benefits of sustainable finance initiatives , and the business case for gender lens 
investing . Following this, the Program will motivate senior management to champion climate action with a gender lens 
and sustainability commitments, embedding these principles in the institution’s mission and values. The objective of this 
activity is to encourage senior management of a bank (typically C -suite level) to make an i nitial commitment toward 
sustainability, set a vision and make the necessary resources (including human resources) available. This can be 
supported by helping to establish dedicated sustainability committees or task forces that oversee climate- related 
initiatives, ensuring high- level engagement and accountability.  
This activity will build capacity among F Is to create ambition within their institutions to contribute to the global climate 
agenda, promote gender equity in the workplace, pro mote financial inclusion, transition toward becoming a greener bank 
and execute on financing for sectorial commitments and priorities related to the NDCs but also as demonstrated by 
market need, and segments prioritized by the FI in their business strategy . 
Training and capacity -building programs can be implemented to educate employees about the urgency and opportunities 
associated with climate change as well as the differentiated risks and roles that women can play in climate resilience.  
This includes but is not limited to providing specialized training on sustainable finance, climate risk assessment, and 
impact measurement methodologies.  
Courses may be created for FI employees about sustainable finance and climate change and to raise awareness and 
foster a sense of urgency among employees regarding the importance of the climate agenda.  
Furthermore, the aforementioned advocacy with clients may also include convincing F Is to lead or participate in 
establishing an industry -wide collaboration and partnerships such as industry associations to engage with regulators 
and raise the bar for sustainable finance across the industry (Further described in Activity 1.3.1).  
(b) Development of strategic visions and action plans.  
• Creating a green vision, sustainable finance strategies and corporate roadmaps, helping the F Is to assess their 
starting point, and guiding them to design and implement customized and ambitious sustainable finance plans , 
that include a gender angle.  
• Leverage the use of the Women's Empowerment Principles (WEP) Tool or Women's Entrepreneurship Banking 
methodology to diagnose existing gender gaps in internal policies or in financial products, processes and 
capacity in the operation of the segments; and c ocreate an action plan with at least 2- 3 defined KPIs  
• Analyze the climate impact of portfolios, develop frameworks, as well as verify and certify any thematic bond 
issuances, including new climate instruments such as net -zero and sustainability -linked loans.  
• Support F Is in becoming climate- smart institutions by defining strategies and toolkits, including action plans to 
develop social and environmental management systems, elaborate resiliency -focused financial products, align 
with the Taskforce for Climate- related Finan cial Disclosures (TCFD) and prepare for net -zero commitments 
(e.g., Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF), Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ)). 
Regular reporting and transparency on these targets can create a sense of a ccountability and motivate 
employees to work towards achieving them.  Capacity Building will be provided so F Is are able to apply the tools.  
• This activity will also include support to F Is to, through their sustainable finance initiatives, improve their 
corporate policies to be more equitable and inclusive in their workforce and decision- making.  
• As part of this activity, FIs can also establish internal targets and key performance indicators (KPIs) to track 
progress and  incentivize action towards climate- related goals. This can include targets for increasing green 
investments, reducing carbon emissions from internal operations, and enhancing the institution’s resilience to 
climate risks.  
 
(c) Development of green financial products to channel funding to the five main sectors of this program:


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 29 
 
 IDB Invest will support F Is in creating green lines that will finance green businesses and assets. It will build capacity 
among F Is to develop climate- focused financial products that support the needs of five main sectors  to increase their 
decarbonization and climate- resilient efforts through green lending.  
 
Additionally, the program will support F Is to introduce green financing lines that include gender considerations where 
applicable and over time build green portfolios, especially in sectors central to the NDCs and/or the climate change 
needs of the country or specific location. This will include segmenting their portfolios and defining sub- portfolios with 
high climate impact in the f ive sectors of this program: renewable energy and energy efficiency, AFOLU, sustainable 
transport, resilient infrastructure, a nd the blue economy (including waste management).  
 
Through the advisory services, IDB Invest will support the FI to begin and advance the roll out of green loans. In cases, 
where the bank is in a more advanced stage, this could also include analyzing the climate impact of portfolios, develop 
frameworks, and second party opinions over thematic bond issuances. In the cases of the most advanced banks, it could 
also include support toward issuing sustainability -linked bonds and instruments.   
 
Also, in order to provide support to the private financial systems to assess climate risks in their portfolios and identify 
growth opportunities in new green market segments, this activity will develop market studies  for the key sectors for this 
program in the targeted countries to identify business opportunities for the F Is. The outcomes of these studies will allow 
prioritizing target segments and new green financial products.  
 
This activity will also include support to F Is to increase their product offering to enhance the access to green financial 
products by women -led SMEs and other vulnerable populations, as well as to improve their corporate policies to be 
more equitable and inclusive in their workforce and decision -making.  The Fis will be encouraged to demonstrate capacity 
for gender intervention, including but not limited to dedicated financial offerings for WMSMEs; defining criteria for 
WSMEs and sizing the women's segment of their portfolio.   
Output 1.2 Sustainable and resilient corporations and real sector projects developed.  
Activity 1.2.1 Strengthening of a portfolio of eligible inclusive green projects  
Grant Instrument resources will be allocated to preparing a strong pipeline of projects in contexts that allow for higher 
and broader impact , based on leads generated by IDB Invest’s  business generation unit . The identification of projects 
and leads is carried out by IDB Invest investment officers, upon which specialized consultancy services will be hired to 
support the generation of a bankable climate finance pipeline. This is of particular importance in the infrastructure sector,  
where pre- investment advisory services  can be instrumental in  making a project or asset bankable and in line with 
sustainability targets.  
The process will involve a systematic process of assessing, preparing, and selecting projects that meet the eligibility 
criteria and align with the Program’s objectives regarding impact and financial viability. Through rigorous screening and 
due diligence,  a portfolio of eligible green projects is curated with GDI considerations , ensuring a diverse range of 
initiatives that have the potential to deliver desired adaptation and/or mitigation outcomes and contribute to the overall 
Program’s objectives.  
Activity 1.2.2 Implementation of advisory services toward corporations and project developers   
The Program will provide support to potential and current IDB Invest clients in the form of capacity building, execution 
of feasibility studies, development of business models, among others. The Program will work closely with the client 
(Corporations and Project Developers ) to develop inclusive and just climate action plans and climate operations that can 
be financed under Component 2 or to unlock climate finance from other sources.


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 Component 1 will support the performance of technical feasibility studies at Recipient sites with the objective of 
demonstrating business viability and ultimately to unlock finance for climate change mitigation or climate change 
adaptation projects and assets. The below includes some examples of the work that can be done under this Component:  
Energy:  In the case of the Energy Sector, the program will work with companies to assess the benefits for the private 
sector of renewables, conducting market studies to determine feasibility, price point and financing mechanisms needed 
to make a competitive case for renewable energy for residential, commercial and industrial consumers, informed by data 
on gender -differentiated use as applicable, and the gaps in the regulatory framework.  Add itiona lly, the  p rogra m will s e e k 
ways to promote gender equality in the workplace through increasing the presence of women in technical roles in the 
energy sector.  These studies will allow for companies to feel comfortable to take on loans to invest. As an example of 
this activity, it will be possible to support the commercial, industrial, and power utilities sectors with capacity building,  
feasibility studies, and project/business model design for the deployment of disruptive and digital technologies including 
large scale battery storage and green hydrogen, artificial intelligence for water efficient systems.  
Blue economy, water and waste:  Support infrastructure projects to integrate nature- based solutions and coastal zone 
management that maintains or regenerates blue carbon and is not disruptive to mangroves, wetlands and forests. The 
facility may also support clients in capturing blue finance. For example, in the Blue Economy sector, the program can 
work with  clients to integrate nature- based resiliency solutions for coastal management. These may include advisory 
services to conserve, restore or design living shorelines to support resilient communities.  
 
Resiliency:  Conduct gender -sensitive climate change vulnerability analysis in order to support corporations and 
infrastructure projects to identify resiliency measures, develop inclusive disaster preparedness plans and capacity in 
order to minimize damage in sudden onset events and restore normal activity quickly afterward.  
Decarbonization:  Under this activity, the program will also work with companies in all key sectors in customized 
decarbonization strategies including through renewable energy and energy efficiency interventions, as well as supporting 
them on preparedness for carbon certif ications.   
 
AFOLU:  Support to foster mitigation and adaptation include the development of climate vulnerability assessments for 
agribusinesses and the identification of adaptation measures to reduce climate vulnerability in food production and 
processing , resulting in climate investments plans which will unlock climate finance . Studies may include the pre-
feasibility of innovative climate smart agriculture measures such as the adoption of bio- inputs to reduce the consumption 
of synthetic fertilizers to reduce GHG  emiss ions whilst also fostering soil health and improved water retention. Or the 
use of biological pest control to replace pesticides whilst promoting biodiversity and reduced emissions associated to 
the use of fossil fuels from the application of agrochemicals. This activity may also cover the design and pre-feasibility 
studies that support a shift towards agroforestry production models that diversify food production and increase resilience 
whilst reducing emissions . Additionally, this activity will supp ort agribusiness in developi ng decarbonization plans, 
including the identification of investments to unlock climate finance.  
The Program will build capacity to increase companies’ engagement with SMEs along their value chain, as well as 
women and other vulnerable populations in their workforce, to define and implement their decarbonization and climate 
resilient strategies, given the importance of scope 3 emissions reductions for many industries.  
 
Output 1.3 Market -level guidelines, standards, tools and capacity building 
Activity 1.3.1 Market -level engagement to raise the bar for sustainability  
This activity will promote industry -specific or association -specific initiatives to raise the bar and advance the sustainability 
agenda for all private -sector entities.  
Through industry or private sector associations, this activity will work with private sector enterprises, to identify the 
material GDI/sustainability topics for the industry, understand the demand from the private sector and develop 
sustainability protocols and set guides for the respective industry.


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 31 
 
 The objective of this activity is to raise the bar across the industry, rather than conduct one on one advisory services 
with clients and potential  Recipients .  
Also, the Program will carry out capacity building activities based on the information produced during the execution of 
the activities described above.  
Learning workshops : Throughout the Program's duration, workshops will be organized for industry or association 
initiatives. These workshops will serve as platforms to disseminate the lessons learned to key stakeholders, other 
organizations involved in mitigation projects, and project Recipients . The primary objective of these workshops will be 
to share valuable insights and foster collaborative learning.  
Through this activity, the Program can promote inclusive, sustainable and resilient investments preparedness by issuing 
guides and tools for various types of projects, as well as support Project Developers and providers in using these tools. 
These tools and guides will be available to all members of such associations.  
As an example, the Program could engage the green building council of a country to develop green building standards 
that are appropriate and impactful given the local context, this may include the development of a standard that 
incorporates and customizes existing emissions reductions guides but also incorporates r esiliency measures required 
in that region.  
Another example could include support  for the banking association in a country to develop local green and  social 
(including gender ) finance taxonomies, create climate and environmental risk protocols in order to raise the bar across 
the industries. Often such initiative s will result in an invitation to the regulator to participate in the discussion and co-
create country -level guides and standards for climate banking.  
Output 1.4 Public knowledge products and capacity building reinforced.  
Activity 1.4.1 Creation and public dissemination of industry or technology -specific knowledge  
Firstly, the Program will support the development of comprehensive research and analysis to identify innovative 
approaches in selected sectors where there is demand or potential for demand. This would involve gathering data, 
disaggregated by sex where applicable, assessing the effectiveness and cost -efficiency of various strategies and 
technologies. Under this activity, the program could support the development of guidelines and/or reports that provide 
practical guidance on implementing gender responsive, cost-effective solutions for mitigation and adaptation in specific 
sectors. These resources will be accessible, user -friendly, and based on sound scientific evidence and real -world 
examples. These activities will help to actively engage with stakeholders to fostering the implementation of these 
practices at scale and advance local  demand for global technologies or interventions. This activity will promote 
knowledge generation on mitigation and adaptation cost -effective solutions and technologies across the s ectors.  
 
Activity 1.4.2 Market studies for financing inclusive green and climate technologies  
Under this Program, this activity will develop state of the market studies with a gender lens  highlighting the gaps, barriers 
and opportunities for green business models, climate technologies and gender -smart climate financing green broadly, 
with a country or region -specific lens. It may include publication of tax incentives and other existing incentives in place 
for climate business for the public domain.   
 
For example, for the sustainable Transport sector, elements such as EV adoption in the target countries, in terms of 
vehicle uptake, charging infrastructure deployment, demand to purchase vehicles so companies can begin to introduce 
EV products, availabili ty of models in local markets can be researched and published for the public domain.  
 
Another example could be a market study for resilient buildings by helping to demonstrate the demand for resilient 
construction (including housing, commercial and industrial properties), identifying location -specific measures, 
showcasing the benefits, incl uding the financial returns for companies and individuals, and the identification of 
opportunities to engage SMEs to provide services for sustainable and resilient construction.


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 32 
 
 These market studies will allow not only IDB Invest clients to draw on this research but also for other investors and 
businesses to mobilize gender -smart climate finance and conduct climate business based on the opportunities identified 
in the market studies.  
 
Activity 1.4.3 Case studies, evaluations, dissemination material to share lessons learned.  
The objective of this activity is to facilitate the extensive dissemination of the Program among the targeted countries, 
key stakeholders, and Program recipients . Additionally, it aims to promote a culture of continuous learning by fostering 
the sharing of valuable insights, lessons learned, and best practices among key stakeholders.  
 
Within this framework, project case studies will be developed to showcase the outcomes of successful projects. 
Furthermore, various materials will be created with the purpose of sharing lessons learned with other market participants. 
Some of the activities  that will be implemented will be the following: (non -exhaustive):  
- Case studies : As part of the Program, a minimum of ten case studies will be identified, divided across the various 
sectors aiming to capture valuable lessons learned. The IDB Invest team will carefully select successful projects 
which include gender -specific actions from various countries to analyze the factors contributing to their success, 
the primary Sub- project benefits, and the lessons learned. These insights will subsequently be shared through 
multiple channels such as the IDB Invest website, LinkedIn, webinars, presentations, and other formats. In at 
least two case studies , the program will use sex -disaggregated data,  outline the intersections between climate 
crisis and gender inequality and highlight the shared benefits to recipients  of leveraging climate finance to 
achieve gender equity. To ensure inclusion io, authoring of case studies will include both men and women, and 
where interviews are necessary, the program will attempt to take a gender -inclusive approach to data collection. 
This will include efforts to ensure an equal representat ion of women’s and men’s voices during interviews with 
project recipients . 
- Conference and panels participation:  As part of the Program, IDB Invest and its clients will participate in 
conferences and panels to showcase to the public, including government stakeholders, private enterprises, 
international organizations, the successes and lessons learned of select proje cts as well as to showcase new 
and upcoming trends in the Caribbean region.  
As outlined in annex 4, f or the activities under component 1, IDB Invest will host or participate in capacity building 
workshops, events and/or meetings in -person to share and ensure successful project implementation. This could include 
event content, logistics and travel for IDB Invest staff and consultants.  
 
COMPONENT 2 –  Portfolio of private sector investment in low- carbon and climate resilient projects in the 
Caribbean  
Building on Component  1's activities, which focuse s, in part,  on providing a dvisory services to prepare the climate 
readiness of the private sector, Component  2 aims to offer catalytical financing at concessional terms to private sector 
actors in the SIDS Host Countries . Currently, the Caribbean region is confronted with a significant funding gap for 
implementing crucial climate mitigation and adaptation projects. Given the limited financial resources available in the 
public sector, involving the private sector in financ ing climate and mitigation outcomes becomes crucial.  
Therefore, Component  2 will include the establishment and implementation of a private sector facility for supporting 
crucial private sector -led investments in climate mitigation and adaptation measures. The facility will have an indicative 
size of USD 1 00 million, to be funded with GCF P roceeds. Additionally, IDB Invest and other commercial banks will 
provide an additional USD 406 million of co -financing to projects financed by the facility. IDB Invest, as administrator of 
the facility, will in turn execute investments into climate -related private sector projects while optimizing the overall climate 
impact and achieving the financial return requirements set by the GCF for the facility.  
The Recipients of Component  2 will be  IDB Invest existing or new clients in the SIDS Host Countries who are F Is, 
Corporations , and Project Developers of energy and infrastructure.  FIs will on-lend to SME's, Project developers and 
Corporation s.


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 33 
 
 Output 2.1 I mproved financing solutions to support private sector -led net zero  and climate resilien t projects in 
the Caribbean,  promoting equitable participation for women and vulnerable groups  
The financing activities of C omponent 2 will support projects that simultaneously target climate  and gender  goals  by 
having demonstrated ex -ante net positive contribution to mitigation and adaptation (see Section B.1 Climate Context) . 
Please see the positive list of eligible activities in Annex 2 Feasibility Study . The activities will focus on the Program 
Sectors . The allocation of financing per sector is displayed in Table 5 below.  
Table 5: Indicative allocation of financing activities under Component 2 
 in USD million     
Budget breakdown by 
financing activity  $ from 
GCF  $ from 
IDB 
Invest  & 
others  $ total  x 
leverage  % of 
$ total  % of 
GCF  
2.1.1: Renewable energy & 
energy efficiency  30 180 210 6.0x 42% 30% 
2.1.2: AFOLU  14 42 56 3.0x 11% 14% 
2.1.3: Sustainable & resilient 
infrastructure  20 80 100 4.0x 20% 20% 
2.1.4: Sustainable transport  16 64 80 4.0x 16% 16% 
2.1.5: Blue economy  20 40 60 2.0x 12% 20% 
  100 406 506 4.5x 100%  100%  
 
Activity 2.1.1: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Financing  
This activity will finance projects that focus on renewable energy sources and energy efficiency measures  through 
concessional blended financing instruments . The goal is to support the just transition of the Caribbean to low -carbon 
electricity grid, while increasing the energy efficiency of the economies , improving the resilience to climate- related 
impacts  and providing opportunities to upskill women in traditionally male- dominated fields . 
Activity 2.1.2: AFOLU  Financing  
This activity aims to finance sustainable agricultural projects  through c oncessional blended financing instruments , 
particularly those that adopt climate- smart practices , define strategies for expanding access to credit for WMSMEs to 
adapt to climate change,  and leverage the role of women in the agriculture value chains and community groups such as 
cooperatives  to enhance productivity while promoting environmental conservation. It focuses on projects such as 
agroforestry systems and reforestation to address deforestation and climate change impacts.  
Activity 2.1.3: Sustainable & Resilient Infrastructure Financing  
In this activity, financial support will be provided through c oncessional blended financing instruments  for investments in 
inclusive, sustainable and climate -resilient infrastructure projects , including those which increase decision -making 
opportunities and women's participation in gender -smart in frastructure design.  The primary focus of this activity is to 
encourage the development of energy -efficient and climate -resilient buildings and infrastructure to reduce emissions 
and increase resilience to climate- related impacts such as hurricanes, sea -level rise, torrential  rain, and heatwaves.  
Activity 2.1.4: Sustainable Transport Financing  
This activity involves providing financial support through  concessional blended financing instruments  for investments in 
low-carbon and resilient infrastructure projects, with a specific focus on promoting electric vehicles (EVs). The activity 
aims to accelerate the adoption of eco- friendly transportation solutions, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and enhance 
overall resilience to environmental challenges.  
Activity 2.1.5: Blue Economy, Water and Waste Treatment Financing  
In this activity, financial support will be provided for various blue economy activities that not only enhance local water 
quality and availability but also bolster resilience against water -related climate impacts such as droughts and floodings , 
and explicitly includes gender and/or social KPIs to ensure investment in the blue economy works for all . The blue


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 34 
 
  
108 Unhedged local currency financing: s ubject to approval by GCF post the operationalization of local currency  modality.  economy refers to the sustainable use and conservation of ocean and marine resources for economic growth and 
improved livelihoods.  
Overview of financial instruments for the above -mentioned activities.  
The financing instruments for the previously described activities will take form as debt instruments (including securities), 
guarantees, risk mitigation instruments, and/or equity investments, among other financial tools. Program resources may 
also be offered in the form of unhedged local currency financing products108 to contribute to create a conducive 
environment to develop local financing markets and crowd in local institutional investors. The availability of different 
types of financial instruments will allow this component to tailor the financing conditions to the specific challenges faced 
by private sector actors when implementing climate mitigation and adaptation projects.  
The Indicative allocation of Financial Products  for Component 2 activities is given below:  
• Risk capital  (25%), in the form of equity and mezzanine capital, aiming to provide growth capital where it is still 
not commercially available, while also crowding in commercial senior or subordinated debt.  
• Senior or subordinated debt  (50%) with terms and conditions that match the ability of the projects to generate 
repayment cash flows, creating the conditions to unlock additional resources from other financial or corporate 
investors.  
• Risk -mitigation instruments  (25%), specifically  in the form of guarantees aiming to address investment -
specific risks, such as first -mover risk or lack of track record for innovative business models or addressing 
specific risk exposures to climate -related events  (collectively, the “ Financial Products ”). 
IDB Invest will originate projects with Program funds  in accordance with its policies and procedures for the processing 
of transaction s, respect ing the highest standards of accountability, efficiency, objectivity , integrity , and ethical conduct , 
as further detailed in Section B.4.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
 
Program Structure.  To address the Program Sectors  in the SIDS Host Countries , achieve the expected outcomes and 
implement activities , the Program will use a combination of funding sources , as follows : GCF Proceeds of USD 11 8.976 
million, which will contribute to mobilize  an additional  USD 40 8.2 million from IDB Invest and other  private sector  co-
financiers and co- investors .  
 
IDB Invest will channel Program resources  through the Components to eligible Recipients  to implement the Program’s 
activities, in accordance with the corresponding ( i) client -beneficiary agreements and other documentation with third 
partie s that govern the use of Program resources for Advisory Services under Component 1 (the “ Advisory Services  
Agreements”), and (ii) financing agreements and other documentation with third par ties that govern the use of Program  
resources for Concessional Financings under Component 2 (the “Financing Agreements”), as applicable.  
 Funded Activity Sub-Projects : The Components will be implement ed through a set of projects  to be approved by the 
Accredited Entity in accordance with its internal policies and procedures , as described in Section B.3. above , which  may 
consist of a single a ctivity or a set of activities under the respective Components  (each a Funded Activity “ Sub-
Project ”). For the avoidance of doubt, eligible Sub- Projects under Component 2 are those with climate mitigation and 
adaption activities that meet the “Climate Finance” definition according to the “Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) 
Joint Methodology for Tracking Climate Finance”. For the avoidance of doubt, an eligible  Sub-Project  under Component 
2 may be financed by a single or multiple Financial Product (s), in tandem with Co- financing  (as defined below) , in 
accordance with the terms of the FAA .  
 
Advisory Services  available under Component 1 may be used in conjunction with Concessional  Financi ngs for 
Component 2 Sub -Projects, or on a standalone basis for  Component 1 Sub-Projects.  In some cases, Recipients will 
require GCF Proceeds from both Component 1 and Component 2 in order to successfully unlock climate finance.  In 
some cases , Recipients will require GCF Proceeds from  both Component 1 and Component 2 in order to successfully 
unlock climate finance. Funding for e ach Sub-Project will be evaluated on a case- by-case basis depending on identified  
needs. There can be more than one Sub -Project in a Host Country.  
 
The Accredited Entity may execute Advisory Services activities identified in Output 1.4 depending, for example, on the 
local context , knowledge of networks , differentiated in-house expertise of the highly specific and technical complexity of 
the activities. The execution by the Accredited Entity would enhance the quality control of the studies and methodologies


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 35 
 
 to be developed and would improve the efficiency and velocity in the design and execution of climate finance projects in 
the SIDS Host Countries. The Accredited Entity would apply its own policies and procedures for the hiring of individual 
consultants and/or procurement of consulting and other services, ensuring the fulfilment of applicable AMA and FAA 
requirements.  
 
The AE will evaluate and select Sub- Projects that meet all eligibility criteria and are aligned with the activities and outputs 
set forth in Section B.3 of this Funding Proposal and the overall Program objective , that meet eligibility criteria as set out 
in the FAA  in accordance with its policies and procedures, and will channel GCF Trust Fund Resources through the 
Components to eligible Recipients (as defined below), in accordance with the corresponding Advisory Services 
Agreements and Financing Agreements, as applicable    
 The following diagram provides an overview of  the Program structure:  
 
 
 
 
 
SIDS Host Countries. The Program will be implemented in the SIDS Host Countries (namely, Bahamas, Barbados, 
Belize, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Jamaica, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago ). For the avoidance of doubt, and 
the Funded Activity  will not finance activities or Sub- Projects in countries other than these listed SIDS Host Countries . 
In the case of regional private equity funds, with at least 50% of investments in SIDS Host Countries, Advisory Services 
can be provided to, and Concessional Financings can be made in, such regional investment funds to support their fund


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 36 
 
  
109 As per Section 18.01 (a) of the AMA between the GCF and IDB Invest, and for purposes of the execution of an FAA under the AMA , 
references to the AE’s policies and procedures include policies and procedures of the Inter -American Development Bank, as assess ed during 
the accreditation process. level climate action strategy for investments into host countries and risk management.  Inclusion of a new Host Country 
to the Funded Activity will constit ute a Major Change, as defined in the AMA between IDB Invest and the GCF .  
 
GCF Proceeds.  The total amount to be disbursed by the Fund to the AE under the FAA is up to USD 118,975,948 (the 
“GCF Proceeds ”) as follows : 
 
• USD 1 00,000,000 in the form of GCF reimbursable funds which the A ccredited Entity will use, as the trustee of the 
GCF Trust Fund, to provide Concessional Financings . 
 
• USD 18,975,948 in the form of GCF non-reimbursable funds which the A ccredited Entity will use, as the trustee of 
the GCF Trust Fund,  as follows : 
 
(i) USD 1 1,875,000 for the delivery Advisory Services;  
(ii) USD 3,495,851  for project management costs . 
(iii) USD 3,605,097  for monitoring and evaluation costs.  
 
The AE Fee is not included in the GCF Proceeds.  
 
 
“Co-financing ” means jointly the amounts of estimated funding to be provided by the co- financiers  and the Accredited 
Entity , and separately, any of such co- financing. The total amount of expected Co- financing for the Funded Activity is 
estimated to be USD 408,200,000 subject to the approval of allocation of funds to each individual Sub -Project on case-
by-case basis and contingent on such approvals being obtained and subject to the terms of the corresponding legal 
agreement(s) . A Co -financier is any entity providing Co- financing for a Sub- Project , including, without limitation, the 
Accredited Entity  (the “ Co-financiers ”). The Co -financing to be arranged for each Sub- Project will be leveraged from 
the following Co- financiers:  (i) financial institutions , corporations , private investors and other eligible entities pursuant to 
the AE's  policies and procedures and (ii) the  AE itself. Arrangements for such Co- financing will be included in the project 
documents of each Sub -Project.  
 
 
  
1. Implementation Arrangements  
 
1.1. IDB Invest’s GCF Accreditation  
 IDB Invest signed the GCF Accreditation Master Agreement ( the “AMA” ) on June 29, 2021,  and it became effective on 
August 18 of that same year , whereby IDB Invest is acting as an Accredited Entity  (the “AE”)  of the GCF . 
 
1.2. Legal arran gements among GCF, IDB Invest and Recipients 
 
Following the GCF Board approval  of this Funding Proposal , IDB Invest and G CF will, based on the AMA,  enter into a 
Program -specific legal agreement (the “ Funded  Activity Agreement ” or the “ FAA” ). The FAA  will outline, among other, 
the sectoral and geographical scope  of the Program , and will establish the requirements for the transfer, administration 
and use of GCF Proceeds for the financing of the Program.  The GCF Proceeds will be placed in a dedicated trust (the 
“GCF Trust Fund "). IDB Invest  (acting as the AE) will be solely responsible for the management and administration of 
GCF Proceeds  and will carry out such management  in accordance with its policies, procedures and practices
109, and 
with at least the same degree of care as it uses in the administration of its own funds or other third-party funds  for which 
it has management or investment responsibility , taking into account the provisions of the AMA and the FAA . In this 
context, the Accredited Entity will provide management, monitoring and supervisory mechanisms to maintain a 
transparent and effective administration of the Program  and will apply its own policies and procedures relating to integrity 
checks, anticorruption, countering of financing of terrorism (CFT), fraud, financial sanctions, embargoes and anti -money 
laundering (AML) .  
 
Selection and approval of Sub- Projects.  IDB Invest’s internal processes will be followed for the approval of  each Sub -
Project under the Program  targeting IDB Invest clients . Each Sub-Project will be prepared, assessed and approved  as


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 37 
 
  
110 For the avoidance of doubt, this is in addition to non- objection for this Program, and it is specific to IDB Invest’s project approval cycle, 
and may differ and should not to be confused with the GCF non -objection process with NDAs.  an individual IDB Invest project financed with GCF Proceeds and , where applicable,  Co-financing under this Program, 
in accordance with the A ccredited Entity’s policies and procedures.  Each Sub -Project shall be consistent with the 
objective, scope and activities of the Program as established in Section B.3 of this Funding Proposal and aligned with 
one or more of the expected results, as presented in the Program performance indicators in Section E.5 of this Funding 
Proposal. Each  Sub-Project under the Non -Grant Instrument shall receive a non- objection of the SI DS Host Country  
prior to final approval of  such Sub- Project , which will be channeled through the IDBG Country Representative s in relevant 
SIDS Host Countries, in accordance with applicable IDB Invest policies and procedures.110 
 
IDB Invest’s  selection and approval processes  for each Program Component are summarized in pertinent part below  
and further described in Annex 2: Feasibility study , section 5.  
 
• Non-Grant Instrument : Potential  Sub-Projects under the Non- Grant Instrument  must  go through all stages of the 
Accredited Entity’s transaction cycle, in accordance with its policies and procedures . The transaction cycle according 
to IDB Invest ’s Operations Manual includes the following stages: 1) Origination, 2) Client engagement, 3) Path to 
approval, 4) Closing/First Disbursement, 5) Supervision/Recovery and 6) Ex -post Evaluation.  
 
 
Figure 2: Stages of the transaction cycle within IDB Invest  
 
In addition to IDB Invest's general eligibility criteria,  Sub-Project s under Component 2 must meet the following 
requirements : 
 The projects must qualify for Climate mitigation or/and climate adaptation finance, as defined in the "Common 
Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking" and "Joint Methodology for Tracking Climate Change Adaptation Finance".  
o Climate Finance mitigation involves the reduction, limitation, or sequestration of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to mitigate the effects of climate change.  
o Climate Finance Adaptation involves an assessment of physical climate impact, both taking into account 
historic and future climate trends, as well as the company’s contribution to reduce negative climate 
impacts . 
 The projects must align with the Paris Agreement, as defined in the 'Joint MDB Methodological Principles for 
Assessment of Paris Agreement Alignment'."  
 Blended Finance Assessment: including the 5 principles 1) Additionality, 2) Crowding- in and minimum 
concessionality, 3) Commercial sustainability, 4) Reinforcing markets, 5) Promoting high standards  
 Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)  Compliance  
 Sustainable Development Co- benefit  
 Impact potential: Only Sub- projects with measurable and trackable indicators (i.e. core and supplementary) will 
be considered eligible for funding under GCF resources.  
 
The Figure below displays the stages of the referred transaction cycle, as well as the specific steps that the A ccredited 
Entity will take during each stage:


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 38 
 
  
 
Transaction Cycle Stages and relevant Steps  
 
1. Origination: The A ccredited Entity builds and further develops a relationship with potential or existing clients and 
works on a business origination plan according to the business development model, with a view to moving a 
potential Sub -Project into the A ccredited Entity’s active pipeline of transactions.  
 
2. Client Engagement : The A ccredited Entity conducts initial integrity and business conflicts of interest reviews of 
the Sub- Project to determine whether the prospective Recipient(s) and Sub -Project are viable in principle and 
do not, on their face, present undue risk to, or contradict key institut ional and/or policy requirements of, the 
Accredited Entity. Following these steps, a concept note (the “Concept Note”) for the Sub- Project will be 
developed, which will provide an overview of the underlying transacti on and must contain, at a minimum, (i) key 
elements of the Sub- Project’s structure (ii) overview of the Recipient(s), their management team and other 
relevant parties, (iii) estimated development impact and additionality, (iv) compliance with the A ccredited Entity’s 
policies, guidelines and exposure limits, (v) key risks (including credit, legal, integrity, reputational, financial, 
environmental, social and corporate governance risks), (vi) snapshot of industry and sector and client’s 
competitive position, (vii) preliminary conclusion of credit analysis including financial position of Recipient(s) or 
Sub-Project, (viii) any potential internal operational considerations related to funding, accounting/financial 
administration of the transaction, (ix) results of the initial integrity review, (x) alignment with the Country Strategy, and (xi) initial business conflicts of interest assessment. During this stage, contributions from the A ccredited 
Entity, Co-Financing from other Co- financiers  and the GCF Trust Fund m ay be indicatively identified. If the 
Concept Note is approved, then an inter -disciplinary transaction team is assigned to continue the appraisal of 
the Sub- Project, followed by the confirmation of the Recipient (client) engagement, which could require a f ormal 
mandate letter.  
 
3. Path to Approval : The A ccredited Entity will carry out all appropriate due diligence on each Sub- Project, including 
all checks and assessments on Recipients, in a manner that it ordinarily would carry out in any project/program 
financed by the A ccredited Entity, and in accordance with the AMA and FAA. Such due diligence will enable an 
in-depth analysis of each Sub- Project’s creditworthiness, development impact, legal and non- financial risks, 
including integrity, business conflicts of interests, and environmental  and social risks. The analysis wi ll then be 
used to prepare an investment proposal, which contains the information necessary for the Accredited Entity to 
make an informed investment decision, considering all Sub- Project eligibility criteria, as listed in the table below.  
 
 reviewed and assessed  during stage 3: Path to Approval.


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 39 
 
 Climate Finance 
and mitigation and 
adaptation 
assessment  In addition to the general eligibility criteria by IDB Invest, the Sub -Project must fulfill the eligibility criteria of 
climate mitigation or/and climate adaptation finance, as defined in the “ Common Principles for Climate 
Mitigation Finance Tracking ” and “ Joint Methodology for Tracking Climate Change Adaptation 
Finance” . Some Sub -Projects may have dual climate finance (mitigation and adaptation). Potential 
investments with dual climate finance will be eligible as long as at least one component (either mitigation or 
adaptation) or the sum of both has a sizable share.105 
• For mitigation: To verify that this criterion is fulfilled, IDB Invest will use the “MDB/IDFC Common 
Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking” accounting for the total share of climate finance 
according to the share of activities that are eligibl e according to the aforementioned methodology.  
Climate Finance mitigation involves the reduction, limitation, or sequestration of greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions to mitigate the effects of climate change.  
 
• For adaptation: To verify that this criterion is fulfilled, IDB Invest will use the “Joint Methodology for Tracking Climate Change Adaptation Finance”, to verify that climate risks have been appropriately 
identified and addressed. Climate Finance Adaptation involves an assessment of physical climate 
impact, both taking into account historic and future climate trends, as well as the company’s 
contribution to reduce negative climate impacts.  
Potential investment will be assessed against the eligibility criteria as defined in the FAA, which includes a 
list of adaptation and mitigation activities to be financed through the Program.  
Alignment with 
Paris Agreement  
 All Sub -Projects must also be deemed as aligned with the Paris Agreement  under IDB Invest’s  
implementation manual and sector -specific methodologies to assess alignment. IDB Invest’s Paris alignment 
strategy, implementation manual and sectorial guidance have been developed considering the “MDBs’ Characterization Framework for Alignment with the P aris Agreement’s Mitigation Goals (BB1)” and the 
“Implementing the MDBs’ Characterization Framework for Alignment with the Paris Agreement’s Adaptation Goals (BB2).”  
The principles of the MDB Paris Alignment (BB2) ensures that there is no maladaptation and consistency with national and broader resilience contexts and assesses and manages climate risks that could impact the 
project's financial and environmental and soci al (E&S) performance.  
Blended Finance 
Assessment (BFA)  
 In addition to complying with the above general project eligibility criteria by IDB Invest, the candidate Sub -
Projects will be assessed against the Enhanced Principles of the DFI Working Group on Blended Concessional Finance for Private Sector . Only Sub-Projects that fulfill these principles have a chance to 
be selected for funding by the Caribbean private sector facility. The blended finance principles are the 
following:  
• Principle 1. Additionality:  DFI support of the private sector should make a contribution that is beyond 
what is available, or that is otherwise absent from the market, and should not crowd out the private sector.  
• Principle 2. Crowding- in and Minimum Concessionality . DFI support to the private sector should, to 
the extent possible, contribute to catalyzing market development and the mobilization of private sector resources.  
• Principle 3. Commercial sustainability. DFI support of the private sector and the impact achieved by 
each operation should aim to be sustainable. DFI support must therefore be expected to contribute 
towards the commercial viability of their clients.  
• Principle 4. Reinforcing markets.  DFI assistance to the private sector should be structured to 
effectively and efficiently address market failures and minimize the risk of disrupting or unduly distorting markets or crowding out private finance, including new entrants.  
• Principle 5. Promoting high standards.  DFI private sector operations should seek to promote 
adherence to high standards of conduct in their clients, including in the areas of Corporate Governance, Environmental Impact, Social Inclusion, Transparency, Integrity, and Disclosure.  
For each project a Blended Finance Assessment (BFA)  will be prepared by the Blended Finance 
Investment Officer (BFIO) in charge. An internal Blended Finance Panel  will then review and approve the 
BFA.  
ESMF compliance  Each Sub -project under the program is required to comply with the requirements of the ESMF and with the 
corresponding domestic social and environmental regulations.  
For Sub-projects with E&S risk category B or A, it will be required to comply with the disclosure package


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 40 
 
 Sustainable 
Development Co -
benefit  Sustainable development co -benefits are assessed during the eligibility process through the DELTA 
scoring system (please refer to section E of the FP for further information)  
Impact Potential  Each Sub -project will be assessed in its contribution to adaptation and mitigation indicators  following the 
logical framework of the Program. Only Sub- projects with measurable and trackable indicators (i.e. core and 
supplementary) will be considered eligible for funding under GCF resources.  
 
 
The Investment proposal will be presented during the investment decision meeting (IDM) and, if needed, the 
Operations Committee. Unless covered by a delegated facility, each Sub- Project will be presented for approval 
to the IDB Invest Board of Executive Directors on a transaction- by-transaction basis.  
 
4. Closing and First Disbursement : Following approval of each Sub -Project, IDB Invest will seek to sign one or 
more Financing Agreement(s) with all relevant Recipients. Financing Agreements will be tailored to the specific 
Financial Product(s) required for the Sub- Project, and will make I DB Invest, Co -financier(s) and GCF Trust Fund 
resources available to all relevant Recipient(s) in line with the Program Sectors. Financing Agreements will be 
between IDB Invest (acting on its own behalf as the lender, investor  or guarantor of record, and on behalf of the 
GCF as agent of the GCF Trust Fund) and the relevant Recipient(s). The Recipient(s) will execute the 
investments in line with the Program Sectors, according to the terms and conditions outlined in the Financing  
Agreements. IDB Invest and the Recipient(s) will track the implementation and compliance with the Program 
Sectors (and the Financing Agreements), and IDB Invest will provide reporting to the GCF in line with the FAA. 
Once the Financing Agreement(s) are si gned, the disbursement procedure is initiated, which encompasses the 
verification of the Recipient(s)’ compliance with conditions precedent for the first disbursement or issuance of a 
guarantee, depending on the relevant Financial Product for the Sub -Project.  
 
Following the first disbursement and d uring the supervision stage of the Sub- Project,  IDB Invest will be responsible 
for providing the necessary governance, oversight,  and quality assurance in accordance with its policies, procedures 
and any specific requirements in the AMA and FAA . This shall include monitoring, reporting and ex-post evaluation 
of Sub -Projects , including any recovery activities, where applicable.   
 
• Grant Instrument : Sub-Projects under the Grant Instrument will be financed through technical cooperation grants  
designed, approved and executed by the A ccredited Entity (the “TC”). As such, the TC will be the internal vehicle 
through which the A ccredited Entity will allocate GCF Trust Fund resources to eligible Recipients for Sub- Projects 
under Component 1, pursuant to the execution of all necessary Advisory Services Agreements, as applicable.  
 
Eligibility: Under the grant component, AE will finance activities listed under component 1 in section B3 for 
recipients as defined in section BE.  
 
Sub-Projects under the Grant Instrument may be linked to Sub- Projects under the Non -Grant Instrument. The figure  
below  displays the principal stages of IDB Invest’s transaction cycle for Sub- Projects under the Non- Grant Instrument 
and underpins the Advisory Services support that can be offered to such Sub- Projects’ Recipients with resources 
from the Grant Instrument.  
 
 
Advisory Services to IDB Invest’s clients throughout the transaction cycle


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 41 
 
  
111 An Advisory Engagement Leader may be any IDB Invest personnel who leads the engagement with the client. Advisory Engagement 
Leaders should coordinate with INO/ADS.  
112 RD Advisory Engagements support the generation and dissemination of knowledge, and therefore, may relate to a specific client(s) or may 
relate to a knowledge product that will benefit a region. As such, the RD activities may or may not relate to a current investment transaction. 
113 Tall et al., 2021  
114 Marto et al., 2014  
115 A recent IDB study focuses on how entrepreneurs in Latin America and the Caribbean are demonstrating world- class vision, business 
skills, and grit (Peña 2021)   
Sub-Projects under the Grant Instrument may be linked to Sub- Projects under the Non -Grant Instrument. For the 
avoidance of doubt, Sub-Projects under the Grant Instrument  will not finance or be  considered a part of the Sub- Projects 
under the Non- Grant Instrument but may support the preparation or execution of those Sub- Projects at the national 
and/or regional levels. The execution of A dvisory Services under this Program will be done in accordance with IDB 
Invest ’s applicable policies and procedures, a nd the e ligibility criteria , activities and outputs  listed in Section B.3. , if 
applicable. IDB  Invest  will determine with potential Recipients  the detailed deployment of Advisory Services  and define 
based on it the best execution option.  
 
IDB Invest may execute Advisory Services activities depending, for example, on the local context or technical complexity 
of the activities. IDB Invest will  apply its own policies and procedures in the establishment of A dvisory Services  
Agreements, as well as for the  hiring of individual consultants and/or procurement of consulting and other services  
associated with each Advisory Services , ensuring the fulfilment of  applicable AMA and FAA requirements.  
 
Advisory Services Requirements of the program  
 
Operational Arrangements. IDB Invest will directly offer Concessional Financing and Advisory Services to be funded 
through the GCF Trust Fund alongside financial products and advisory services from its own capital resources and of 
other Co-Financiers for specific, covenanted purposes in line with the Program proposal.  
Approvals involving the use of GCF Trust Fund resources will follow IDB Invest’s policies and procedures.  
Processing of Advisory Services ( AS) is based on a two- staged approval process. The first stage is the AS Abstract 
Preparation and Eligibility with basic information on the proposed activity and its objectives, and compliance with 
eligibility requirements. The second stage, once a funding source has been determined, is the preparation of a detailed AS Document, for quality review, to be followed by final approval.
 
 
New A dvisory Engagement s will be generated by the A dvisory Engagement  Leader111 who must register the basic 
information related to the A dvisory Engagement112 in Maestro, by including a description of the scope of the AS, defining 
the activities, the proposed budget, identifying a client beneficiary, and indicating whether the A dvisory Engagement  is 
supporting an investment transaction. The activities and scope of the A dvisory Engagement  must be defined in 
coordination with the client/prospect.  
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)  has one of the largest absolute adaptation finance gaps, requiring an additional 
US$ 14.7 -18.1 billion per year113 in investments to close it . Globally, the area’s  most in need of investment in developing 
countries are (i) coastal protection (accounting for the greatest adaptation finance gap); (ii) infrastructure, energy, and 
other built environment, (iii) water and wastewater management; (iv) disaster risk managem ent, (v) agricultural, forestry, 
and land- use. The Caribbean is particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change. Projections in these countries 
show that losses could reach US$ 22 billion per year by 2050.114 Rising sea levels, storm surges, hurricanes, coastal 
erosion are some of the climate- related threats that have the potential to impact coastlines. This will inevitably affect 
infrastructure of all kinds (transport, water and sanitation, social infrastruct ure, built environment, and energy), including 
the tourism sector, manufacturing sector, and agribusinesses located in coastal areas.  
Ambitious and innovative action on climate change has the potential to close investment gaps in the region by attracting 
private capital. Climate- smart economic development relies on innovation and entrepreneurship, both of which are strong 
in the region.115 Conservative estimates indicate that policy packages for a “decisive transition” to greener economies 
can boost long- run GDP by almost 5% on average, while also delivering short -term growth (OECD 2017).


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 42 
 
  
116 Defined as the by -product cost or benefit of an economic activity imposed to a bystander.  
117 Moench et al., 2007.  
118 Goldstein et al., 2019; Hallegatte et al., 2019.  
119 Subject to IDB’s capability to administer securities on behalf of third -party funds.  In economics terms, GHG emissions are considered an externality116. If the social cost of carbon was internalized, 
phasing out existing coal plants and replacing them with new renewable energy capacity would be far more competitive. 
Conversely, where renewable energy is already competitive but uncompensated for the GHG emissions abated, it generates positive externalities. Climate resiliency is also a source of positive externalities. On average, for every US$1 invested in resilience there is a reduction of US$4 in disaster losses
117, and it is reasonable to expect first movers to 
capture at least a portion of that avoided loss. However, the inclusion of climate risk in corporate decision making and the subsequent investment in climate resilience remains the exception. This is a knowl edge and an economic problem. 
On one hand, firms need to believe in the risk, understand it, assess it, and have the tools to act on it (knowledge).
118 
On the other hand, low -carbon and climate resilient investment may require higher upfront investments (e.g. drip 
irrigation, electric buses), while economic benefits only materialize over time (e.g. tree crops) or under catastrophic events (e.g. resilient  buildings during a hurricane) (economics).  
Businesses that adopt low -carbon or climate resilient practices becomes more competitive, leading competition to 
implement similar actions, while contributing to the overall resilience of the value chain. In addition, firms that target underserved populati ons (e.g. through the provision of goods and services, or employment) contribute to increased 
equality and inclusion. Hence stimulating innovation in climate technologies, business models and social practices can drive inclusive growth, emissions reduction, and climate resiliency.  
This Program will aim to develop knowledge, tools, as well as advisory services and financing products that are 
specifically targeted at businesses operating in the SIDS Host Countries (see section B.1 above).  Blended finance 
solutions offer an opportunity to accelerate the role that private sector stakeholders can play to achieve the goal to limit 
global warming to 1.5 °C, by targeting the use of concessional funding towards high- impact projects in which actual or 
perceived risks are too high for commercial finance alone. Blended finance resources can enhance the risk profile of 
transactions in the Caribbean and offer the adequate terms and conditions to mobilize additional commercial resources into economically sound and transformational projects. Knowledge generation through advisory services also address these market failures helping to prove what are the best practices, technologies and business models that can be later 
replicated and financed by commercial capital alone. Through advisory services, IDB Invest will support the development 
of a strong pipeline of bankable projects.  
The Program will drive climate resiliency and emissions reduction while supporting inclusive economic growth. The 
proposed financial structure is as follows:  
• Funding amount:  
o US$ 506 million in non -grant instrument, of which US$100 million co- financed  by the GCF and  
o US$1 4.075 million in grant instrument , of which US$11.875 million co- financed by the GCF . 
o US$ 3.496  million in project management costs  
o US $3.605 million in monitoring and evaluation costs  
• Financial instruments:  debt instruments, guarantees and risk mitigation instruments, and/or equity investments, 
among other financial instruments.  
119 The different types of instruments will enable the Fund to respond to the 
countries’ needs, adapt to specific domestic circumstances and adapt the financial instrument to be used, on a 
case -by-case basis, during the implementation.  
• Terms and conditions : GCF resources will be deployed in accordance with the Development Finance Institution 
and Multilateral Development Bank principles for the use of concessional finance in private sector operations 
(for further reference, see Enhanced Principles of the DFI Working Group on Blended Concessional Finance for 
Private Sector ). The different types of instruments will enable the Fund to respond to the countries’ needs, adapt 
to specific domestic circumstances and adapt the financial instrument to be used, on a case- by-case basis, 
during the implementation. Concessiona l financing provided with GCF resources may be provided by IDB Inve st 
on concessional terms and/or conditions, including one or more of the following:  
i. Conditions below those available on the market, as determined upfront, or periodically for achieved 
and verified results;  
ii. Terms that unless reflected in the expected returns, would normally not be accepted under a 
commercial financing;  
iii. Financing provided where there is otherwise no access to market, even at terms and/or conditions that would be deemed acceptable under a commercial financing; and/or


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 43 
 
  
120 This tenor allows the program to originate projects with an up to 20 -year tenor financing all throughout the 5- year investment period.  iv. Additional concessionality may be provided as a results -based incentive to promote additional 
social, climate and/or sustainability co -benefits such as gender inclusion.  
• Tenor:  up to 25 years; with a 5- year investment period and an up- to 20- year reimbursement period.120 
• Targeted countries: SIDS Host Countries.  
Concessional resources from the GCF  are highly additional in the Caribbean, as some countries like Barbados, the 
Bahamas and Trinidad and Tobago are considered high- income countries, and as such as not eligible to receive Official 
Development Assistance. This classification impedes the three Caribbean countries, who remain highly vulnerable to 
the effects of climate change, to access concessional resources for climate mitigation and adaptation.  
Moreover, one of the most impactful additionality factors of GCF funding is its ability to lower the cost of capital  and the 
address the scarcity of debt, which are two particular challenges for the private sector in Caribbean countries . 
Investments in new technologies and business models for climate mitigation and adaptation are capital -intensive and 
require long -term investment periods  and considerable amount of debt financing, making them particularly sensitive to 
high costs of capital. This relationship is particularly visible in renewable electricity and electric mobility sector , where 
new solar and wind power plant s, or electric vehicles,  have relatively high initial capital expenditures but very low 
operational expenditures once the projects are in operation. However, in cases of high costs of capital, investors face 
more difficulty in accessing sufficient debt financing to finance the considerable  upfront capital expenditures, leading to 
a preference for projects with lower initial capital expenditures but higher operational expenditure costs, such as fossil -
fuel power plants, fossil -fueled vehicles, and infrastruc ture projects with few embedded resilience measures . Renewable 
energy projects , electric vehicles, and infrastructure projects in the Caribbean incur significantly higher costs compared 
to the rest of Latin America due to small and fragmented local markets. This further increases the need for debt financing, 
further reducing the financial viability of these projects.  
According to the economic and financial model conducted for this program, the concessional financing of the GCF would 
greatly improve the financial indicators of climate -resilient investments like renewable energy projects  (see Annex 3 - 
Financial and Economic analysis ). Given the current conditions in all countries modelled, the business -as-usual scenario 
(without GCF financing) in the region for renewable energy projects result in negative Net Present Values (NPV) and an 
incapacity to reach sufficient liquidity ratios to give private investors the confidence that it will be able to service its debt 
obligations. With the GCF financing, carefully structured according to the principles of minimum concessionality, the 
project returns positive values for NPV, a considerable improvement of Investment Rate of Return (IRR), and reaches 
comfortable liquidity ratios, which enables the mobilization of private investors. The participation of the GCF in projects 
also acts as a stamp of confidence for private investors, who are more likely to participate in the transaction and provide 
less stringent terms  (without the GCF, private investors would provide more risk -adverse financial terms, such as shorter 
tenors and/or higher interest rates ). 
B.6. Exit strategy (max . 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The proposed program will combine a grant and non -grant instrument component.  
Grant instrument component . For IDB Invest to provide advisory services to its clients with the grant instrument 
component of this program, IDB Invest signs a CBA that includes, as applicable, a monetary or in- kind contribution by 
the recipient  of the work. This contribution ensures that the scope of the work is relevant for the client. Additionally, 
advisory services help companies to address the barriers to climate action and creates value for the company, ensuring 
client interest in expanding on the advisory work well beyond the project dates.  
Non-grant instrument component . Given the program’s catalytic purpose, concessional investments provided by the 
program may yield less interest and/or be subject to higher risk than the respective IDB Invest financing or other 
commercial capital used to co- finance eligible projects and that there is a risk of loss of resources of the program. While 
the non -grant instrument component of the program may take positions with risk -return profiles below those taken by 
commercial investors, all transactions will b e structured in financial instruments that are expected to, not only preserve 
the capital invested, but also generate returns through (i) interest or coupon payments, in the case of debt -like financing 
instruments; (ii) premium payments, in the case of ris k-mitigation instruments or guarantees; or (iii) dividends and/or 
exits, in the case of equity investments. GCF resources are expected to be committed in the first 5 years of the program, 
and the transactions in the portfolio will be structured such that t hey are repaid within the tenor of the program.


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 44 
 
  
 By proving the financial viability and long -term sustainability of the projects supported by this program, more commercial 
capital is expected to flow into similar projects in the Caribbean. IDB Invest will generate monitoring reports during the 
life of th e transactions in the program, and a final evaluation once a transaction reaches closure. This monitoring and 
evaluation include an assessment of the financial and non- financial performance of the project, including the 
performance vis à vis the development impact indicators defined at the onset of the project, as well as the financial 
return generated by the transaction, informing future projects that would then benefit from the spill overs and lessons 
learned.


---
*Page 49*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) 
Requeste
d GCF 
funding  
(i + ii + iii 
+ iv + v + 
vi + vii + 
viii + (d) ) Total amount  Currency  
118.976 million USD ($)   
GCF 
financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior 
loans  25 up to 25 years  Case by Case   Case by Case   
(ii) 
Subordinat
ed  
loans  25 up to 25 years  Case by Case   Case by Case   
(iii) Equity  25   Case by Case   
(iv) 
Guarantee
s 25 up to 25 years   Case by Case  
(v) 
Reimbursa
ble grants  2.5    
(vi) Grants  18.976     
(vii) 
Results -
based 
payments  -    
(b) Co-
financing 
informatio
n Total amount  Currency  
 408.2  million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Fina
ncial 
instr
ume
nt Indicative 
Amount  Currency  Tenor & grace  Pricing  Seniori
ty 
IDB Inve st Se
ni
or 
Lo
an
s 
 25 million USD ($)  Case by Case  
 Case by Case  
 Case 
by 
Case 
 
Other Co-
Investors  Se
ni
or 
Lo
an
s 76.5 million USD ($)  Case by Case  
 Case by Case  
 Case 
by 
Case


---
*Page 50*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 IDB Invest  Su
bo
rdi
na
te
d 
Lo
an
s 
 25 million USD ($)  Case by Case  Case by Case  
 Case 
by 
Case 
 
Other Co-
Investors  Su
bo
rdi
na
te
d 
Lo
an
s 
 76.5 million USD ($)  Case by Case  Case by Case  Case 
by 
Case 
IDB Invest  Eq
uit
y 
 25 million USD ($)  Case by Case  
 Case by Case  
 Case 
by 
Case 
 
Other Co-
Investors  Eq
uit
y 
 76.5 million USD ($)  Case by Case  
 Case by Case  
 Case 
by 
Case 
IDB Invest   G
ua
ra
nt
ee
s 25 million USD ($)  Case by Case  Case by Case  Case 
by 
Case 
Other Co-
Investors  G
ua
ra
nt
ee
s 76.5 million USD ($)  Case by Case  Case by Case  Case 
by 
Case 
Recipient s 
of 
Component 
1121 Gr
an
t 
 2.2 million USD ($)  Not applicable Not applicable Not 
applica
ble 
(c) Tot
al 
financi
ng 
(c) = 
(a)+(b)  
+d Amount  Currency  
527.176 million  USD  million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangeme
nts and 
contributiFrom the total GCF financing of USD 118.976 million, USD 100 million are allocated as  reimbursable  
funds  to Component 1. Additionally  for non -reimbursable funds,  USD 11.875 million will be allocated 
to Component 1, while USD 3.496 million will be allocated to Project Management Costs and USD 
3.605 million will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation costs.  
 
121 In the case of non-reimbursable Advisory Services (under the Component  1), IDB Invest typically requires the R ecipient 
to co-finance the Advisory Services.


---
*Page 51*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
 ons (max. 
250 words, 
approxima
tely 0.5 
page)  
C.2. Financing by component  
  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
Million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1  Output 1.1 2.15 1.65 Grants  0.5 Grants  Component 1 
Recipient122  
Output 1.2 7.85 6.15 Grants  1.7 Grants  Component 1 
Recipient  
Output 1.3 1.1 1.1 Grants  0 Grants  Component 1 
Recipient  
Output 1.4  
 1.1 
 1.1 
 Grants  0 Grants  Component 1 
Recipient  
Execution  
support  1.875  1.875  Grants  0 Grants  Component 1 
Recipient  
Non- grant 
Component  2 Output 2.1 
506 100 Loan, equity , 
risk 
mitigation 
and 
reimbursable 
grant 
instruments  406 Loan, 
equity and 
risk 
mitigation 
instruments  IDB Invest & 
Others  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  520.075 111.875 408.2  
 
Please refer to Annex 17 for details on indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country.  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes     
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes      
 
Capacity Building Activities  
As stated in section B.3, the main capacity building activities foreseen are the advisory services of Component 1 
that will be provided to the program recipients ( FIs, Corporations, and Project Developers of energy and 
infrastructure projects ) (listed as Component 1).   
To reiterate, the advisory services activities will take the form of a Grant Instrument will be set up as a facility to 
provide non -financial solutions aimed at bridging the knowledge gap, supporting project preparation and 
developing local technical capacity. IDB Invest will work with clients from various sectors to develop  and update 
 
122 In the case of non-reimbursable Advisory Services (under the Component  1), IDB Invest typically requires the R ecipient 
to co-finance the Advisory Services.


---
*Page 52*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 their strategy and operations, making the most of new climate technology power, identifying present and future 
climate risks, and discovering and entering new green markets.  
Specific advisory services categories are listed in section B.3, and as such, no further additional information is 
provided in this section on capacity building activities.  
Finance Technology Development Transfer  
Given the fact that the portfolio of private sector investment in low -carbon and climate resilient projects in the 
Caribbean requires investment in “clean technologies”, technology transfer is expected to be supported by the program as follows . The list of technologies to be transferred to recipients in the Caribbean is indicative, but non -
exhaustive.  
Renewable energy & energy efficiency  
• Solar photovoltaic panels, inverters, and balance of plant components, such as support structures, cables, 
and low/medium voltage connection systems.  
• Solar thermal systems for generation of hot water or steam.  
• Wind turbines, transformers, and balance of plant components.  
• Investments related to biomass generation, such as feedstock processing equipment, biodigesters, co-firing, pyrolysis or gasification equipment, turbines, or generators, among others.  
• Hydro generation equipment, where in the Caribbean context, may be linked mostly to wave or tidal power systems.  
• Batteries for electricity storage.  
• Equipment for green hydrogen production and usage, such as electrolysers, fuel cells, storage tanks, compressors, and other balance of plant equipment.  
• Efficient electromechanical and electrical equipment, including motors, engines, HVAC systems, lighting solutions, among others.  
• Advanced control systems and automation solutions for active reduction of energy usage.  
Climate -smart agriculture  
• Sustainable Irrigation Systems: Technologies like drip irrigation, soil moisture sensors, and rainwater harvesting systems to optimize water use in agriculture.  
• Crop Resilience Enhancements: Innovative seeds and breeding techniques for crops that can thrive in changing climate conditions.  
• Data Analytics and Monitoring Software: Software solutions that enable farmers to analyze data, track performance, and optimize their farming operations for climate resilience.  
Sustainable & resilient infrastructure  
• Low-impact construction materials for buildings and other grey infrastructure, such as low -carbon 
concrete, paints, coatings, among others.  
• Finalized constructive solutions (glazing, awnings, roofing systems, etc.) that may not be available in Caribbean markets and enhance energy or material performance or increase building resiliency.  
Sustainable transport  
• Battery electric, hybrid, or plug- in hybrid vehicles for both light and heavy -duty usage (two -wheelers, 
passenger cars, vans, light trucks, heavy trucks, and buses are the most relevant categories).  
• Charging infrastructure for Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 charging.  
Blue economy  
• Optimized aeration systems for nitrous oxide emissions control in aerobic part of wastewater treatment plants  
• Capture systems for biogas (methane and carbon dioxide) in anaerobic process step in wastewater 
treatment plants.  
Given the fact that most technology transfer is expected to be linked to the Renewable Energy and Energy 
Efficiency and Sustainable Transport investment categories, where nearly 100% of the equipment is specialized


---
*Page 53*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 and manufactured overseas, we expect that funding for transferred technologies should be in the 280 -350 million 
USD within the program.


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
This Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector Program will target private sector contributions to ward  countries’ 
low emissions, climate resilient pathways. The program will do this through engagement with the five program sectors 
identified through the countries NDCs as well as engagement with the countries private sector . The Program’s 5 priority 
sectors are: 1) Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU); 2) Sustainable and resilient infrastructure; 3) 
Electricity including renewable energy and energy efficiency; 4) Sustainable transport, and 5) Blue Economy.  
In this program , the specific investments to be funded are not known beforehand and are driven by demand from 
commercial entities . As such,  estimates of potential impacts were formulated based on an illustrative portfolio and 
associated assumptions (refer to Annex 22 for Impact details).  
The adaptation and mitigation potential impact of the program has been estimated considering the projected USD  
portfolio allocation to each of the five sectors, and then 1 or 2 types of projects by sector under mitigation and adaptation 
rationale, which could be executed.  
In addressing the mitigation potential, the approach encompasses several key components. These include the 
establishment of a baseline scenario, the consideration of additionality, an explanation of standard industry practices, 
and the application of a counterfactual approach. This counterfactual approach involves shaping assumptions to reflect 
a plausible situation in the absence of the project (known as Business -As-Usual or BAU), as well as assumptions 
pertaining to the integration of mitigation technologies alongside the project. The subsequent methodologies, sources 
of information, and estimations are grounded in the principles outlined by the chosen methodology, which harmonizes 
with the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and other internationally validated methodologies (please refer to 
Annex 22 for a comprehensive overview of impact potential).  
Guided by these methodologies and informed assumptions embedded within the impact model, an estimated total 
reduction/avoidance of 7,064,470 tCO2e emissions over the lifetime of investments of the Program has been estimated. 
Further detailed insights into this estimation are accessible in Annex 22a and 22b: Assessment of Greenhouse Gas 
(GHG) and Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV).  
The expected volume of resources to be  leveraged by the Program  includes  a total of  US$ 408.2  million in co-financing 
from the private sector, of which US$ 406 for the investment component and US$2.2 million for the advisory services .  
The total number of  direct beneficiaries are estimated to reach at least about 22,833 people, of which all of them  direct 
beneficiaries from Electricity, R esilient Infrastructure, AFOLU and the Blue Economy sector . The identification of 
beneficiaries has followed the following general approach: a) Description of the context of vulnerability to climate 
change, including the identification of climate risks in the targeted countries, b) potential adaptation solution ba sed on 
suitable technologies to address the identified climate risks and past climate change projects financed in the region; 
and c) description of a clear and direct link between climate change vulnerability and project activities estimating thus 
the number of targeted beneficiaries, which receive direct support from the program and are expected to have an 
adaptation benefit (see Annex 22). To calculate this, we used the indicative allocation of program resources to capital 
investments in that sector and adjusted the estimated adaptation beneficiaries using secondary data from previous 
similar projects  or from publications with data on similar projects . It should be noted that the program has used a 
conservative approach on the potential impact, thus calcul ations for this section consider conservative scenarios. The 
Program will provide the estimates for the actual Sub- Projects that will be supported during the course of its 
implementation.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately 1 page )


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 Companies in the Caribbean have yet to shift from a corporate social responsibility mindset to a core  business  
sustainab ility strategy . Therefore, there is pressing opportunity and need to support those companies that are willing to 
take the lead, breaking away from the business as usual and integrating a new paradigm in the way they do business. 
In the assessment and analysis of eligibl e projects, IDB Invest conducts climate risk assessments and vulnerability 
analyses within the scope of the environmental and social due diligence of every project, formalizing an Environmental 
and Social Action Plan (“ESAP”) to close compliance gaps that might have been identified. In addition to the preliminary 
assessment and recommendations that might be included in the ES AP, IDB Invest may also support its clients by 
providing recommendations to create additional value beyond compliance on the types of resilient measures to be 
incorporated into the project design and implementation.  
Potential for Innovation. Innovation is expected to come: (i ) for financial institutions projects, in the form of (a) new 
customer segments that have a higher exposure to climate risk and represent untapped market opportunities for local 
financial intermediaries, (b) new financial products that respond to the emerging needs that existing customers may 
face due to changing climate, and/or (c) improved corporate governance that integrates data- driven climate- related 
risks and opportunities into the decision- making process of local financial institutions; (ii) for companies in the real 
economy, in the form of new technologies or business models that, taking into account the project -specific market 
development and regulatory context, maximize the impact potential for decarbonization, such as new models and 
business lines  for renewable energy generation, sustainable transport and logistics or regenerative agriculture and 
agroforestry; (iii) for resiliency projects, in the form of new business models and technologies that offer commercially -
sustainable avenues to ensure pre paration to a changing climate, promoting the livelihood of those most affected by it.  
The program will also support the paradigm shift creating additionality through the Grant C omponent. With these 
resources, IDB Invest will prioritize the implementation of zero -carbon and climate resilient solutions, while leveraging 
benefits for human well -being and biodiversity.  
Potential for scaling up and replication. The program will support projects that can be implemented at scale and offer 
opportunities to be replicated in other countries across the Caribbean. As an example, supporting a sustainable financial 
sector offers opportunities to replicate new financial products but also policies to mitigate the risks of exposure to climate 
change that may affect the portfolio of financial institutions across the region. Similarly, projects that aim to create a 
portfolio of small -scale distributed generation projects enable the implementation of renewable energy generation at 
scale. The regional approach of the Program further contributes to the opportunities to scaling up and replicating 
solutions throughout the eligible countries .  
Contributi on to the creation of an enabling environment . The program will support the evaluation of the barriers to 
sustainable investments in the Caribbean, and address and overcome these through innovative blended finance 
solutions. Making the business case and demonstrating returns on investments made for r esiliency, will be essential in 
order to mobilize the private sector to finance adaptation measures and prevent or reduce significant damage as a 
result of climate events. The advisory services  provided to clients through this facility, will have specific capacity building 
components, targeting both mitigation and adaptation activities. IDB Invest requires co -design of climate strategies, 
action plans, technical and market studies with clients, ensuring that clients build capacity along the way. Additionally, 
most advisories are accompanied by workshops for senior management and/or the relevant personnel and as such, 
this builds capacity amongst clients to ensure they are able to implement and further advance plans set out, even after 
IDB Invest financing and advisory services  concludes.  
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning. IDB Invest not only offers financing and advisory services to its clients, 
but also shares lessons learned with stakeholders in the market through knowledge products, namely case studies, 
blog posts, or other sector -specific and S&I focused publications. P rojects supported by the program will be featured 
in future knowledge products to increase the spillover effects and impact potential  of the program. Additionally, 
a key part of this program will be precisely to create the knowledge agenda for a net -zero, climate resilient Caribbean 
private sector.   
Overall contribution to climate- resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change 
adaptation strategies and plans . The Program will prioritize those areas of focus that the eligible countries have defined 
in their NDCs , targeting the adoption of technologies, best practices and business models by the private sector in their 
contribution with the national plans for mitigation and adaptation.  Since January 1st, 2023,  IDB Invest  is committed to 
having all new transactions in its portfolio , including transactions supported by third- party funds, such as those that will 
be supported by the Program , to be  Paris Aligned.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page )


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 While the focus of the programme is supporting climate investments, the benefits of the projects go beyond 
environmental net gains. The general developmental outcomes of the projects may also include increased (new) 
revenue streams for the company , improved livelihoods, increased and better employment, health benefits derived from 
lower water and air pollution, enhanced productivity derived from more reliable electricity supply and/or strengthened 
resilience,  gender equity practices, enhanced health and saf ety standards,  among others.  
As the private sector arm of the IDB Group, IDB Invest is leveraging decades of experience as an impact investor to 
serve as a gateway to SDG impact in Latin America and the Caribbean.  IDB Invest’s mandate is to maximize 
development impact while maintaining financial sustainability, a two -sided objective shared with many impact investors. 
IDB Invest  offers its strong capacity to select and structure projects with the greatest impact potential, manage ESG 
risks, and build a strong pipeline of SDG -enabling investment opportunities in the region.123 Moreover, The IDB Group’s 
strategic priorities , which include social inclusion and equality, gender equality and diversity, productivity and innovation 
and economic integration,  support all 17 Sustainable Development Goals, emphasizing the region’s most critical  
development challenges and cross -cutting issues . 124 
 
To maintain its focus on development impact, IDB Invest promotes  targets and strategically selects its operations. Its 
main sustainability -related corporate goals include:  
• 30% of financing to support MSME access to finance.  
• 30% financing to foster green growth through climate finance.  
• 30% of transactions have a gender, diversity and inclusion component.  
• 10% of financing for small and island countries125 
 
Further, specific projects can have well -defined components and/or development objectives that directly address 
diversity gaps, as well as the needs of vulnerable or excluded populations. All in all, the economic net benefit of each 
project must be positiv e in order to be eligible under the IDB Invest Impact Managing Framework. This impact 
framework identifies and characterizes the costs and benefits of all projects in the portfolio. It establishes well -defined 
and measurable indicators that reflect the mai n projects’ development objectives. These indicators are monitored during 
the project implementation. Further, as part of the IDB Invest’s impact framework, after clearly establishing the 
development contribution of each project, based on such contribution , each project is aligned to the relevant 
Sustainable Development Goals.  Currently, t he quantification of this contribution is aggregate at the Group level through 
the corporate indicators . 
In the context of this programme, the defined co- benefits estimated for this program include:  
• Reduction of Fine Particle Pollution (PM2.5): Particle pollution can increase the risk of heart disease, lung 
cancer and asthma attacks and can interfere with the growth and work of the lungs. Major health impacts 
include asthma attacks, heart attacks, stroke, COPD, lu nger cancer and death.  
• Jobs created and supported, disaggregated by sex : Each Sub-Project is expected to generate economic 
co-benefits, particularly in terms of job creation and jobs supported. The project is expected to create jobs 
in three of the five program areas, namely  sustainable transport, sustainable infrastructure and climate -
smart agriculture.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Most island residents and visitors depend on regular imports of goods such as food and fuel. Weather and climate -
related events anywhere in the global supply chain can disrupt the transport of raw materials and/or products to and 
from islands.  Sea level rise, coastal erosion, and the impacts of coastal storms threaten critical infrastructure. When 
roads, power, and water & sewer services are disrupted, jobs that depend on them disappear, damaging local 
economies. Warming ocean waters and ocean acidification are degradi ng coral reefs and putting critical marine 
resources at risk. Changes threaten valuable fisheries and the livelihoods of all those who work to catch, process, 
package, and deliver fish products.126  
Added to the Caribbean’s exposure to cumulative recovery costs, natural disasters take a large toll on the Caribbean’s 
future economic growth and development opportunities.  For coastal communities, recovery costs take away scarce 
 
123 IDB Invest Development Impact.  
124 IDB Invest and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs )  
125 Sustainability Report 2022  
126 US Resilience Toolkit


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 resources from development and social spending budgets, hampering the possibilities of a speedy reconstruction and 
the prospects of sustained economic development and wellbeing (IMF, 2018).127 
Of the Caribbean’s 40 million inhabitants, 28 million live on the coast.  The IPCC report projects economic decline and 
livelihood failures at warming above 1.5°C from collapses of fisheries, loss of tourism, and biodiversity loss from 
traditional agroecosystems. This is particularly concerning given the total contributions of t ourism to regional GDP: at 
an average of 28% for Caribbean nations. It is especially concerning given that around 67.5% of Caribbean residents 
already live in moderate or severe food insecurity.128 
Private -sector projects contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation offer an opportunity from a social 
inclusion perspective. Climate change events are known to affect the most vulnerable communities and people, and 
particularly women, the most. resiliency financing in the Caribbean can have a dual -purpose in the sense that mitigation 
finance will also serv e as projects that build resiliency in the face of climate events and disasters. For example, 
distributed energy generation that is built to withstand hurricanes, can serve not only to reduce grid emissions but also 
to provide electricity immediately after  a climate event, when other systems are down.129  
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. Countries in the Caribbean have shown political will 
and leadership advancing their pledges towards carbon emissions reductions and pushing the international community . 
However, the private sector faces structural challenges that prevent them from accessing capital to advance towards 
more resilient and sustainable production models : 
• Limited access to financing. The macroeconomic conditions, together with a very fragmented private sector 
where about 95% of companies are SMEs and high vulnerability to climate change limit the appetite for 
international investors to invest in small projects with higher transaction costs, companies with limited borrowing 
track record and/or a high exposure of their business to the potential impact of climate change.  
• Limited access to technology . Technology that may have been proven in other contexts, might not be available 
in the Caribbean; having to be brought from abroad, increasing project costs and reducing project profitability.  
• Social inequalities for vulnerable populations (including gender -based inequality) . The most vulnerable 
communities tend to not be represented in decision -making roles at private sector companies, constraining the 
perspective and sense of urgency to invest in adaptation and climate resilience to better protect the long- term 
sustainabili ty of the company while offering opportunities to underrepresented communities.  
• Regulatory frameworks . Regulatory frameworks fail to define the right incentives to promote low -carbon 
business models and operations (e.g. adequate regulation for the deployment of distributed energy generation) 
or prevent further damage to the existing natural assets (e.g. c learing of wetland near coasts and deforestation 
driven by small -scale farming and charcoal production continue to be prevalent albeit laws designated 
protected areas or prohibiting practices fail to be enforced).  
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
With a well -established track record in climate financing and strong commitments on Paris alignment, IDB Invest is 
well-positioned to be a financing and knowledge partner for companies in the Caribbean, that are seeking out expertise 
on sustainability integration, climate strategies and action plans, as well as the adequate financial products, terms and 
conditions to implement them. Lessons learned from engagement with private sector companies on climate topics in SIDS Host Countries will be shared within t he 
IDBG for further support, together with IDB Caribbean Country 
Department, to inform policy and regulatory development in private sector climate ambition.  
Moreover, in September 2022, and with the support of each of the IDBG Country Office represen tatives  in each of the 
SIDS Host Countries, the IDBG kicked off the stakeholder engagement process to better understand the needs of the 
SIDS Host Countries to be included as eligible in this P rogram, discuss the scope for this P rogram and define the 
relevant activities and areas of focus that are a priority for private sector participation over the 5- year investment period 
of this P rogram. In the context of this engagement process, IDBG team held one- to-one meetings with each of the 
NDAs in the countries, among others. The following is a summary of our findings:  
Bahamas:  The Office of the Prime Minister has provided a no -objection letter to this program. Other GCF programs in 
Bahamas include FP181, FP180, FP152, FP151. The program sectors  most relevant to the NDC are AFOLU, blue 
economy, Infrastructure, Renewable energy and transport130. Additionally , IDB Invest has engaged with  corporations  
 
127 The Caribbean’s Extreme Vulnerability to Climate Change: A Comprehensive Strategy to Build a Resilient, Secure and Prosperous  
Western Hemisphere. Global Americans High Level Working Group on Inter -American Relations and Bipartisanship 2019 
128 Climate Analytics , 2022 
129 Beyond 60 minutes: the Caribbean, center stage for the soft energy pathway. RMI, 2020  
130 A summary of the analysis conducted of country’s NDCs can be found in Annex 2: Market and Feasibility Study


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 in the infrastructure, blue economy and renewable energy sectors , demonstrating demand  from these sectors in the 
country  as well .  
Barbados:  The Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs has provided a no- objection letter to this program . Other GCF 
programs in Barbados include: FP231, FP192, FP189, FP060. The program sectors  most relevant to the NDC are  
infrastructure, blue economy, renewable energy. IDB Invest has engaged with corporations  in the infrastructure, 
transportation and renewable energy sectors , demonstrating demand from these sectors in the country as well.  
Belize:  The Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment, has provided a no- objection letter to this 
program . Other GCF programs in Belize include: FP101 and FP180. The program sectors most relevant to the NDC are 
infrastructure, blue economy, renewable energy  and climate smart agriculture.  IDB Invest has engaged with 
corporations and project developers  in the renewable energy , infrastructure  and climate smart agriculture sectors , 
demonstrating demand from these sectors as well.  
Dominican Republic:  The Ministry of Environment has provided a no- objection letter to the program . Other GCF 
programs in Dominican Republic FP198, FP189, FP174, FP152, FP151, FP097, FP223 . The sectors most relevant to 
the NDC are climate smart agriculture, blue economy, renewable energy  and infrastructure. IDB Invest engaged with 
corporations and project developers  in the renewable energy  and infrastructure sectors, demonstrating demand from 
these sectors as well.  
Guyana: The Office  of the President  of Guyana has provided a no -objection letter to this program . Other GCF programs 
in Guyana include: FP173. The sectors most relevant to the NDC are infrastructure, blue economy, renewable energy , 
and climate smart agriculture.  IDB Invest has engaged corporations  in the renewable energy , infrastructure and 
transport sectors, demonstrating demand from these sectors .  
Jamaica: The Ministry of Economic Growth and Job Creation has provided a no- objection letter to this program.  Other 
GCF programs in Jamaica include: FP189, FP180, FP152, FP151.  The program sectors most relevant to the NDC are 
infrastructure, blue economy, renewable energy and climate smart agriculture.  IDB Invest has banks, as well as 
corporations  in the renewable energy, infrastructure and mobility sectors , demonstrating demand from these sectors .  
Suriname: The Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment has provided a no -objection letter to this program. Other 
GCF programs in Suriname  include: FP173.  The program sectors  most relevant to the NDC are infrastructure, blue 
economy, renewable energy and climate smart agriculture.  IDB Invest has banks as well as corporations  in the 
infrastructure sector , demonstrating demand from these sectors.  
Trinidad and Tobago:  The Ministry of Planning and Development has provided a no- objection letter to this program.  
Other GCF programs in Trinidad and Tobago include: FP197, FP181. The program sectors  most relevant to the NDCs 
are infrastructure,  renewable energy  and mobility . IDB Invest has engaged banks and project developers in the 
renewable energy and infrastructure sectors, demonstrating demand from these sectors.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
In the management of concessional blended  finance resources,  the IDBG subscribes to the DFIs’ Principles on Blended 
Concessional Finance for Private Sector Projects131. This common framework seeks to ensure a harmonized, efficient 
and catalytic use of concessional resources in private sector projects, while avoiding market distortions and crowding 
out the private sector. Concessional Financ ing will comprise Financial Products, including loans, guarantees, and equity 
investments, provided on terms that are more favorable than those available are from the market, including:  
• Pricing : Concessionality can be achieved through expected returns below those available on the market (i.e. 
lower interest rate for a loan), as determined upfront, or periodically for achieved and verified results (i.e. 
performance -based interest to promote gender equality and inclusion or support SMEs access to finance and 
access to market opportunities)  
• Terms:  Other aspects of structure may also make a financing concessional. For example, unless it is reflected 
in the pricing, lower seniority, longer tenor, back -weighted repayment profile, credit enhancements, or a weaker 
security package of a transaction would  be considered concessional if commercial financial institutions would 
normally not accept it for a client in a particular market environment.  
• Liquidity : Finally, finance provided where there is otherwise no access to market is implicitly concessional, 
even when its expected risk adjusted returns are aligned with market’s expectations (i.e. priced at “market”)  
 
131 DFI Working Group on Blended Concessional Finance for Private Sector Projects . October 2017.


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 The IDBG has established a set of guidelines to implement the 5 principles that will be followed in the structuring by a 
dedicated Blended Finance team in charge of the deployment of the resources of the program in each transaction. 
Among these principles, the commercial sustainability principle aims to ensure that transactions financed by the non-
grant instrument component of this program present a commercial and financially viable model in the long term. The 
financial viability will be assessed on a case- by-case basis, rejecting models that require permanent subsidies to be 
viable.  
For projects with a focus on climate mitigation, the estimated cost per tCO 2e over the project lifetime will be assessed 
during the analysis and structuring phase, based on the principle of minimum concessionality. On average, the 
estimated cost per tCO 2e is expected to be between US$1 and US$2.132 In extraordinary occasions, and if justified in 
the transaction documents by the project -specific context or the social benefits of the project, this estimated cost may 
exceed the benchmark.  
In terms of co-financing, the program is expected to have a target of US$4 leveraged by each US$1 of GCF’s non- grant 
instrument contribution.  
 
In the investments modelled (as referenced in Section B.5. and detailed in Annex 3), the economic analysis 
resulted in a positive ENPV (with a social discount rate of 12%), an EIRR of 25% and a Cost -Benefit Ratio of 1.63 
(see Annex 3 -  Financial and Economic analysis) . This included adding the revenues and costs associated with 
investments, as well as incorporating the co- benefits of mitigated tCO 2e emissions (calculated in Annex 22 - 
program impact) valued at the average price of the effective carbon tax rate for the electric sector from OECD.Stat 
(2021) for the Dominican Republic and Jamaica (taken as representative for the region).  
 
 
 
132 To avoid market distortions the World Bank’s Pilot Auction Facility  clearing prices are used as a benchmark.


---
*Page 60*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1- 2 pages)  
 
The information presented in this Section is provided for information purposes only and includes estimates that are, or may be deemed to be, “forward -looking 
statements”. All assumptions, including those based on historical data, presented in this Section,  including, without limitation, those regarding the current state 
(baseline), potential scenario (target) and Program contributions for future operations of IDB Invest and the Program are for ward -looking statements.  These forward-
looking statements are not  guarantees of future performance, and involve risks and uncertainties, and actual results and performance may differ material ly from 
those described in, or suggested by, the forward- looking statements as a result of various factors.  These forward -looking statements are based on numerous 
assumptions regarding IDB Invest’s present and future business and operational strategies and priorities, the environment in which it expects to operate in the future, 
and the purpose of the Program.  The information project s all sources and uses of GCF Proceeds based on reasonable assumptions made by IDB Invest to the best 
of its ability following IDB Invest’s operational strategies and priorities, whether existing or in development, and the Program’s goal and purpose, as set out in this 
Funding Proposal.   
 
  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will contribute 
(Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  Current emissions 
reductions and resiliency measures by commercial entities in program countries are very limited. Sustainability and resiliency 
in energy, AFOLU, 
Infrastructure, Transport 
and ocean economy -Low The paradigm shift is a move from business -as-usual  fossil -fuel dependent 
and unprepared businesses operations to cleaner and more resilient business operations.  The program intervention will contribute to 
mitigating and adapting to climate change. The shift toward gender -sensitive,  sustainable and 
resilient business goes in scale beyond the direct entities where IDB Invest works given that 
they will create a track record and showcase 
sustainable business models that are bankable. 
Additionally, IDB Invest will work at the market 
level with professional associations to conduct 
gender -sensitive market studies, publish


---
*Page 61*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
  
  
 related sectors have not yet 
been developed 
commercially.  findings and make recommendations on how 
businesses in different sectors can move toward 
being more inclusive, sustainable and resilient.  
Replicability  Net-zero and resiliency 
measures are not yet 
implemented at scale by 
commercial entities and thus replicability is very limited to individual companies that want to advance on a climate strategy. Limited 
experience with private 
sector sustainability and resiliency measures and 
investments is available in the different countries with 
insufficient track record for 
climate business.  Low The combination of successful implementation of new business operations 
and new climate business models 
combined with the market force of ESG,  
and sustainability trends and requirements form the base of a fast and significant replication potential. Companies that invest in emissions reductions and resiliency measures will be replicated by other 
companies within the eight  countries but 
can also serve as lighthouses for the 
private sector in other small and island developing states (i.e. ocean states)   Through gender -sensitive  knowledge 
management instruments, successful climate 
business models and projects, as well as impact 
results will be disseminated among stakeholders 
and are expected to be replicated. Additionally, 
the program will include intentional capacity 
building campaigns for all projects, develop 
expertise at the company and business 
association (i.e. industry and national) levels. 
Once the high initial barrier to net -zero, climate 
resilient business in S&I states relating to uncertainty aro und market demand and 
profitability to make them commercially viable is 
removed, the Program can achieve replicability.  
Sustainability  The NDCs  and adaptation 
and mitigation national 
strategies  of these 
countries all include various 
sectorial emissions reductions targets as well as adaptation targets. However, while the government alone will not 
be able to meet these 
targets, existing business 
practices and FI portfolios  
also don’t fully align with 
the NDCs.  Low 
 Successful business models demonstrating lower costs on the one hand, and higher 
revenues on the other hand through 
emissions reductions and resiliency practices and products, will ensure sustainability.  The program will support businesses in 
designing and implementing gender -sensitive 
models and operations that encourage the 
private sector to invest in low -carbon, 
sustainability  and resiliency in the face of 
climate change. The program will also work at the industry -association and private sector level 
to advance the inclusion and sustainability 
agenda.  
Furthermore, the Program will work with FI to develop green financial products which could continue to be sustained over the life of the 
program .  
  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)


---
*Page 62*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
  
  
 Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).   
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)133 Baseline Target134 
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
All mitigation results 
area Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan.  
The MoVs  includes reports 
of IDB Invest divisions 
such as Environmental 
and Social, Portfolio 
Management, and Independent Engineer 
Reports.  0 610,410 tCO
2e At year 5:  
1,017,349 
tCO 2e 
 
Lifetime 
emissions 
reductions:  
7,064,470  
tCO 2e The amount of GHG avoided 
by clean energy generation,  
electric vehicles for public 
and private transportation,  
energy efficient project in 
buildings and coastal 
ecosystem components and water waste management projects, has been calculated based on different  
methodologies. Further details can be found in Annex 
22a and 22b and assumed 
timing of project implementation.  
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered    
Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and Evaluation Plan.  
The MoVs includes reports 
of IDB Invest divisions 
such as Environmental 
and Social, Portfolio 
Management, and 
Independent Engineer Reports.  The starting point 
or current value of the indicators before the 
implementation of 
the project  
0 The estimated value of the indicator at the mid-point of the implementation  
437,532tCO
2e At year 5:  
                        
729,220  
tCO 2e 
 
Lifetime 
emissions reductions: 3,646,098 tCO
2 
e 
 Externalities and factors outside project management's control that may impact the outcomes.  
Data sources and methodologies applied for estimating baseline and targets.  
 
The amount of GHG avoided 
by clean energy generation 
 
133 See also section E.7 and Annex 22.  
134 Midterm  of the project will be defined as year 3 after receiving funds. The final target  means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for 
core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), the target value at the end of the total lifespan  period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts 
of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 63*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
  
  
  
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access  
 Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable energy 
capacity  Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan.   
The MoVs includes reports of IDB Invest divisions such as Environmental and Social, 
Portfolio Management, 
and Independent Engineer Reports.  0 423MW  At year 5: 704MW  
 
Installed 
capacity by the 
end of program: 
3,518MW . 
 has been calculated based 
on CDM methodologies. We 
assumed CAPEX of solar  
based on surveys from 
Engineering companies on latest CAPEX for grid -tie 
solar in Caribbean countries, from advisory services provided or quoted for clients 
in the region  
We assumed S&I Yield Solar 
(MWh/MWp/year) based on PVWatts average solar irradiance and yield in Jamaica, DR, and Guyana .
135 
The total installed capacity is achieved after the end because of the timing in project implementation and 
assumed construction 
periods (of around 2 years).   
Further details can be found 
in Annex 22a and 22b and assumed timing of project implementation . Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated  0 718,596 MWh  
At year 5: 1,197,660 MWh 
 
Renewable 
energy generated Installed by the end of program: 
5,988,300 
MWh. 
 
MRA2 Low -emission 
transport  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and Evaluation Plan.   
The MoVs  includes reports 
of IDB Invest divisions 
such as Environmental 
and Social, Portfolio 
Management, and 0  
81,473 tCO 2e                                            
At year 5: 
135,788  
tCO 2e 
 Amount of GHG avoided by 
projects of electric vehicles 
for public and private 
transportation. The main 
assumptions are based on 
market research for 
Caribbean countries and IDB 
Invest expertise.  Further 
 
135 https://pvwatts.nrel.gov/pvwatts.php


---
*Page 64*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
  
  
 Independent Engineer 
Reports.  Emissions 
reductions by 
the end of life:   
                                     
402,415  
tCO 2e 
 details can be found in 
Annex 22.  
 
MRA3 Buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  
 Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan.   
The MoVs includes reports of IDB Invest divisions 
such as Environmental 
and Social, Portfolio 
Management, and Independent Engineer Reports  
. 0 
 
15,685 tCO 2e 
 
 At year 5: 
26,141 tCO 2e 
Emissions reductions by the end of life of the technology/asset: 261, 399 
tCO
2e 
 Amount of GHG avoided by energy efficient project in 
buildings, calculated with the 
EDGE APP. Further details can be found in Annex 22.  
 
Supplementary 1.1: Annual 
energy savings  0 524 MWh/year  
874 MWh/year  
Energy saving by the end of life of the technology/asset: 8,743 
MWh/year  
MRA4 Forestry and 
land use  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan.  
The MoVs includes 
reports of IDB Invest 
divisions such as 0 75,72 0 tCO 2e At year 5: 126,200 tCO
2e 
 Amount of GHG avoided by 
projects with coastal ecosystem components and water waste management 
projects. For, water waste 
project, the main 
assumptions are based on


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
  
  
 Environmental and Social, 
Portfolio Management, 
and Independent Engineer 
Reportsf..  Emissions 
reductions by 
the end of life:  
                                 
2,754,558  
tCO 2e 
 
 existing projects of the IDB 
Invest. For coastal 
ecosystem restoration 
projects, the main assumptions came from 
literature and market 
research.  Further details can 
be found in Annex 22A and 
22B  
All adaptation results 
area Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. The collection of results during 
supervision is based on 
reports from the Client. For a selection of projects, IDB Invest will commission surveys to ensure the accuracy of information.  0 Direct: 2,887, 50% 
female  
Indirect: 0  
 At year 5:  
Direct: 11,650, 
50% female  
Indirect: 0  
Beneficiaries by 
the end of life:  
Direct: 22,833, 
50% female  
Indirect: 0  People benefited from more 
resilient environments 
through climate smart agriculture, blue economy, 
sustainable transport and 
sustainable infrastructure 
projects. These numbers 
relate to direct beneficiaries. Indirect beneficiaries are not tracked. Benefici aries by the 
end of the project reflect the 
assumed timing of 
implementation.  
Further details can be found in the companion Annex 22b. See also section E7 for monitoring and evaluation arrangements.  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. The collection of results during 
supervision is based on 
reports from the Client. 
For a selection of projects, 0 0 At year 5:  
0 
 People benefited from more 
resilient environments 
through climate smart agriculture, blue economy, 
sustainable transport and 
sustainable infrastructure projects. These numbers 
relate to direct beneficiaries.


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
  
  
 IDB Invest will 
commission surveys to 
ensure the accuracy of 
information.  Beneficiaries by 
the end of life:  
Direct :1848, 
50% female.  
 
Indirect: 0  Indirect beneficiaries are not 
tracked. Beneficiaries by the 
end of the project reflect the 
assumed timing of implementation.  
Further details can be found in the companion Annex 22b.” See also section E7 for monitoring and evaluation 
arrangements.  
       
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment  
 
 Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  IDB Invest impact 
measurement framework.  
The collection of results 
during supervision is 
based on reports from the 
Client. For a selection of 
projects, IDB Invest will commission surveys to 
ensure the accuracy of information.  0 Direct: 2,887, 50% 
female  At year 5: 11,650, 50% female  
. 
Beneficiaries by the end of life:  
                                               
Direct : 20,436, 
50% female.  
 
Indirect: 0  People benefited from more 
resilient environments 
through sustainable and resilient infrastructure projects. These numbers 
relate to direct beneficiaries. 
Indirect beneficiaries have 
not been defined. Beneficiaries by the end of the project reflect the assumed timing of project  
implementation.  
Further details can be found in Annex 22b. See also section E7 for monitoring and evaluation arrangements.  
Supplementary 2.6: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
living in buildings that have 
increased resilience 
against climate hazards  Project -specific results 
matrix or Monitoring and Evaluation Plan.  
The collection of results during supervision is based on reports from the 
Client. For a selection of 0 2,887  
 At year 5:  
11,650, 50% 
female  
Direct 
benefici aries by This is the estimate of the number of beneficiaries that who are living in buildings/dwellings that have increased resilience against climate change related 
hazards  will receive clean


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
  
  
 projects, IDB Invest will 
commission surveys to 
ensure the accuracy of 
information.  the end of life: 
20, 436, 50% 
female.  
 energy, based on energy 
demand per capita.  
It is calculated as number of 
individuals (female and male) that benefit from projects aimed to enhance reliability of electricity services. Thus, this estimate includes beneficiaries, who will 
receive clean energy. The 
number of total beneficiaries depends on the implementation and successful operation of the projects.  
Further details can be found 
Annex 22B.” See also 
section E7 for -  and 
evaluation arrangements.  
Core 3: Value of physical 
assets made more resilient 
to the effects of climate 
change and/or more able to 
reduce GHG emissions  
 IDB Invest impact measurement framework.  
 TBD TBD TBD136 
 USD Million  total project 
costs of adapted investments that integrate measures to reduce material physical climate risks to the asset, 
activity or entity that is the subject of the investment; 
and total project cost of 
enabling investments that 
enable the climate resil ience 
of other assets, activities or 
entities.  
  
 
136 This indicator is a new indicator under the IDB Invest Impact Measurement Framework that will also be applied to this program . As such, AE commits to 
reporting on this indicator but no target has been set for this indicator.


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
 ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  
 Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  IDB Invest impact 
management framework.  
The MoVs  includes 
reports of IDB Invest 
divisions such as Environmental and Social, Portfolio Management, and Independent Engineer Reports.  0 0 At year 5: 0 
Beneficiaries by 
the end of life:  
Direct: 
549,50% 
female  
Indirect: 0  
 The number of beneficiaries is estimated for mangrove 
projects. The main 
assumptions came from market research. Beneficiaries by the end of the project reflect the assumed timing of project implementation.  
Further details can be found in Annex 22b. See also section E7 for monitoring and evaluation arrangements.  
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5- 8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.  
Core Indicator Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformatio
n at the sectoral, local, or 
national level  Weak penetration of 
renewable energy, 
electromobility, climate-
smart agriculture, 
sustainable and forestry 
practices.  Also, there is no 
evidence of systemic 
financing instruments  
incentivizing market 
participants by reducing 
costs or risks, or through 
eliminating barriers to the low The program will provide 
evidence that projects have 
effectively and sustainably 
reduced the costs and risks 
of deploying effective low 
emission and climate 
resilient market solutions .  The project will incentivize 
uptake of greener 
technologies among 
businesses through 
offering gender -sensitive 
technical advice and 
climate investment 
preparedness services as 
well as blended finance 
towards highly additional 
and transformational 
projects that are Multi -countries


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
  
  
 deployment of low -
emission, climate resilient 
solutions.  This situation 
weakens  the demand for 
the targeted markets of  
increas ing sustainable and 
resilient infrastructure, and 
blue economy, including 
the waste management.  economically sound but  
require temporary subsidy 
order to address a market 
failure.  
Core indicator 8: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation and 
learning processes, and 
use of good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  Limited awareness and 
evidence- based knowledge 
of green and resilient 
products and operations 
among businesses  and 
financial institutions  in the 
eight  countries.  low The program provides 
examples of rigorous and 
credible lesson learning 
exercises being undertaken 
and shared at regional or 
national level which 
highlight good practice 
examples and provide 
evidence for future action.  Companies participating 
under projects in the 
program also receive 
inclusive capacity building 
sessions to ensure that 
they are well -placed to 
carry out the climate 
change action plan, and 
are also likely to hire full -
time sustainability experts 
within the company , 
through an inclusive 
recruitment process.   Multi -countries  
 
E.5. Project/ programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide agains t which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a) (b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co -benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numb ering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme  
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
  
  
 Increase gender 
sensitive resilience of 
infrastructure, 
ecosystems and 
communities  See section E.3. GCF 
Outcome level: 
Reduced emissions 
and increased 
resilience.  Project Monitoring 
Records  n/a n/a n/a The outcomes rely mainly 
on two aspects: (i ) the 
Clients/Projects agree to 
run gender -sensitive 
diagnostics and agree to 
implement resulting 
measures; (ii) the 
measures are attractive 
from the cost side for the 
Client/Project or the IDB 
Invest financing is able to 
support its 
implementation.  
Intermediate Outcome 
1: Climate Sub- projects 
became bankable and 
FIs are prepared to 
channel climate finance  # of projects     Project Monitoring 
Records  0 TBC 50 All these projects are 
expected to have a 
financial and economic 
rate of return higher that 
the cost of capital.  
Output 1.1:  
Sustainability practices 
and standards 
promoted in the 
financial sector.  
 
This output is to 
incorporate material 
ESG practices and 
policies in order to drive 
sustainable operations 
and portfolio in the 
Financial Institution.  
.  
 1.Inclusive training 
workshops delivered 
to employees in 
Financial Institutions 
on Sustainable 
Finance  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 20 32 At least two workshops 
per advisory  
2. Gender -sensitive 
sustainability policy or 
gender -sensitive 
sustainable finance 
strategy/action plan 
developed  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 4 12 Support 12 clients in 
developing a sustainable 
finance strategy or action 
plan.  
In cases where the plan 
is partly financed by the 
Client, this assumes that 
the Client is willing to 
contribute financially. In 
all cases it is assumed 
that the Client will be 
willing to allocate in -kind


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
  
  
 resources to develop a 
plan.  
3. Supporting gender -
sensitive material 
developed for 
sustainable finance 
(Operations/Policy 
manuals, market 
studies, Portfolio 
reviews/diagnostic)   Project Monitoring 
Records  0 8 16 At least one supporting 
material per advisory  
 
4. New green lending 
lines or financial 
products introduced  
Project Monitoring 
Records  0 3 8 Assume 8 clients who are 
in advanced stages of 
sustainability strategies 
are ready.  
The resulting financial 
products are expected to 
be financially attractive 
for the Client.  
5.Green, social, 
sustainability and 
sustainability -linked 
documentation 
prepared (FI 
preparatory process 
and second -party 
opinion)  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 1 5 5 clients will be advanced 
enough with sustainability 
strategies and green 
lending to issue a bond. 
In cases where, the 
documentation is partly 
financed by the Client, 
this assumes that the 
Client is willing to 
contribute financially. In 
all cases it is assumed 
that the Client will 
allocate in- kind resources  
to develop the 
documentation.  
Output 1.2 Sustainable  
and resilient 
corporations and real 6.Low-carbon 
feasibility study 
conducted  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 12 24 24 projects will require 
low-carbon feasibility


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
  
  
 sector projects  
developed.  
 
This output is to 
incorporate material 
gender and climate 
practices and studies in 
order to drive inclusion, 
sustainability and 
resiliency in the sub-
projects.  studies over the course of 
five years.  
7.Legal or regulatory 
review conducted  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 4 8 One regulatory review per 
country, as needed.  
8.Gender -sensitive 
resiliency feasibility 
study conducted Project Monitoring 
Records  0 4 10 10 potential financing 
projects will require 
resiliency feasibility study 
to assess bankability and 
financing potential for 
adaptation and resiliency.  
In cases where, the study 
is partly financed by the 
Client, this assumes that 
the Client is willing to 
contribute financially. In 
all cases it is assumed 
that the Client will timely 
provide accurate 
information.  
Output 1.3 Market -level 
guidelines  standards 
tools  and capacity 
building  
 
This output is to 
promote gender -
sensitive action at the 
market -level. . 9.Market -level tool, 
gender -sensitive 
standard or guide  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 2 7 The program expects to 
create 7 market tools, 
standards  and guides 
across the program 
countries.  
10.Inclusive Capacity 
building workshops  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 4 14 Assume each of the 7 
market tools will require 2 
workshops to socialize.  
At least two per 
intervention  
Output 1.4 Public  
knowledge products 
and capacity building 
reinforced  
 
This output will produce 
market knowledge 11.Inclusive 
knowledge product  Website of document 
publication  0 1 10 Knowledge product s aim 
to disseminate positive 
and negative 
experiences. In all cases, 
given the nature of 
private sector operations, 
they require agreements 12. Inclusive 
knowledge product  Website of document 
publication  0 4 10 
13. Inclusive 
knowledge product  Website of document 
publication  0 2 8


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
  
  
 products and detailed 
capacity building 
sessions in order to 
drive gender -sensitive 
climate action in the 
host countries.  of the Client to make 
such products public.  
Intermediate Outcome 
2: Low carbon and 
climate -resilient 
investments 
implemented in the 
SIDS Host Countries, 
with equitable and 
inclusive participation of 
women and other 
vulnerable groups in 
employment and market 
opportunities, training 
and leadership 
opportunities  Number of  low carbon 
and climate- resilient 
investments 
implemented, of 
which 40% with 
gender, diversity 
and/or inclusion 
targets  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 12 34, of which  
14 with GDI 
targets  40% of the 34 
investments will have 
gender, diversity and/or 
inclusion targets  
Output 2.1:  Improved 
financing solutions to 
support private sector -
led net zero and climate 
resilient Sub -Projects in 
the Caribbean, 
promoting equitable 
participation for women 
and vulnerable groups  
 Number of 
decarbonization 
projects financed  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 8 22 This output will enable 
investments in climate -
resilient economic 
activities that would not 
have been feasible 
without concessional 
GCF financing, driving 
progress towards climate 
adaptation and mitigation 
in the region  Number of  adaptation  
projects financed  Project Monitoring 
Records  0 4 12 
Project/programme co- benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1 Jobs supported, 
disaggregated by sex  IDB Invest Impact 
Management Framework  0 742 742 These assumptions were 
made based on job 
creations in the same


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
  
  
 sector in other regions 
and extrapolated for the 
eight  countries.  
Co-benefit 2 PM 2.5 Amount of PM 
2.5 emissions avoided  IDB Invest Impact 
Management Framework  
 0 0 368 Estimation based on 
projects for electric in 
sustainable transport. 
Further details can be 
found in Annex 22b.  See 
also section E7 for 
monitoring and evaluation 
arrangements.  
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub- activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub- activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity.  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Support the FI in 
establishing or advancing its sustainability vision, operations and activities  IDB Invest supports Fis in establishing 
a first sustainability strategy, or further 
elaborating its sustainability strategy 
by developing new policies, 
procedures and green financial 
products. IDB Invest assesses the 
bank’s baseline on gender, diversity  
and inclusion/sustainability  best 
practices and designs a customized 
advisory services solution that meets 
their needs.  • Capacity building and developing 
a commitment.  
• Development of strategic visions 
and action plans, including 
gender, diversity and inclusion where applicable.  
• Development of green financial 
products to channel funding to the five main sectors of this program:  
 Deliverables under these activities 
include but are not limited to:  
• Workshops  
• Sustainability Policies  
• Sustainable Finance 
Strategies  
• FI MRV systems  
• Market Studies  
Proposals for green financial products  
Activity 1.2.1 Strengthening  of a 
portfolio of eligible inclusive  green 
projects  Grant resources will be allocated to 
preparing a strong pipeline of projects 
in contexts that allow for higher and broader impact  • Specialized consultancy services 
will be hired to support the 
generation of a bankable gender -
smart climate finance pipeline.  
  
A portfolio of eligible projects is 
curated, ensuring a diverse range of 
initiatives that have the potential to


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 deliver desired adaptation and/or 
mitigation outcomes  
Activity 1.2. 2 Implementation  of 
advisory services for corporations and 
project developers  The Program will provide support to 
potential and current IDB Invest clients in the form of capacity building, 
execution of feasibility studies  with an 
inclusive/gender lens , development of 
business models, among others . • The Program will work closely 
with the client (corporations and 
project sponsors) to develop 
climate action plans and climate operations , which are inclusive 
and gender smart as applicable,  
that can be financed under Component 2 or to unlock climate 
finance from other sources. 
Support the performance of technical 
feasibility studies with an inclusive 
lens at the recipient  (IDB Invest client) 
sites with the objective of 
demonstrating business viability  • Feasibility studies  
Corporations, and project sponsors 
participate of capacity building sessions to implement net zero and climate resilient projects  
Activity 1.3.1 Market -level engagement 
to raise the bar for sustainability.  
 This activity will promote industry -
specific initiatives to raise the bar and advance the sustainability agenda for 
all private -sector entities.  • Identify the material 
GDI/sustainability topics for the 
industry, understand the demand from the private sector and 
develop sustainability protocols 
and set guides for the respective industry.  
• The program will carry out capacity building activities based on the information produced 
during the execution of the 
activities described above.  
• Learning workshops  
Issuing guides and tools for various 
types of projects  • Sustainability protocols  
• Tools and guides developed for 
the industry.  
• Capacity building  
• Learning workshops conducted.  
 
Activity 1 .4.1 Creation  and public 
dissemination of industry or 
technology -specific knowledge  The Program will support the 
development of comprehensive 
research and analysis to identify and 
innovative approaches in select 
sectors where there is demand or 
potential for demand  • Gathering data, assessing the 
effectiveness and cost -efficiency 
of various strategies and technologies  
 Guidelines and/or reports that provide 
practical guidance on implementing 
cost-effective solutions for mitigation 
and adaptation in specific sectors


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
 Activity 1.4.2 Market studies for 
financing inclusive  green and climate 
technologies  Under this program, this activity will 
develop state of the market studies with a gender lens highlighting the 
gaps, barriers and opportunities for green business models, climate 
technologies and financing green 
broadly, with a country or region -
specific lens  • State of the market studies   
• Publication and dissemination of 
existing incentives in place for climate business  
 State of the market studies  
Activity 1.4.3 Case studies, 
evaluations, dissemination material to share lessons learned  The objective of this activity is to 
facilitate the extensive dissemination 
of the Program among the targeted countries, key stakeholders, and Program recipients.  • Project case studies will be 
developed to showcase the 
outcomes of successful projects.  
• Various materials will be created 
with the purpose of sharing lessons learned with other market 
participants.  
Conference and panels participation  Case studies developed and 
knowledge material for dissemination.  
Activity 2.1.1: Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency Financing  This activity will finance Sub -projects  
through concessional blended 
financing instruments  that focus on 
expanding renewable energy sources 
and energy efficiency measures. The 
goal is to support the just transition of 
the Caribbean to low -carbon electricity 
grid, while increasing the energy 
efficiency of the economies and 
improving the resilience to climate -
related impacts.  • Regular project assessment by 
IDB Invest’s  investment review 
process, including due diligence and in- depth analysis of the 
transaction’s credit and non- credit 
components, preparation of the 
Investment Proposal, negotiation 
of terms and conditions with the 
client, and obtaining an institutional inv estment decision of 
the Investment Decision Meeting (IDM)  
• Enhanced and additional project 
assessment through a through a 
Blended Finance Assessment 
(BFA) against the five blended 
finance principles ( 1. Additionality, 
2. Crowding -in and Minimum 
Concessionality, 3. Commercial 
sustainability, 4. Reinforcing Key deliverables of project 
assessment and approval process include:  
• Approved Investment Proposal 
(IP) 
• Approved Blended Finance Assessment (BFA).


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 markets, 5. Promoting high 
standards) and obtaining an 
institutional investment decision of the Blended Finance Panel  
 
Activity 2.1.2: Climate -Smart 
Agriculture Financing  This activity aims to finance 
sustainable agricultural Sub- projects  
concessional blended financing 
instruments , particularly those that 
adopt climate -smart practices to 
enhance productivity while promoting environmental conservation. It focuses on projects such as agroforestry 
systems and reforestation to address 
deforestation and climate change impacts.  • Regular project assessment by 
IDB Invest’s investment review process, including due diligence 
and in- depth analysis of the 
transaction’s credit and non- credit 
components, preparation of the 
Investment Proposal, negotiation of terms and conditions with the client, and obtaining an 
institutional investment decision of 
the Investment Decision Meeting 
(IDM  
• Enhanced and additional project 
assessment through a through a Blended Finance Assessment (BFA) against the five blended 
finance principles (
1. Additionality, 
2. Crowding -in and Minimum 
Concessionality, 3. Commercial 
sustainability, 4. Reinforcing markets, 5. Promoting high 
standards) and obtaining an 
institutional investment decision of 
the Blended Finance Panel  
 Key deliverables of project assessment and approval process 
include:  
• Approved Investment Proposal 
(IP) 
• Approved Blended Finance 
Assessment (BFA)  
Activity 2.1.3: Sustainable & Resilient Infrastructure Financing  In this activity, financial support will be 
provided through c oncessional 
blended financing instruments  for 
investments in inclusive, sustainable  
and climate- resilient infrastructure 
Sub-projects in the Caribbean which • Regular project assessment by 
IDB Invest’s investment review process, including due diligence and in- depth analysis of the 
transaction’s credit and non- credit 
components, preparation of the Key deliverables of project 
assessment and approval process 
include:  
• Approved Investment Proposal 
(IP)


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 increase decision -making 
opportunities and women's 
participation in gender -smart 
infrastructure design.  The primary 
focus of this activity is to encourage the 
development of energy -efficient and 
climate -resilient buildings and 
infrastructure to reduce emissions and 
increase resilience to climate- related 
impacts such as hurricanes, sea -level 
rise, torrential  rain, and heatwaves.  Investment Proposal, negotiation 
of terms and conditions with the client, and obtaining an institutional investment decision of the Investment Decision Meeting 
(IDM  
• Enhanced and addtional  project 
assessment through a through a 
Blended Finance Assessment (BFA) against the five blended 
finance principles (
1. Additionality, 
2. Crowding -in and Minimum 
Concessionality, 3. Commercial 
sustainability, 4. Reinforcing 
markets, 5. Promoting high 
standards) and obtaining an institutional investment decision of 
the Blended Finance Panel  
 • Approved Blended Finance 
Assessment (BFA)  
 
Activity 2.1.4: Sustainable Transport 
Financing  This activity involves providing 
financial support  through c oncessional 
blended financing instruments  for 
investments in low -carbon and resilient 
infrastructure projects, with a specific 
focus on promoting electric vehicles 
(EVs). The activity aims to accelerate 
the adoption of eco -friendly 
transportation solutions, reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, and 
enhance overall resilience to 
environmental challenges.  • Regular project assessment by 
IDB Invest’s investment review 
process, including due diligence 
and in- depth analysis of the 
transaction’s credit and non- credit 
components, preparation of the 
Investment Proposal, negotiation 
of terms and conditions with the 
client, and obtaining an 
institutional investment decision of the Investment Decision Meeting (IDM  
• Enhanced and additional project assessment through a through a Blended Finance Assessment 
(BFA) against the five blended 
finance principles (
1. Additionality, Key deliverables of project 
assessment and approval process 
include:  
• Approved Investment Proposal 
(IP) 
• Approved Blended Finance 
Assessment (BFA)


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 2. Crowding -in and Minimum 
Concessionality, 3. Commercial 
sustainability, 4. Reinforcing markets, 5. Promoting high standards) and obtaining an 
institutional investment decision of 
the Blended Finance Panel  
 
Activity 2.1.5: Blue Economy, Water 
and Waste Treatment Financing  In this activity, financial support will be 
provided for various blue economy 
activities that not only enhance local 
water quality and availability but also 
bolster resilience against water -related 
climate impacts such as droughts and 
floodings, and includes gender and/or 
social KPIs to ensure blue economy 
investment works for all. The blue 
economy refers to the sustainable use 
and conservation of ocean and marine 
resources for economic growth and 
improved livelihoods.  • Regular project assessment by 
IDB Invest’s investment review process, including due diligence and in- depth analysis of the 
transaction’s credit and non- credit 
components, preparation of the 
Investment Proposal, negotiation 
of terms and conditions with the client, and obtaining an institutional investment decision of the Investment Decision Meeting 
(IDM  
• Enhanced and additional project 
assessment through a through a Blended Finance Assessment (BFA) against the five blended 
finance principles (
1. Additionality, 
2. Crowding -in and Minimum 
Concessionality, 3. Commercial 
sustainability, 4. Reinforcing 
markets, 5. Promoting high 
standards) and obtaining an institutional investment decision of 
the Blended Finance Panel  
 Key deliverables of project 
assessment and approval process 
include:  
• Approved Investment Proposal 
(IP) 
• Approved Blended Finance 
Assessment (BFA)  
 
E.7. Monitoring,  reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
  
137 Development indicators includes adaptation and mitigation when they are part of the project main objectives,   
Program arrangements for monitoring, reporting and evaluation.  
 
IDB Invest follows a differentiated approach to monitoring, reporting and evaluation for Components 1 and 2.  
 
Component 1 : Given that it is primarily technical assistance and knowledge products, there are only project specific indicators. This will be monitor ed and reported  
through data from project documentation such as client beneficiary agreements (CBA), vendor firm contracts as well as all del iverables submitted under the advisory 
services sub -project, IDB Invest can report annually on the progress toward the targets of all indicators listed under component 1.  
 
Component 2: Under its Impact Management Framework , IDB Invest monitors and evaluates the development, financial, and Environmental and Social (E&S) 
performance of all of its projects on an annual basis. This will include the Sub- Projects under Component 2. The benchmarks, annual targets, for evaluating eac h 
Sub-Project's performance will be set at the stage of approval of the financing in the results matrix which will contain the main indicators. The approval documentation 
will also set financial and operational indicators with reference projections. Information on actual performance will be collected from Recipients annually (t ypically 
within ninety (90) days of the close of the fiscal year applicable to each Sub -Project jurisdiction). Exceptions to this period shall be based on Recipient requests and 
proper justifications. Under each Financing Agreement, each Recipient shall commit to deliver documentation and key indicator s to track Sub -Project performance, 
including audited financial statements, and cert ificates of compliance with local regulations, among others. Upon agreement with the Recipient, IDB Invest will also 
use external sources such as independent engineer visits, environmental and social verification visits, or administrative dat a from other s ources. After the information 
has been collected and verified, IDB Invest will assess the financial, operational, E&S, and development performance in the A nnual Supervision Reports (ASR).137 
The ASRs for the whole portfolio are prepared throughout the year. The development performance of Sub- Projects will be measured through our score system 
called Development Effectiveness, Learning, Tracking, and Assessment (DELTA). The DELTA system encompa sses impact indicators, financial and economic, 
E&S, and corporate governance aspects. It is a fact -based scoring system that assesses the impact potential of each investment.  Adaptation and mitigation 
objectives and/or benefits are assessed in the DELTA under the specific category of Environment and Climate Change. DELTA ass esses the type of project, the 
share of use -of-proceed allocated to mitigation and/or adaptation, and the extent of the expected impact. To be scored in the DELTA, the project needs to have a 
net positive climate or environmental impact. That is, not merely compensating for negative environmental impacts of the proj ect but going beyond environmental 
risk mitigation. The net positive impacts need to be well -identified and measurable. To t hat end, appropriate indicators and targets are established. Those indicators 
and targets also allow to monitor the project performance during project operation. The category of Environment and Climate C hange weight 30% of the total DELTA 
score. This score is calculated at approval (based on projections) and annually updated based on actual performance (with respect to its ex -ante targets). After a 
reasonable operating time, IDB Invest prepares, for each project over US$1 million, the Expanded Supervision R eports (XSRs). The XSR evaluates the project 
performance based the ex -ante identified development gaps. The XSR is in turn evaluated by the Office of Evaluation and Oversight, an independent eval uation 
office that monitors the performance and effectiveness  of the IDB Group activities. Under this framework, all indicators in E.4 will be tracked and evaluated annually.  
 
Specific consideration s: For the following indicators (i) Direct beneficiaries reached, and (ii) Jobs created or  supported, the ir actual values are reported by the 
client in their annual reports delivered to the IDB Invest. The main sources of verification are field visits of specialist s of IDB Invest Environmental and Social Division


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
  
 and Portfolio Management Division. It is important to highlight that the actual values of indicator s are collected according to each Recipient ’s reporting capacity. 
Therefore, the actual values are reported/collected at the level of the beneficiary units that are specific to each project. For reporting to the GCF, the number of 
individuals will be calculated as the number of units benefited from  the project multiplied by the number of estimated individuals in that unit. This calculation will be 
performed an d documented by the Office/Division administering the GCF Trust Fund withing the IDB Invest. In addition, for a selection of Sub-Projects, IDB Invest 
will perform surveys to validate the magnitude (number of beneficiaries) and quality (project direct benefit) of reach of the Program, as well as to validate the number 
of women benefited.   
 
For GHG Emissions avoidance see Annex 22. Additionally, annual reporting can be made available for the indicators listed under section E -5. 
 
Compliance with AMA and GCF evaluation policy requirements  
In accordance with the AMA and GCF evaluation policy the IDB Invest will collate and aggregate data to report to the GCF in t he Annual Performance Reports.  
IDB invest will contract an intermediate evaluation at mid- term of program timeline and final evaluation at end of program implementation in alignment with the AMA 
and the GCF evaluation policy.


---
*Page 82*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 Credit default risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
Credit risk could materialize as borrowers face challenges meeting their financial commitments due to unforeseen 
circumstances, project underperformance, or adverse market conditions.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?   
 
The investments  from the program will typically  receive  co-investments from IDB Invest own capital. As such the credit 
or loan default risk on repayment of program loans is low. IDB Invest uses an internal credit risk scoring system called 
FACT that encompasses sector -specific scorecards and combines internal and external data sources, models, and 
financial templates to closely monitor the both the individual and portfolio- wide credit risk of projects. FACT is the basis 
for measuring the risks of individual  operations and of the overall portfolio of IDB Invest. FACT ratings are taken into 
account to determine the amount of exposure, negotiate the pricing or yield of a transaction, devise a suitable structure, 
guide the supervision process, determine loss giv en default (LGD) and probability of default (PD), and facilitate risk 
migration analysis. The credit risk rating is updated at least once a year and at any point in the transaction cycle when 
necessary — for example, when project completion is achieved, or  when positive or negative signals are observed in 
the market, sector, shareholders or transaction fundamentals.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 Delayed or incomplete execution  of projects  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
This risk factor encompasses the potential for projects within the program to face delays or potentially remain 
incompletely executed, primarily stemming from challenges in identifying private sector initiatives that offer substantial 
climate mitigation or  adaptation advantages, as well as the availability of suitable financial instruments to facilitate their 
implementation.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?


---
*Page 83*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
   
 To address the potential risk of project delays or incomplete execution, a proactive approach is implemented through 
two primary mitigation measures. Firstly, the availability of a diverse set of financial instruments throughout the 
investment period ensur es alignment between resources and the varied and changing financing needs of different 
private sector stakeholders. This approach contributes to a reduction in overall execution risk. Secondly, leveraging the strong geographic presence of IDBG across key Caribbean countries  such as Barbados, Bahamas, Belize, Guyana, 
Jamaica, Suriname, and Trinidad & Tobago, enables continuous  engagement with local private sector representatives. 
This engagement aids in identifying suitable climate- focused investment opportunities early on and thereby works to 
minimize the possibility of project execution delays or incompletions. In combination, these  measures substantially  
enhance the likelihood of successful and timely project execution.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Lack of alignment of Environmental and Social Standards ( ESS) 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description  
Recipients ’ failure to comply with national regulations and/or IDB  Invest  and GCF environmental, social policy, gender 
requirements and compliance with standards, policies and procedures . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The 2020 IDB Invest Sustainability Framework effectively addresses the risk of recipients not complying with national 
regulations, as well as IDB Invest and GCF environmental, social policy, gender requirements, and standards. This risk 
mitigation is achieved through the following components of the framework:  
 
IDB Due Diligence and Oversight : The framework includes a thorough due diligence process that ensures recipients' 
alignment with environmental and social sustainability standards. It encompasses the 2020 Environmental and Social 
Sustainability Policy, the Access to Information Policy, a nd the IDB Invest Exclusion List. These policies serve as 
comprehensive guidelines for recipients' compliance. The framework's oversight and advisory role further support 
recipients in meeting these requirements.  
 
Requirements for Real Sector Clients : Real sector clients  are obliged to adhere to the policies mentioned above. 
They are also required to implement the 2012 IFC Performance Standards for managing environmental and social risks 
within the private sector. Additionally, clients must conform to the Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines 
established by the World Bank Group. These requirements collectively reduce the risk of non- compliance with 
environmental, social, and gender -related expectations.  
 
Involvement of Financial Institutions (FIs):  Projects and investments routed through financial institutions undergo a 
dual-layer risk mitigation process. First, financial institutions must establish a robust Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS) to ensure alignment with national laws and international standards. Second, the FI 
conducts a comprehensive screening process to identify and mitigate environmental and social risk factors. By limiting  
funding eligibility of Fis to projects with a moderate risk profile, the framework effectively addresses the risk of non-
compliance with national regulations and standards.  
 
In conclusion, the IDB Invest Sustainability Framework mitigates the risk of recipients failing to comply with national 
regulations, IDB Invest and GCF environmental, social policy, gender requirements, and standards. It does so by 
providing clear guidelines, conducting rigorous due diligence, and maintaining oversight and advisory roles throughout the funding proposal process. This approach considerably  reduces the likelihood of non -compliance and associated 
risks.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 Illicit practices  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Low High


---
*Page 84*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
   
 Description  
Risk of projects being involved in illicit practices (money laundering, terrorist financing or other prohibited practices)  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As GCF  Trust Fund resources  will be provided alongside Co-financing from IDB  Invest , IDB Invest integrity principles 
and associated due diligence will apply at Sub -Project level, which will also mitigate this risk.  All Sub-Projects shall 
comply with IDB Invest’s Integrity Framework , and Recipients shall contractually acknowledge that IDB Invest reserves 
the right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, obstructive,  coercive 
practice  or any misappropriation (collectively, the “Prohibited Practices”) relating to the Sub-Projects; and Recipients 
shall cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such 
investigation.  
The Office of Institutional Integrity of the IDB ( “OII”) plays a key role in the IDB  Invest ’s integrity efforts. OII is an 
independent office responsible for the prevention and investigation of Prohibited Practices in all activities financed by 
the IDB Invest . OII’s investigative team is responsible for conducting investigations and for the submission of 
administrative charges to the Sanctions System against parties involved in Prohibited Practices. OII follows the 
Principles and Guidelines for Investigations incorporated in the Uniform Framework for Preventing and Combating 
Fraud and Corruption adopted by the International Financial Institutions Anti -Corruption Task Force. OII has different 
channels to report allegations of Prohibited Practices, including an independent reporting hotline available 24/7 and an 
online form to report allegations of Prohibited Practices.  
In addition, OII’s preventive team provides advisory services to project teams to identify, assess and mitigate integrity 
risks and their related reputational impact throughout the lifecycle of a Sub -project, including when an allegation is 
received, and operational measures need to be taken. As part of its preventive activities, OII carries out trainings for different organizational units, including country offices, to reinforce employees’ awareness of IDB Invest ’s integrity 
framework and of managing integrity risk in IDB  Invest -financed operations, executing agencies, and other external 
stakeholders.  
Internally, the Office of Ethics of the IDB investigates ethical violations by IDB Invest  staff and ensures compliance with 
financial disclosure requirements, including completion of the annual declaration of interests or affidavit form by all IDB  
Invest  staff. The Office of Ethics also investigates allegations of Prohibited Practices by IDB Invest staff, such as theft, 
workplace fraud, and abuse of authority.  
IDB Invest  has strong mechanisms to protect whistleblowers.  IDB Invest management has approved staff rules  for 
whistleblower protection which expressly prohibit acts of retaliation against IDB Invest employees and external parties 
that report allegations of Prohibited Practices or cooperate with IDB Invest  authorities in investigations, audits, or other 
inquiries.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 Co-financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The amount of c o-financing does not materialize at projected levels, reducing the total amount of projects that can be 
implemented or/and their average project size  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Projected Co -financing amounts were estimated by analyzing Co -financing ratios observed in recent IDB Invest -funded 
projects in the Caribbean, taking into account both the inherent risk associated with project types and the likelihood of 
securing Co- financ ing. Under Component 2, the financing activities related to renewables and energy efficiency are 
anticipated to generate Co -financing amounts six times greater than the GCF Proceeds, while for the blue economy 
financing activities, only a Co- financing amount twice the size of the GCF Proceeds is expected. In summary, the 
Program's Co- financing is projected to reach USD 408.2 million, in addition to the GCF Proceeds of USD 118 .976 
million, resulting in a Co -financing ratio of 3. 4. 
 
From an operational perspective, a shortfall in the co- financing projections is mitigated by adopting a market -driven 
approach to investment. This approach entails only entering into projects where a minimum nascent market demand


---
*Page 85*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
   
 from other commercial lenders already exists, but they may be hesitant to advance with the project alone due to their 
perceived high risks.  
Selected Risk Factor 7: Forex  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Volatile local currencies create financial viability stresses on underlying projects.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Local currency financing will undergo a n internal risk assessment with project -specific financial models  that may 
incorporate local currency -to-USD long -term swap rates, ensuring the project's financial stability in the face of potential 
currency fluctuations.  
Depending on the GCF’s risk appetite, local currency financing could be fortified by FX hedging instruments that 
guarantee fixed- rate exchanges with an acceptable counterparty . However, such hedging instruments would increase 
project costs and reduce the amount of available financing for private sector climate projects.


---
*Page 86*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
   
 
 
 GCF  POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
The proposed Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector program is categorized as I -1 High level of 
intermediation, since the project portfolio for Corporations and project developers that will be channeled by IDB Invest  
is expected to include Category A projects . In the case of the Sub- projects to be financed through  Financial 
Intermediaries,  sub-projects that would be categorized as Category A projects  are not eligible.  Annex 6 provides the 
assessment and management instruments according to the Program’s environmental and social risk category . This 
Annex complies with the requirements of the GCF’s Revised Environmental and Social Policy .  
 
The Program  will apply the 2020 IDB Invest Sustainability Framework for the environmental and social risk management 
process. The Framework consists of three levels of due diligence and risk assessment and management:  
 
1. IDB’s due diligence process , oversight role, and advi ce to clients under the program are based on the 2020 
Environmental and Social Sustainability Policy; the Access to Information Policy; and the IDB Invest Exclusion 
List. The Exclusion List describes a number of types of projects that IDB Invest will not finance, whether directly 
or through financial institutions. The list includes an overview of prohibited activities, and activities that are 
inconsistent with IDB Invest’s commitment to address the challe nges of climate change and promote 
environmental and social sustainability.  
2. The same policies apply to real sector clients. Additionally, clients are required to apply the 2012 IFC 
Performance Standards, a global benchmark for environmental and social risk management in the private 
sector. Clients are also required to apply the World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) 
Guidelines.  
3. Projects and investments channeled through financial institutions  (FIs) will be based on (i) the FI establishing 
a robust environmental and social management system (ESMS), and (ii) a screening process wherein projects and investments are reviewed by the financial institution for environmental and social risk factors. Under the 
agreement with the FIs under the program, it is expected that only moderate risk projects and investments financed by the FI will be eligible for funding. These projects will apply national law and the IDB Invest Exclusion 
List. If higher risk pr oject finance is undertaken, the FI clients will apply the IFC Performance Standards.  
 
1. IDB Invest due diligence process  
 
IDB Invest’s due diligence process follows a comprehensive Environmental and Social Review Procedures Manual for 
all transactions, commensurate with the risks, scale and complexity of the proposed transaction. Each project’s transaction team is assigned an environmental and social specialist. The specialist reviews transaction details:  verifies 
the project does not appear on IDB Invest’s exclusion list; and assesses likely project -related risks. This process also 
identifies opportunities for additional envi
ronmental or social benefits. Projects are assigned a preliminary 
environmental and social risk rating (A, B, or C), which will be updated as more information becomes available. The risk rating is made public, along with relevant studies and action plans. IDB Invest has established robust project screening tools covering various topics including contextual risks; security and violence; gender -related risks; and 
climate risk. A dedicated climate screening report is prepared for each project. Additionally, an independent 
environmental and social consultant is engaged to support the due diligence process for Category A project s and higher 
risk Category B projects. The consultant and assigned specialist work with the IDB Invest team and the client to assess 
any gaps with IDB Invest’s Sustainability Framework, including the IFC Performance Standards. The due diligence 
process for projects with significant risk (Category A and High B) will include one or more site visits. An Environmental 
and Social Review Summary (ESRS) is prepared containing the findings of the due diligence process. Together with the client, IDB Invest prepares an Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) describing the actions the client must 
take to remedy any policy compliance gaps found during the due diligence process. These documents are made public.  
2. Real Sector Clients  
 
Where there are potential adverse environmental or social impacts associated with the project under consideration, 
IDB Invest will work with its client to determine the appropriate application of the mitigation hierarchy. This requires integration of envir onmental and social considerations in project design and implementation, to avoid, minimize, or 
mitigate any negative impact. Clients are required to undertake an environmental and social assessment process, as 
described in IFC Performance Standard 1. This  process is complemented by a systematic, disaggregated stakeholder


---
*Page 87*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
   
 
 analysis and engagement process. IDB Invest works with the client to advise on appropriate resources and methods 
for environmental and social risk management, and to help strengthen capacity and build up relevant skills.  
 
3. Financing through Financial Institutions  
 
Financing under the Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector in the financial sector will involve support to 
financial institutions (FIs) to on- lend to different clients for projects and activities that contribute to the overall objectives 
of the pr ogram. This may be for individual investment projects that the FIs clients undertake, or towards a whole asset 
class with multiple sub -projects and activities. Under this approach, the FI takes on the responsibility and develops the 
capacity to apply the principles and requirements of the IDB Invest Sustainability Framework. The FI has to establish 
an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) with procedures for assessing and managing risks of the 
transactions it undertakes and undertake a due diligence process of its potential clients and investments. It is expected 
that most of the financing will go towards low to moderate risk projects from an environmental and social perspective, applying national law and the IFC Invest Exclusion List. If higher risk projects are funded,  clients will also be required 
to apply relevant aspects of the IFC Performance Standards and World Bank Group EHS Guidelines. Under the agreement with the FIs under the program, it is expected that only moderate risk projects and investments financed by the FI will be eligible for funding. These projects will apply national law and the IDB Invest Exclusion List. If higher risk  
project finance is undertaken, the FI clients will apply the IFC Performance Standards.  
Governance and accountability  
For all these proposed activities and financing mechanisms under the program, systematic monitoring and evaluation 
of environmental and social issues will be undertaken, both by IDB Invest and its clients. Projects and investments will 
include transparent governance mechanisms, including the right of affected persons to raise concerns or complaints 
through grievance mechanisms established for each project. Complaints can also be submitted directly to IDB Invest, 
through its Management -led Grievance Mechanis m or to the Independent Consultation and Investigation Mechanism 
(ICIM; MICI in Spanish).  
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
A gender assessment was conducted via a desk review and involved an extensive review of secondary material from 
national, regional and international  publications. Although gender -disaggregated data in the Caribbean is limited, t he 
assessment  was two -pronged. In the first instance, the assessment investigated gender equality within each country , 
with regard to health outcomes, economic opportunities, agency and legal protections and, where data availability  
allowed,  financial inclusion . On the other hand, gender -sensitive assessment of value chains,  labor market outcomes 
and access to resources in the prioritized  sectors  –. Findings reveal a high level of gender -disproportionate vulnerability 
which cannot be ignored. While Caribbean women live longer than Caribbean men, there is a higher  incidence of 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases ( STDs)  and N on-Communicable Diseases among women, as well as mortality rates , 
which affects their quality of life. Reverse gender inequality in education has not improved women's  labor market 
outcomes. In several countries analyzed, women form a small portion of the labor force, hold fewer positions in 
leadership and business ownership than men, are heavily involved in informal sector activity and gender segregation 
is common in several economic sectors , particularly agriculture and tourism. The use and access to resources such as 
energy and water are also gender disproportionate which exacerbates gender -based vulnerability.  Conclusively , 
women earn less , save less, have less resilience and unequal resource access which if unaddressed will continue to 
widen income and wealth gaps between men and women.  Due to climate change and more frequent disasters, a lack 
of gender sensitive disaster management increases women's vulnerability with regard to preparedness, resource 
planning and resilience in the post -disaster context.  
 
To address these inequalities, t he project -level action plan seeks to empower women in the Caribbean and ensure 
equal access to opportunities by reducing discrimination, risk, or unequal access to benefits for women and girls in 
clients’ transactions. The action plan  benefits from the integration of performance standards and institutional 
environmental and social sustainability policies which prohibit discrimination based on gender and recogni zes gender 
and vulnerable groups as an area of focus. Gender, diversity and inclusion will be integrated into all proj ects supported 
under this initiative.  To address areas of vulnerability, potential  risks and impacts on the basis of gender or gender 
identity arising from projects will be identified either through a gender risk screening assessment or  the application of 
the gender risk assessment tool (GRAT) . Once risks are identified,  a baseline and defined actions for intervention can


---
*Page 88*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
   
 
 be derived.  These actions will be formalized in an action plan . At the program level, expected results include i) 100% 
compliance with the standards  set out in section G.1.  in all projects and ii) the recommendation of an action plan in 
transactions  where there is client demand. Annual monitoring by ESG  teams will work to ensure alignment with the 
standards in Section G.1.   
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Financial resources from the GCF will be managed according to the general provisions of the AMA . As disclosed during 
the accreditation process, the Inter -American Development Bank (IDB) provides certain services to IDB Invest that 
cover the administration and management of third -party funds, including GCF Proceeds. As such, the IDB will hold, 
administer and manage the funds of the Program in accordance with its policies and procedures and the terms of the 
FAA, whereas IDB Invest will be responsible for functions related to the ori gination, disbursement and portfolio 
management of  Products  including, without limitation,  any amendments, waivers, restructurings , workouts and 
litigation,  as well as  for functions related  advis ory services activities,  in accordance with its policies and procedures and 
the terms of the FAA.  
The IDB will thus establish the GCF Trust Fund (‘GCF Account’) internally, through which all GCF resources under this 
Program will be transferred to the GCF Account, based on the forecast of IDB Invest’s expected approval and 
disbursement requests of S ub-projects. Based on such Sub-project disbursement requests, IDB Invest  will commit GCF 
resources to be held in the GCF Account to relevant  Sub-project s, as applicable.  For the implementation of the Funded 
Activity, the Accredited Entity shall manage the GCF Trust Fund within the Accredited Entity in accordance with its own 
policies and procedures and the FAA.  
The financial management and oversight of any of the above- mentioned operations, including reporting requirements, 
would follow IDB Invest policies and procedures, and applicable AMA and FAA requirements, which would be reflected 
as needed in any Financing Agreements  and/or Technical Cooperation Agreements . The Financing Agreements  would 
require that use of GCF resource s to be eligible activities under the applicable Components of the Program.  
The disbursements, reporting (including external audit reports), monitoring, and evaluation of the Sub-Project will be  
done in accordance with IDB Invest  policies and procedures , as reflected in the Term Sheet and FAA.  
Disbursement of GCF  Proceeds  to the GCF Trust Fund shall be governed pursuant to the provisions of the FAA.   
The procurement of Goods, Services and Works for Funded Activities by the Accredited Entity  shall be done in 
accordance with IDB Invest policies and procedures  to the extent and scope of its accreditation.  
In accordance with the AMA, the GCF Account will be subject to an external audit requirement. No later than June 30 
of each year, the IDB will deliver to the GCF an assertion report by the IDB management and a report by the Bank’s 
external auditors, on the effectiveness of internal controls and on the accuracy of the combined financial statements of 
all trust funds under the IDB’s administration with an external audit requirement, including the GCF Account , together 
with the combined financial statements of  all trust funds for the previous calendar year. Such audited financial 
statements are prepared in accordance with the IDB's existing policies and accounting standards for trust funds’ 
financial reporting, as updated from time to time. The cost of such audits will be deducted from the resources of the 
Fund.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
With confidential information:  The AE declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not be disclosed 
in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity will provide  
to the secretariat in the final phase of the funding proposal  the following two copies of the funding proposal, including 
all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.   
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.


---
*Page 89*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
   
  
138 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.  
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
X Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
X Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
X Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
X Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
X Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
X Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
 Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
 Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
X Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
X Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
X Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)    
X Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
X Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
X Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
 Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
X Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
 Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
 Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
X Annex 17  Multi- country project/programme information (template provided)  
 Annex 1 8 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
 Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
 Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
X Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
X Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)138 
 Annex X  Other references


---
*Page 90*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s.


---
*Page 91*
---

No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 93*
---

 
 
The Hon. Ryan Straughn, M.P.  
MINISTER IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE  & ECONOMIC AFFAIRS   
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment  
Government Headquarters,  
Bay Street, St. Michael, BB11156, Barbados, W.I . 
   Our Ref.:   7045/79/1 Vol. 5           Tel.: (246)535 -5300
               Fax: (246)535 -5629  
          
                    Date: February 2 7, 2023  
 
Mr. Yannick Glemarec  
Executive Director  
The Green Climate Fund  
Songdo Business District  
Incheon  
REPUBLIC OF KOREA  
 
 
Funding proposal for the GCF by IDB Invest regarding  
 the Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector  
 
Dear Mr. Glemarec,  
 
We refer to the programme titled Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private 
Sector in Barbados as included in the funding proposal submitted by IDB 
Invest t o us on 15 November 2022.  
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of 
Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment, the National Designated Authority 
of Barbados.  
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowle dge to 
have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no -objection to the programme 
as included in the funding proposal.  
 
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
 
(a) The government of Barbados has no -objection to the programme as 
included in the fund ing proposal;  
 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity 
with the national priorities, strategies and plans of Barbados;  
 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the 
programme as included in the funding pr oposal is in conformity with 
relevant national laws and regulations.  
 
GOVERNMENT OF BARBADOS


---
*Page 94*
---

- 2 - 
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the 
programme as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to a ll projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the programme  
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF 
website.  
 
Kind regards,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
HON. RYAN STRAUGHN, M.P.  
Minister


---
*Page 100*
---

MINISTRY OF SPATIAL PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT 
Prins Hendrikstraat 22,Paramaribo, Suriname 
Tel: +597 522020 
Email: secretariaat.minrom@gov .sr 
Mr. Yannick Glemarec 
Executive Director 
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund 
175 Art Center-daero 
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
Our Ref: MinROM/GCF/807 /22 Paramaribo, 29 December 2022 
Subject: Funding proposal for the GCF by IDB Invest regarding 
the Caribbean Net-Zero and Resilient Private Sector 
Dear Mr. Glemarec, 
We refer to the programme titled Caribbean Net-zero and Resilient Private Sector in Suriname as 
included in the funding proposal submitted by IDB Invest to us on 16 November 2022. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Spatial Planning and 
Environment, the National Designated Authority of Suriname. 
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)The government of Suriname has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
(b)The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of Suriname;
(c)In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the programme


---
*Page 101*
---

MINISTRY OF SPATIAL PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT 
Prins Hendrikstraat 22,Paramaribo, Suriname 
Tel: +597 522020 
Email: secretariaat.minrom@gov.sr 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Minister 
Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment 
Suriname


---
*Page 103*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector   
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  IDB Invest  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I- 1 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominican Republic, Guyana,  
Jamaica, Suriname,  and Trinidad and Tobago * 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management  System (ESMS)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Thursday, March 14, 2024  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Spanish, and Dutch  
Explanation on language  These are the official languages of target countries . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://idbinvest.org/sites/default/files/2024 -
03/Caribbean%20Net -
Zero%20And%20Resilient%20Private%20Sector%20Ann
ex%206%20 -%20Environmental%20And%20Social%20M
anagement%20System%20- %20English%20Version.pdf  
 
Spanish:  
https://idbinvest.org/sites/default/files/2024 -
03/Caribbean%20Net -
Zero%20And%20Resilient%20Private%20Sector%20Ann
ex%206%20 -%20Environmental%20And%20Social%20M
anagement%20System%20 -%20Spanish%20Version.pdf


---
*Page 104*
---

 
Dutch:   
https://idbinvest.org/sites/default/files/2024 -
03/Caribbean%20Net -
Zero%20And%20Resilient%20Private%20Sector%20Ann
ex%206%20 -%20Environmental%20And%20Social%20M
anagement%20System%20- %20Dutch%20Version%281
%29.pdf   
 
Other link(s)  https://idbinvest.org/en/solutions/blended -
finance#caribbean -net-zero -and-resilient -private -sector  
Remarks  Confirmation that the ESMS is consistent with the 
requirements for a Category I -1 project is subject to further 
due diligence on the Funding Proposal .  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , Indigenous Peoples Planning  
Framework  (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, March 15, 2024  
Place  • Bahamas: IDB G Office, IDB House, East Bay Street 
Nassau, Bahamas  
• Barbados: IDBG Office, "Hythe" Welches Maxwell 
Main Road BB17068 Christ Church, Barbados  
• Belize:  IDBG Office, 1024 Newtown Barracks 101 
1st Floor Marina Towers Building, Belize City, 
Belize  
• Dominican Republic:  IDBG Office, Calle César 
Nicolás Penson esquina Calle Leopoldo Navarro 
Sector Gascue, Santo Domingo, Distrito Nacional, República Dominicana  
• Guyana: IDBG Office: 47- High Street, Kingston, 
Georgetown, Guyana  
• Jamaica: IDBG Office, 6 Montrose Rd, Kingston 6, 
Jamaica  
• Suriname : IDBG Office,  Peter Bruneslaan 2 -4 
Paramaribo, Suriname  
• Trinidad and Tobago: IDBG Office, 17 Alexandra 
Street, St. Clair, Port of Spain, Trinidad y Tobago  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Wednesday, August 14, 2024  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, July 15, 2024


---
*Page 105*
---

Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
 
* Subsequent to the disclosure of the form to the Board and active observers on 1 5 March   
2024 , the following update s have been made:  Haiti has  been removed  as the NOL was not 
provided by the deadline.  Consequently , ESMS in French and the Haiti address for convenient  
access by affected peoples have also been removed.  
 
Moreover, t he Secretariat has confirmed that the “Environmental and Social Management 
System (ESMS) ” is consistent with the requirements for a Category I-1 programme.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 106  
 
 
 
 Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP242  
Proposal name:  Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector   
Accredited entity:  Inter -American Investment Corporation (IDB Invest)  
Country/(ies):  Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominican Republic, Guyana, 
Jamaica, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago  
Project/programme size:  Large  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 Overview   
1. In its assessment , the  independent Technical Advisory Panel  (iTAP) is guided by 
decision B.33/12, which explains the principles for demonstrating the impact potential of GCF-
supported activities as well as other appraisal and assessment guidance in considering these  
investment criteria and as endorsed by the Board.  
2. Scientific evidence suggests that climate change poses a significant threat to the 
Caribbean, a region comprising over 700 islands, islets, reefs and cays that are particularly 
vulnerable to environmental fluctuations. The region is on the frontline of climate change, 
enduring significant hazards despite its minimal contribution to the problem:  less than 1  per 
cent  of global greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) emanate from the Caribbean islands . The 
socioeconomic stability and environmental sustainability  of the  Caribbean region face 
substantial risks posed by numerous impacts: a ltered rainfall patterns leading to both increased 
rainfall intensity and prolonged periods of drought ; rising temperatures  exacerbat ing heat 
stress, increasing  the prevalence of vector -borne diseases and reduc ing agricultural 
productivity ; sea level rise  threaten ing to inundate low -lying coastal areas, erode beaches and 
increase the salinity of freshwater resources ; and ocean warming contribut ing to the 
intensification of hurricanes and t ropical storms.  
3. The region’ s geographical vulnerability, economic dependence on natural resources  (e.g. 
through tourism, agriculture and fisheries, all of which are sensitive to climate variability and 
extreme weather conditions) , and limited adaptive capacity exacerbate its susceptibility to 
climate change impacts . This poses an existential threat  to many countries in the region . 
Addressing these challenges requires comprehensive adaptation and mitigation strategies, 
international cooperation and increased financial and t echnical support for the countries 
involved .  
4. This proposal  requests  USD 112.5  million from GCF  to facilitate and support private 
sector climate mitigation and adaptation investments across five sectors  in the Caribbean: 
agriculture, forestry and other land use; infrastructure; electricity (including renewable energy 
and energy efficiency); transport; and the b lue economy (i.e. activities associated with oceans 
and seas)  . The accredited entity ( AE) is IDB Invest,  the private sector institution of the Inter -
American Development Bank (IDB) Group . The AE is seek ing to support private sector -driven 
climate action in efforts to respond to the growing regional challenges emanating from climate 
change.


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 107  
 
 
 
 5. In terms of financial instruments, the AE is request ing USD 10  million  for grants, USD 2.5  
million  for reimbursable grants, USD 25  million  in guarantees and USD 25  million  in equity. The 
AE anticipate s that , through the program me, it will facilitate climate mitigation and adaptation 
investments amounting to  a total value of USD 520.7 million , of which roughly USD 100  million  
will be provided from the AE ’s own balance sheet , with the remainder  (approximately USD 308  
million ) coming from private sector co-investors at the level of individual projects supported 
under the programme  (GCF leverage ratio of approximately 1:4).  
6. Under the terms of the funding proposal, IDB Invest would act as both the AE and as the 
executing entity (EE). The proceeds from the GCF contribution would be ringfenced in a trust 
fund administered by the AE that would provide support for climate investments in the target 
region via two main program me components:  
(a) Component 1:  An advisory facility that would provide advisory services to clients of the 
AE and to finance the development of relevant knowledge products in support of private 
sector climate mitigation and adaptation investments in the target region (grant funding 
only) ; and  
(b) Component 2:  An investment facility through which the AE would utilize GCF resources 
to unlock private sector investment in low -carbon and climate -resilient investments via 
deployment of concessional and risk -tolerant financial products (non- grant instruments 
only).  
7. The selection of advisory and investment projects will be on the basis of  the criteria set 
out by the AE in the funding proposal , but otherwise implementation will follow the standard 
operating model of other AE- managed trust funds , where the AE applies its own procedures and 
standards to the selection, due diligence, structuring, implementation and monitoring of individual projects.  
1.2 Impact potential          Scale:  Medium  
8. The funding proposal highlights a wide range of anticipated impacts resulting from the 
proposed project across various GCF mitigation results areas (MRAs) and adaptation results 
areas (ARAs) , reflecting the broad investment scope of the proposed trust fund . Specifically, the 
funding proposal references three main project outcomes:  
(a) Outcome 1: Emission reductions over the  lifetime of the programme amounting to 
3,867,104 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( t CO 2 eq) via investments in renewable 
energy generation and access (MRA1, c ore indicator 1) ; 
(b) Outcome 2: Installed renewable energy generation capacity of 140  MW by the end of 
the program me (MRA1, supplementary 1.3) ; 
(c) Outcome 3: Direct beneficiaries living in improved housing with increased resilience 
against climate change hazards by the end of project life: 20,208 people  (with 50  per 
cent  of those being women) (ARA3, supplementary 2.6) ; 
(d) Outcome 4: Emission reductions by the end of project lifespan  amounting to 1,369,391 t  
CO 2 eq via emissions reduced, avoided or removed/sequestered (MRA4, core indicator 
2); 
(e) Outcome 5: People benefit ting  from more resilient environments through climate -
smart agriculture, the blue economy, sustainable transport and sustainable 
infrastructure projects (ARA1, core indicator 2) ; 
(f) Outcome 6: Emissions avoided through energy efficien cy project s in buildings , 
estimated at 28,152 t  CO 2 eq by the end of technology life ;


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 108  
 
 
 
 (g) Outcome 7: 228 people (50 per cent  of th em female) benefitting from more resilient 
environments through sustainable and resilient infrastructure projects ;  
(h) Outcome 8: 376,589 t  CO 2 eq emissions avoided by projects focusing on  electric 
vehicles for public and private transportation  (MRA2, core indicator 1) ; 
(i) Outcome 9: 1,620,467 t  CO 2 eq emissions avoided by projects with coastal ecosystem 
components and waste water  management projects  (MRA4, core indicator 1) ; and  
(j) Outcome 10: 549 people benefitting from mangrove projects (ARA4, core indicator 2).  
9. In addition, the AE anticipates that the program me will further incentivize the uptake of 
green technologies in the target region by substantially reducing costs and risks of such 
investments via successful implementation of precedence transactions and enabling environment support ( core indicator 7). The AE also highlights that the program me will 
contribute to effective knowledge -generation and learning processes ( core indicator 8)  via the 
implementation of rigorous learning programmes and compelling knowle dge products . 
10. The AE/EE expects to accomplish these outcomes via five outputs, namely:  
(a) Output 1: Support to financial institutions  in establishing or advancing their 
sustainability vision, operations and financing activities  (e.g. via training or product 
development) ; 
(b) Output 2: Development of s ustainable and resilient corporations and real economy 
projects (e.g. via feasibility studies or legal advisory services ); 
(c) Output 3: Development of market -level guidelines , standards and tools , and capacity -
building ; 
(d) Output 4: Public knowledge products and capacity -building reinforced  (e.g. via 
knowledge products) ; and  
(e) Output 5: Improved financing solutions to support private sector -led net zero and 
climate -resilient sub-projects in the Caribbean  region.  
11. The logical framework presented in the funding proposal is expansive and based on a 
multitude of assumptions (specifically regarding the ultimate composition of the portfolio of 
projects to be funded via the program me) but ultimately straightforward. However, the 
independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) considers  there are various factors that may 
negatively impact the ability of the proposed project to generate the project ed impact results,  
including  the following considerations : 
12. Limited visibility on pipeline. Like many other Private Sector Facility (PSF) projects 
presented to the GCF (especially impact investment fund proposals, or concessional lines of credit for on -lending via f inancial institutions), the AE bases its impact projections on a pipeline 
of potential opportunities rather than a firm list of projects it will invest in. As in other PSF 
projects, that makes it difficult to develop a reliable ex ante  assessment of programme  impacts. 
The anticipated mitigation and adapta tion impact s of this program me, however , are particularly 
hard to assess because the funding proposal  contains  only rudimentary information regarding 
investment projects to potentially be included in the trust fund program me. As part of the 
question and answer (Q&A)  process with the iTAP, the AE submitted additional and more 
detailed information regarding potential projects to be considered . However, there remains 
limited information on concrete investment opportunities, specifically those targeting  
adaptation. That makes it difficult for the iTA P to rationalize the broad and , in parts , ambitious 
outcome targets that have been set out for the trust fund, and at the very least it is expect ed that 
impact estimates will change significantly as program me implementation proceeds . 
13. Crowded space.  As the AE acknowledges in the funding proposal , there are various 
donors as well as multilateral and regional development banks active in the Caribbean region to


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 109  
 
 
 
 support countries with climate adaptation and mitigation investments. Support to the region 
has significantly picked up in recent years, with various entities (including the GCF , the Global 
Environmental Facility, the Climate Investment Funds, the Adaptation Fund, the European 
Union, the C aribbean Development Bank , United States Agency for International Development , 
the Government of Canada and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland Foreign and Commonwealth Development Office,  as well as other bilateral 
donors) supporting climate investment program mes in the Caribbean . The iTAP is concerned 
about whether the AE will be able to deploy a programme  of the magnitude outlined in the 
funding proposal , in an environment where increasingly significant resources “hunt” a limited 
number of relevant and well -prepared investment opportunities . The AE’s operations  have 
extensive coverage in the target region, and many (though by no means all) of the potentially 
competing concessional of ferings focus on public rather than private sector projects. However, 
the iTAP recommends that a mechanism be included in the funded activity agreement (FAA)  
between the GCF and the AE that allows the GCF to reduce its committed amount to the trust 
fund program me if the AE is unable to deploy resources with specific timeframes 
(recommendation 1  below ). 
14. Use of m ethods to assess and monitor mitigation impacts . Although the funding 
proposal  includes a high -level pipeline of possible investments and highlights generic clean 
development mechanism ( CDM ) methodologies for quantifying the mitigation impact potential 
over time, key aspects for demonstrating the mitigation impact potential remain unclear, including:  
(a) The process for checking the applicability conditions of the selected CDM methodologies 
(i.e. who, when, how) ; 
(b) What will happen when there is no applicable method in the CDM booklet for a 
proposed investment ( i.e. who will propose a new method, who will check it) ; and 
(c) What are the requirements of the AE for ensuring that the mitigation impact of an 
investment is included in the national measurement, reporting and verification system  
of the participating countries and who will check, when/how this requirement is fulfilled.  
15. The iTAP understands that , because this funding proposal  uses a programmatic 
approach, it is impractical to include a final quantification of the mitigation potential or check 
for alignment with the measurement, reporting and verification system in the participating 
countries  at this point in time . However, for this very reason, the funding proposal  should at the 
very least provide complete information explaining the process the AE will use for securing the 
fulfilment of the principles for demonstrating mit igation impact potential in accordance with 
decision 33/12,  which is currently not the case. This is a serious shortcoming of the funding 
proposal , and one the iTAP feels needs to be rectified before the signing of the FAA  (funding 
proposal ), should the GCF approve the programme  (condition  1 below ).  
16. Potential for duplication of efforts.  As part of the funding proposal  (output 1.3 ), the 
AE proposes to include the development of “market -level guidelines, standards, tools and 
capacity -building ”. During the Q&A  process , the iTAP raised a concern that , considering the 
number of existing guidelines, standards and tool s (including those  that focus on the private 
sector ), the value -added elements  of the relevant workstreams under the program me may be 
limited. In the Q&A response, the AE provided some reassurance that this work will not result in 
duplication of efforts; however, the iTAP considers that it will be important for the AE to 
coordinate particularly closely with other ongoing donor and multilateral development bank  
(MDB ) program mes in the region to ensure that comparable activities do not result in a 
duplication of effort.


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 110  
 
 
 
 17. Overall, the iTAP rates the impact potential for the project as medium , with potential 
for improvement if the issues highlighted above are adequately clarified and addressed prior to 
the start of program me implementation.  
1.3 Paradigm shift potential               Scale:  Medium  to high 
18. Overall, the AE presents a credible pathway for the two main components of the trust 
fund program me to foster scaling up climate finance in the target region, thus promoting 
paradigm shift . By supporting private sector investments  addressing adaptation and mitigation , 
the program me has the potential to demonstrate the business case for investing in such assets, 
thus enabling a shift from a “corporate social responsibility” mindset to a “core business 
sustainability strategy”,  as pointed out in the funding proposal . Through its advisory 
component, the trust fund program me has the potential to support companies in the region in 
developing new business models that help to maximize decarbonization opportunities while 
establis hing and demonstrating the viability of commercially sustainable operating models. In 
combination with the advisory component , which contains various outreach and learning 
elements, this can trigger replication and draw in corporate investment for climate -friendly 
projects in the target region.  
19. One key to achieving paradigm shift in climate finance in the target region (and beyond) 
is to successfully leverage private sector finance into investments supported by the proposed 
trust fund , especially from local sources. The funding proposal  submitted to iTAP contain s 
limited information about the AE’s proposed efforts to leverage such private sector investors. 
During the Q&A  process, the AE clarified that it intends to utilize its existing syndication 
practice to mobilize co- investment for program me-supported projects from commercial banks, 
institutional investors and insurance companies. Although the leverage factors highlighted in 
the funding proposal  are significant, t he AE did not specify how it will engage specifically with 
local private sector investors from the Caribbean. As described in the funding proposal , the AE  
intends to support financial institutions in adopting sustainability standards and practices 
under component 1;  however, it remains unclear to the iTAP what type of local  institutions the 
AE intends to engage with  and crowd in . From the iTAP’s perspective, inclusion of local 
institutions in both  the advisory and the investment component s of the programme  would be 
crucial to promote a paradigm shift in climate finance in the target region.  
20. Another key lever for facilitating a paradigm shift in climate finance in the target region 
is making local currency funding available for mitigation and adaptation investment projects in 
order to remove related currency risks for clients (and ultimately end beneficiaries). In the 
funding proposal , and also  in the Q&A  response document, the AE has underscored its 
commitment to provid ing, when investing from its own resources, local currency (via hedges 
and swaps) when possible and commercially attractive to  clients. However, the AE is unable to 
provide local currency financ e with the funds provided by the GCF because there is no 
mechanism in place for the AE to be compensated in case of costs associated with the potentially 
necessary unwinding of/changes to swaps and hedges that cannot be passed on to clients. The 
AE has also proposed to the GCF the option to utilize up to 30  per cent  of the GCF resources to 
provide unhedged local currency offerings , but this is subject to relevant GCF policies being put 
into place . 
21. As noted in previous funding proposal  assessment reports, the iTAP believes that the 
GCF should make an urgent and determined effort to facilitate local currency solutions for climate finance investments  through its funded activity program mes. There is ample evidence 
now that hard currency lending, even if provided on highly concessionary terms, can create 
significant debt sustainability issues for public and private sector borrowers that rely on local 
currency income to service their debt.


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 111  
 
 
 
 22. Overall, the iTAP rates  the potential for the project to effect paradigm shift as medium -
high.  
1.4 Sustainable development potential                 Scale:  Medium  
23. The funding proposal highlights the following sustainable development benefits:  
(a) Reduction of fine particle pollution:  The AE expects that the program me will help to 
reduce f ine particula te matter (specifically particles less than 2.5 micrometres in 
diameter; PM2.5),  from anthropogenic sources such as combustion engines, industrial 
processes, manufacturing, mining and quarrying, fossil fuel power plants, residential 
heating and cooking, and construction activities. The AE has identifie d the methodology 
for measuring the contribution of projects to the reduction of PM2.5 (provided in annex 
22a to the funding proposal ). However, following its general assessment of the 
program me’s impact potential  (discussed above ), and while it is not unreasonable to 
expect the programme  to make a positive contribution on reduction of PM2.5 , the iTAP 
considers it difficult to know without more detailed in the program me what the scale of 
the co -benefit will be ; and  
(b) Jobs created and supported, disaggregated by gender : The AE expects that e ach 
project to be supported by the programme  will generate economic co- benefits, 
specifically in terms of job creation and jobs supported. The AE proposes to track this 
indicator via field visits as well as analysis of a sample of projects supported. Again, 
without more detailed knowledge on the structure of the trust fund  portfolio, it is 
difficult for the iTAP to assess the projections for jobs created/supported by the AE 
because the programme  covers a broad range of sectors and project types. However, it is 
not unreasonable to expect that positive benefits will indeed accrue.  
24. The AE has included a comprehensive gender assessment and program me- level action 
plan as part of the funding proposal  (annex 8) , and various gender -specific actions are being 
highlighted in the funding proposal  (the word “gender” appears 76 times in the funding 
proposal ); however,  no specific gender -sensitive development impact  targets  are highlighted 
(apart from job targets for women). This may present a lost opportunity to track relevant 
impacts as part of program me monitoring  and should be improved upon.  
25. Overall, the iTAP rates the sustainable development impact potential of the project as 
medium . 
1.5 Needs of the recipient                          Scale:  High  
26. The estimated climate finance gap for the Caribbean region is substantial, with 
adaptation investment needs alone surpassing USD  100 billion.1 This figure represents about 
one-third of the region ’s annual economic output. The current level of climate finance in the 
Caribbean falls well short. For instance, as of now, Caribbean countries have only been 
approved for approximately USD 800 million from climate funds such as the GCF , the Global 
Environment Facility and the Adapt ation Fund .  
27. Efforts to address this gap include various innovative financial mechanisms, such as blue 
bonds, debt -for-nature swaps and catastrophe bonds. However, these initiatives are not enough 
to cover the vast needs for rehabilitation and reconstruction following natu ral disasters (which 
are frequent in the region due to its high exposure to climate -related events ), over and above  
the finance required for investments in mitigation and adaptation more generally.  To bridge 
 
1 Source: https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2023/06/27/caribbean -climate -crisis -demands -urgent -action-
by-governments -and- investors


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 112  
 
 
 
 this gap, there is a pressing need for increased involvement from the private sector and 
international financial institutions. Collaboration and enhanced capacity for project preparation 
and qualification for climate funds are essential to mobili ze the necessary capital .  
28. Against that backdrop, t he proposed trust fund can make an important contribution to 
closing the remaining financing gap. As noted above, however, in the iTAP’s view, the more 
crucial bottleneck in the region at this stage is probably not a lack of adequate and tailored 
finance but a limited set of well -prepared investment opportunities that can absorb this finance. 
From that vantage point, the AE’s proposed measures to focus on developing a pipeline and 
building out an investment -ready set of projects is i mportant.  
29. Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for the project to serve the needs of the recipients 
as high.  
1.6 Country ownership                          Scale:  High  
30. Coherence with existing policies: The proposed trust fund program me is well aligned 
with national climate change strategies in the target region. The funding proposal  demon strates 
a high level of alignment between the nationally determined contribution  of target countries 
and the priority sectors identified for the program me. No-objection letters have been submitted 
from all participating countries to the program me. 
31. Stakeholder consultations and engagement: The AE has implemented extensive and 
well- documented stakeholder consultations in every target country, under the leadership of the 
respective AE country offices  (see a nnex 7  of the funding proposal ). 
32. Capacity of the AE: The AE is the main MDB active in the region and has local 
representation in each of the target countries. It also has a  long -standing track record of 
investing in the Caribbean, including in private sector projects. T he funding proposal  states that 
the AE it has committed USD 790  million  for climate investment projects in the targeted 
countries between 2017 and 2023 , including USD 224 million  for energy projects, USD 117  
million  for investment funds, USD 93  million  for manufacturing, USD 73  million  for agribusiness, 
USD 53  million  for transport and the balance for financial institutions and tourism .  
33. The iTAP considers the alignment of the project with the priorities of the host country 
government s to be high but  assesses the track record of the AE as medium. Overall, the iTAP 
rates  country ownership of the funding proposal as high.  
1.7 Efficiency and effectiveness      Scale:  Medium to low  
34. As previously noted, the lack of evidence of a pipeline of projects makes a reliable 
assessment of the economic soundness of the trust fund program me somewhat challenging. 
However, the following can be noted:  
(a) Based on historical experience and the synthetic portfolio constructed for the purposes 
of the funding proposal , the AE expects a significant share of co- financing from its own 
balance sheet as well as private sector sources (GCF funding represents about 22 per 
cent  of total expected project costs).  The overall leverage of 1:4 on GCF resources can be 
considered substantial, especially in the specific project region ; 
(b) Based on the synthetic portfolio constructed, the AE estimates an average economic 
internal rate of return of 25 per cent  and an economic net present value of USD 
141,559,576.  Considering the lack of evidence of the  program me pipeline, the iTAP 
noted that these numbers can only provide a highly indicative assessment of the 
economic performance of projects that will be eligible under the program me; and


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 113  
 
 
 
 (c) The projected climate benefits ( amounting to GHG reductions of around 7.2 million t  CO 2 
eq over the total project lifetime ) and the number  of expected beneficiaries appear to be 
modest relative to the total amount of GCF funding requested for the program me. The 
projections correspond to USD 72 per t CO 2 eq avoided  and USD 24,000  per beneficiary. 
However, while t he price per tonne of GHG emissions avoided is higher than the global 
average it still falls within the prices observed in various regions, including the 
Caribbean  where cost levels tend to be high due to lack of potential for scale and other 
factors . The price also needs to be a ssessed in the context of additional benefits beyond 
the emission  reductions  that the trust fund program me may provide , such as technology 
transfer, capacity -building and significant sustainable development impacts  but that are 
difficult to quantify at this stage . 
35. At the time of submission of the funding proposal  to the iTAP, the negotiations between 
the AE and the Secretariat regarding the AE fee (see a nnex 12 to the funding proposal ) were not 
concluded. In its original submission, the AE requested a fee that amounted to more than 14 per 
cent  of overall GCF funds requested for this program me. As clarified by the Secretariat in the 
Q&A  process, as per the GCF p olicy on fees for AEs, the fee cap for large -size d projects for public 
sector grants is 4  per cent . The policy also states that , for private sector projects , fees should be 
determined on a case -by-case basis. The historical AE fees for large private sector project s range 
from 1.5  to 4.5  per cent  (with an average AE fee of around 3.3 per cent  for such proposals and 
the average AE fee for MDB -related transactions being around 3.5 per cent ). In a subsequent 
email (dated 5 June 2024), the iTAP was informed that the AE reduced its AE fee request to 
close to 6% . This reduction was achieved largely by eliminating various budget positions  that 
were explained in annex 12  to the funding proposal , including line items for capacity -building 
activities and administrative oversight . However, t he Secretariat also shared an updated 
program me budget plan ( see a nnex 4  to the funding proposal ); this revised budget plan now 
contains new budget line items, inclu ding program me management costs and monitoring and 
evaluation costs roughly equivalent to the amounts previously included in the AE fee request . 
The AE f ee also remains substantial , and significantly above the levels typically seen for MDB -
managed programmes . Overall, t he iTAP views the fee request by the AE as high and consider s it 
as a negative factor in its assessment of the effectiveness and efficiency of the program me.  
36. The iTAP therefore considers the efficiency and effectiveness of the program me as low -
medium .  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
37. Overall, the funding proposal is comprehensive,  and although  there are various risks 
and weaknesses (as highlighted above ) it shows a credible pathway to achieving notable 
impacts. Having said that, the iTAP is of the view that the trust fund proposed by the AE raises 
relevant questions of policy for the Secretariat and the Board that are outside the appraisal 
remit  of the iTAP. Specifically, the application raises the question of whether MDB trust fund 
operations such as the one proposed should  be considered by the GCF or whether other 
instruments in the global climate finance architecture (notably the Climate Investment Funds ) 
would be better positioned to support programme s such as this. In addition, if in future more 
“open” program mes with a broad architecture ( i.e. multiple sectors and countries, fairly broad 
project selection criteria and so on) come to the GCF  for consider ation , this may merit a re-
thinking of the investment criteria framework currently employed by the iTAP (the “Initial 
Investment Framework” ; decision B.09/05)  because the appraisal focus would then have to 
move from an assessment of project -specific criteria to institutional track record and 
capabilities of AEs/EEs (beyond the focus of the accreditation to determine programme- specific 
elements)  as well as systems and procedures put in place by AEs to ensure adherence to 
program me implementation principles a nd standards. The iTAP is open to engage in a dialogue 
with the Secretariat and the Board on these matters.


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/ Add. 17 
Page 114  
 
 
 
 38. The iTAP recommends that the Board approves this funding proposal with the following 
condition precedent to the execution of the Funded Activity Agreement:  
39. Submission to the Fund by the Accredited Entity, in a form and substance satisfactory to 
the GCF Secretariat, of a report setting out specific guidance explaining the process that the 
Accredited Entity will use for securing the fulfilment of the principles for demonstrating 
mitigation impact potential as approved by the GCF Board in its decision B.33/12 . The report 
shall identify person(s) who shall conduct the assessment with regard to any particular 
investment considered by the Trust Fund, as well as the relevant timeline, and shall include:  
(a) the process for selecting methodologies for quantifying mitigation impact potential of 
the proposed investments as well as for assessing the assumptions, system boundaries 
and additionality;  
(b) the requirements for securing the establishment of measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) system of a proposed investment and the alignment with the national 
system of the corresponding Host Country;  
(c) examples of how (a) and (b) referred to above will be implemented, using sample investments from the pipeline that are sufficiently well advanced; and  
(d) clarification of how the assessment of the mitigation impact potential will affect decisions regarding whether or not a sub -project will be included in the Programme.  
40. The iTAP makes the following additional recommendation:  
(a) That a mechanism be included in the FAA between the GCF and the AE that allows the 
GCF to reduce its committed amount to the trust fund program me if the AE is unable to 
deploy resources with specific timeframes . Specifically, that mechanism could allow the 
GCF to reduce its overall funding commitment to the AE by up to 50  per cent  if the AE 
has not contractually commited at least 25  per cent  of GCF funds by the second 
anniversary of signing the FAA. In addition, the mechanism could allow the GCF to 
reduce i ts funding commitment by up to 25  per cent  if the AE has contractally 
commitment more than 25  per cent  but less than 50  per cent  of GCF funds by the third 
anniversa ry of signing the FAA.


---
*Page 115*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 9/02 /Add.17 
Page 115  
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's  assessment (FP 242) 
Proposal name:  Caribbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector     
Accredited entity:  Inter -American Investment Corporation (IDB Invest)  
Country/(ies):  Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominican Republic, Guyana, 
Jamaica, Suriname,  and Trinidad and Tobago.  
Project/Programme size:  Large  
 
Impact potential  
IDB Invest takes note of the comments and provides the following additional details to the 
Funding Prop osal :  
IDB Invest  has indeed provided an indicative pipeline  of projects because it is critical that 
such a program is demand -driven and based on the needs of the private sector  in the 
Caribbean . However, in order to ensure maximum climate impact, IDB Invest  has developed a  
rigorous  eligibility criteria list for climate change mitigation and climate change adaptation 
projects in each of the program sectors. Additionally, IDB Invest  has developed and delivered 
the methodologies, in- house expertise and processes it will follow to ensure, record and 
monitor climate cha nge mitigation and climate change adaptation impact. We provide the 
following details to ensure clarity around the methods to assess and monitor mitigation impacts:  
IDB Invest’s Department of Strategic Planning (DSP) hosts a Climate Change Team (ADV -CC) 
as well as a Development Effectiveness Division (DVF), which is the impact measurement 
division at IDB Invest. These teams identify the applicable methodologies during sub -project 
screening and due diligence. During due diligence, e x ante estimations are made through IDB 
Invest’s GHG calculation system , while ex -post calculations are conducted annually during the 
tenor of the transaction. The processes and expertise of the professionals conducting these 
assessments have been documented in Annex 2. These teams assess the  suitability of the CDM 
methodolog ies during due diligence. If there is no applicable method in the CDM booklet for a 
proposed method, the specialized impact measurement and climate change teams will give 
priority to exploring other internationally recognized and validated methodologies and 
frameworks. In cases where GHG accounting for the project is particularly complex , the 
following alternatives will be explored: 1) consultation with  the IDB Invest  GHG working 
group, 2) consultation at the Multilateral Development Bank (MDB)  GHG working group, 3) 
external expert assessments.  If none of these options are feasible, and the project net positive 
impact cannot be clearly stablished, the project would  not qualify for this program. In any of 
the above cases where the project does qualify, it would be reviewed by climate change and 
impact evaluation teams within IDB Invest.  
IDB Invest  also  has systems in place to evaluate project mitigation potential  and create 
evaluation and monitoring plans to track and report project impact directly for the project , 
which have been demonstrated through the Funding Proposal package.  
Finally, I DB Invest also relies on the work that the IDB Group, trough the Inter -American 
Development Bank , conducts  with member  countries in integrating project impacts into their 
national frameworks whenever possible. This involves collaborating closely with national 
authorities and stakeholders  to ensure their climate change strategies and commitments and


---
*Page 116*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 9/02 /Add.17 
Page 116  
 
 
 systems  are consistently updated . As such, while IDB Invest  and this program can only work  
with the private sector , IDB Invest will coordinate  within  the IDB Group to explore how select 
large material  sub-projects could be reflected in country’s systems. Overall,  IDB Invest 
remains committed to maximizing the visibility and recognition of project impacts within the 
NDCs or similar national climate plans, ensuring that the benefits of supported initiatives 
contribute meaningfully to climate objectives.  
 
Paradigm shift potential  
IDB Invest takes note of the comments and provides the following additional details:  
Through this program, IDB Invest will provide  support to financial institutions in adopting 
sustainability standards and practices under component 1. These financial institutions  
include banks, funds, and microfinance institutions. Indeed, per ITAP’s comment , local 
financial institutions will be included in both component 1, under output 1 and output 3, as 
well as under component 2, in order to successfully promote  a paradigm shift in climate 
finance in the program countries.  
IDB Invest  has demonstrated in- house capacity of selection of climate change mitigation and 
climate change adaptation projects that will enable IDB Invest to meet the ambitious outcome 
targets that been set out in this proposal . The targets have been set after an extensive analysis 
of past projects in program countries, as well as comprehensive research and consultations 
with stakeholders and country and sector experts to identify trends for future pipeline. 
Finally, through its climate commitment s, climate change teams and development 
effectiveness (impa ct measurement divisions), IDB Invest will track program impact ex -ante 
and ex -post.  
 
Sustainable development potential  
IDB Invest takes note of the comments and provides the following additional details:  
IDB Invest  tracks the reduction of fine particle pollution in the case of project of clean 
transportation. The estimation is based on project specific characteristics (e.g., type of 
technology being deployed , and type of fleet being replaced). Project specific information is 
typically available during project structuring , through market  studies, project documentation 
and independent engineer  assessments. As the details of all of the sub -projects are not 
available at the time of the proposal development , IDB Invest has based its projections in 
conservative assumption informed by current projects in our portfolio.  
IDB Invest  monitors  the number of jobs supported disaggregated by gender for each project 
in our portfolio. Current projections  in the proposal  are based on conservative assumptions, 
weighting the past performance of existing projects in our portfolio.  Nonetheless, given IDB 
Invest’s new 100% gender mainstreaming commitment, IDB Invest expects to be able to identify, track and monitor more gender -sensitive indicators through the execution of the 
program.  
 
Needs of the recipient  
IDB Invest takes note of the  ITAP assessment and provides the following additional details:


---
*Page 117*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 9/02 /Add.17 
Page 117  
 
 
 Through Component 1, the Program will seek to support the private sector and international 
financial institutions and make IDB Invest projects ready for climate investment. This 
component focuses on developing  a pipeline to boost  the private sector's ability to prepare 
projects and qualify  for climate funds, thus enabling  the mobilization of essential  capital . 
 
Country ownership  
IDB Invest takes note of the ITAP assessment.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
IDB Invest takes note of the ITAP rating for efficiency and effectiveness and is also providing 
additional details : 
Updated fee structure  
Please note that IDB Invest has updated the presentation of the structure of the requested 
Accredited Entity fee in the Funding Proposal  package.  The initial estimate for the ITAP 
assessment was presented as a single percentage that combined the Accredited Entity fee 
estimate, project management costs (PMC), and monitoring and evaluation budgets. After 
correctly allocating these items, the Accredit ed Entity fee is currently 4.2% of GCF financing.  
Please also  note that  the market and feasibility study and stakeholder engagement  found that 
there  are very limited private sector climate projects in most of the program countries. As 
such, this program intends to create the climate finance ecosystem for private sector climate 
projects by engaging at the market level and building capacity through component 1 , as well 
as execute first -of-its-kind private sector climate projects in each of the five program areas  
through component 1 and 2 . As a result, the cost of implementing these projects for the first 
time as well as the need to create a  climate finance ecosystem may be perceived as result ing 
in high costs  but will set a pathway for the countries to have a track rec ord and knowhow so 
they can replicate private sector climate projects beyond the program  tenor.  
Finally, our estimates for projected climate benefits were derived using conservative assumptions. Nevertheless,  based on IDB Invest ’s Development Impact Framework, Climate 
Impact Methodologies and this program’s eligibility criteria, we anticipate that the program 
will result in a significant number of indirect beneficiaries . 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
IDB Invest takes note of the overall remarks , agrees  with the conditions and would like to 
provide  the following details  below :  
Per the recommendation, IDB Invest can further discuss creation of a report explaining the 
process IDB Invest will use  for demonstrating mitigation impact potential.  
Additionally, IDB Invest has proposed as part of the F unding Proposal  package, selection of 
the methodology outlined  in the “impact potential” section of this document.  
Once a methodology is identified, detailed assumptions related to emission reductions or removals are assessed. This includes evaluating factors such as baseline emissions, project 
boundaries, and any assumptions made about additionality. Regarding  System Boundaries:


---
*Page 118*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 9/02 /Add.17 
Page 118  
 
 
 CDM methodologies may not encompass all project types. If this is the case, other options, as 
mentioned previously in impact potential section of this document will be considered.  
Regarding the requirements for securing the establishment of MRV system of a proposed 
investment and the alignment with the national system of the Host Country: While IDB Invest  
works directly with the private sector, it sits within the IDB Group. As such , IDB Invest will 
coordinate within the IDB Group to explore how select large material sub -projects could be 
reflected in country’s systems. Overall, IDB Invest remains committed to maximizing the 
visibility and recognition of this program’s  project impacts within the NDCs or similar 
national climate plans, ensuring that the benefits of supported initiatives contribute 
meaningfully to climate objectives. Documentation or a report  of how this may work with 
program pipeline examples can be provided .  
The projects must qualify for climate mitigation (and/or climate adaptation finance), as defined in the 'Common Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking' and "Joint Methodology for Tracking Climate Change Adaptation Finance" and as highlighted throughout 
the F unding Proposa l package, and have a net positive impact. If a project qualifies for climate 
mitigation, the associated mitigation impact will be calculated. Only sub -projects with 
measurable and trackable indicators (i.e., core and supplement ary), and positive net benefits 
will be considered eligible for funding under GCF resources.


---
*Page 119*
---

Anne
x 8 
IDB Invest Gender Action Plan  
Cari
bbean Net -Zero and Resilient Private Sector  
Jun
e 21, 2024 Gender documentation for FP242


---
*Page 120*
---

   
 
Part I: Gender  Analysis/Assessment:  
 
Introduction  
 
To robustly assess the level of gender inequality which persists in the Caribbean, gender -
disaggreg ated data is key. This , however, is limited as less than half of the indicators needed to 
monitor progress on  the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are  produced by actors in the regional 
statistical system . This includes data gaps on gender -differentiated wage earnings , financial inclusion, 
time use and unpaid care. Despite these limitations, the intersectionality of gender -disproportionate 
vulnerabilities in the Caribbean cannot be ignored. While women and girls in the Caribbean 
experience favorable outcomes in health and education, opportunities exist to improve and support  
gender -equal  outcomes  and the socioeconomic wellbeing of women.1  
 While women have a consistently higher life expectancy at birth than Caribbean men, and one that is 
comparable to their female counterparts throughout the region,  this is not always indicative of the 
quality of life they lead. Maternal mortality is significantly high in some states  and the prevalence of 
sexually transmitted diseases is often higher among women. A ccess to healthcare is publicly provided 
in several countries,  but women have a higher likelihood of mortality due to non -communicable 
diseases such as diabetes and cancer.  
 Improved  educational outcomes among girls in the Caribbean have  not always translat ed into 
improved  gender equality in the labor market. While data shows Latin America and the Caribbean to 
be the only region to show progress toward parity in educational attainment (WEO, 2022),
2 other 
studies specific to Caribbean states find evidence of reverse gender inequality in educational 
performance (ECLAC, 2022 ).3 Girls outperform boys at the primary and secondary schooling levels, 
even in subjects which were traditionally  considered male dominated.  At the tertiary level,  women 
and girls have a higher representation  in enrolment and graduation shares compared to men and 
boys.  
 In contrast, and  as outlined in the country profiles below, wo men constitute a smaller proportion of 
the labor force, and face significantly higher rates  of unemployment at the national and youth levels. 
Many of those employed are engaged in the informal sector or vulnerable employment  
arrangements .
4 Occupational gender -disaggregation exists in some sectors such as tourism and 
agriculture and women are involved in low -earning positions in the value chain. Low levels of female 
participation in business ownership, leadership and governance stymy opportunities for policymaking to bring more women into the value chain either through targeted recruitment or service delivery through which women may empower themselves. Barriers to women’s economic inclusion , despite 
their high levels of qualification, will widen the income and  wealth gaps between women and men in 
the Caribbean and reduce opportunities for productivity and growth in the workplace.  
 The intersectional nature of gender -disproportionate vulnerability is worsened by global crises such 
as the COVID -19 pandemic . Higher levels of mortality due to COVID -19 among men  increased the 
already high proportions  of female -headed households in the Caribbean. The Association of Caribbean 
States (ACS) suggests that an average of 35% of Caribbean households are headed by women – as high  
as 44% in Barbados.
5 This was compounded by gender -disproportionate job loss due to the closure of 
several economic sectors such as tourism, hospitality and personal services where women comprise 
 
1 World Bank Gender Data Portal : https://genderdata.worldbank.org/   
2 World Economic Outlook, 2022. Global Gender Gap Report  
3 ECLAC, 2022. Addressing gender disparities in education and employment  
4 This refers to self -employed persons without employees or contributing family workers who are unpaid. This is different from informal workers who are often 
without social protection, health benefits, legal status  or freedom of association. See: https://databank.worldbank.org/metadataglossary/world- development -
indicators/series/SL.EMP.VULN.ZS ; https://databank.worldbank.org/metadataglossary/world- development -indicators/series/SL.ISV.IFRM.FE.ZS   
5See blog:  Inequality and its impact on societies


---
*Page 121*
---

   
 
a significant share of the labor force. Th ese economic closures  put downward pressure on women’s 
income earning capabilities. School closures in Latin America and the Caribbean were prolonged  and 
the burden of unpaid care and domestic work was unprecedented . These additional responsibilities 
were shouldered mainly by women and reduced their time availability for paid employment . Due to 
social and cultural norms, some of these additional responsibilities fell on the eldest female children 
within the househol d and impact ed their educational continuation . Reports of gender -based violence  
also increased as did  women’s food insecurity compared to men .  
 
The geographic location of the Caribbean leaves the region extremely susceptible to climate shocks  
which are becoming more severe and frequent. Planning and design of disaster management and response protocols often do not  cater to gender -differentiated  vulnerability. Though limited, data 
show a digital divide in favor of men . This leaves women comparatively ill-prepared given greater use 
of ICT i n the dissemination of early warning messages. Natural disasters such as hurricanes, tropical 
storms and flash flooding often disrupt access to health services, particularly for rural communities.  
This creates additional health risk for rural women  and girls  in need of antenatal care, sexual and 
reproductive services or vital medications given the high prevalence of NCDs. Loss of livelihoods threaten to increase poverty among  FHHs  as women tend to earn and save less and have lower 
economic resilience . Negati ve attitudes around  men’s need for  psychosocial support following trauma 
lead to increases in violence within  the home. In addition, the use of schools as shelters does not 
provide adequate priva cy in water, sanitation and hygiene  (WASH) facilities for women. In the 
aftermath of natural disasters, it is not uncommon to observe increases in domestic and intimate 
partner violence as well as sexual assault.   
 
Conclusively , a number of opportunities exist to empower women in the Caribbean and improve 
gender equal access to opportunities. These include increasing women’s participation in decision-
making, promoting incentives to integrate women into higher -earning and sustainable positions in 
value chains, supporting women’s resilience capabilities,  increasing their access to training, 
mentorship and business skills  and removing barriers to credit for sustainable business practices.  
 Country Profiles  
 
The Bahamas  
 
Health Outcomes . In most instances, health outcomes for women and girls in The Bahamas are 
comparable or just slightly lower than the regional average for women and girls throughout Latin 
America and the Caribbean (LAC). According to available data from the World Bank Gend er Portal, 
female children born in The Bahamas have a life expectancy at birth of approximately 75.1 years, with 
99% of total births attended by skilled health staff. This is higher than the 68.1 years expected of male 
children but slightly lower than the average of 75.6 years expected of female children born throughout  
LAC. As outlined in the table below, levels of m aternal mortality (77 per 100,000 live births) and 
adolescent fertility (25.8 births per 1,000 women aged 15 -19) are also lower than the average 
maternal mortality (88) and adolescent fertility (54.8) in LAC. Despite equal prevalence of sexually transmitted dise ases such as HIV among young people
6 in The Bahamas, more women seek healthcare 
services and treatment through anti -retroviral drugs than men. Lower levels of mortality due to non -
communicable diseases (NCDs) are observed among women . 
 
Economic Opportunities . Labor market outcomes are not as favorable for women than for men. 
Women  account for 48.4% of the total labor force, which is slightly higher than the regional average. 
Of the female population aged 15 years or older, women have a labor force participation rate of 66.1% 
- compared to 79.1% labor force participation among their  male counterparts.  Still, unemployment is 
 
6 Defined as people aged 15 -24 inclusive .


---
*Page 122*
---

   
 
higher among women . Female unemployment at both the national and youth levels (10.2% and 27.8% 
respectively) are higher than male unemployment (9.9% and 21.4%). Of those women who are 
employed in The Bahamas, 6.9% are engaged in vulnerable employment compared to 17.0% of 
Baha mian men. While data is not available on the share of women in senior and/or middle 
management, only 17.9% of the seats in the national parliament are held by women. This is almost half of the regional average of 35.7% across LAC, and will likely have negative impacts on decision-
making on issues which impact women disproportionately such as GBV and time-use.  
 
Agency and Legal Protections . The legislature in The Bahamas allows for gender equality, allowing 
women to enjoy many of the same freedoms as men as shown below in Table X. Women can apply for a passport, open a bank account, be the head of their households or remarry in the same way a s 
Bahamian men. Legislation also exists on the issue of sexual harassment in employment as well as 
specifically addressing domestic violence.  
 
Barbados  
 
Health Outcomes . Indicators show positive health outcomes for women in Barbados which are 
comparable to women throughout LAC. Female children born in Barbados have a life expectancy at 
birth of 79.4 years, compared to 75.6 years among male children. These health indicators  are both 
higher than the regional average of 75.7 and 69.8 years for girls and boys respectively. 98.4% of all births in Barbados are attended by skilled health staff and maternal mortality is low at 39 per 100,000 
live births (compared to an average mate rnal mortality of 88 per 100,000 live births in LAC). With an 
adolescent fertility rate of 42.4 per 1,000 births among women aged 15 -19, the majority of adult  
women of reproductive age in Barbados have access to modern family planning methods. The 
prevalence of HIV among girls and young women in Barbados is 0.1% - the lowest on record within 
the region -  and lower than the prevalence of 0.3% among young men in Barbados in the same cohort 
group. Higher proportions of women seek access to anti -retroviral trea tment than men, which 
improves their quality of life and wellbeing.   
 
Economic Opportunities . While Barbadian women are a minority in senior positions in business or 
national leadership, there are fewer women than men facing negative labor market conditions such 
as unemployment and insecure working conditions. In Barbados, women make up just about half 
(50.1%) of the total labor force, with a labor force participation rate of 58.0% among the female 
population 15 years and older. This is lower than male labor force participation of 64.2% among Barbadian men of the same age. In  contrast, the proportion of women engaged in vulnerable 
employment is roughly half the proportion of men engaged in vulnerable employment – 12.7% and 
24.6% respectively. As a proportion of the female labor force, women experience lower levels of joblessness at the national and youth levels, compared to their male counterparts. Still,  there are 
areas of concern. Additionally, the proportion of female-headed households (FHHs) is higher in Barbados (44%) compared to the regional average (ACS). This has implications for women’s availability for work and the socioeconomic well -being of their families, as well as the burden of care on those 
women or the eldest children within the home.  
 
Agency and Legal Protections . Legal frameworks exist in Barbados to promote and support gender 
equality in Barbados . These allow  the right to apply for a passport, be the head of the household or 
access credit in the same way their male counterparts can. While data on intimate partner or physical 
violence is not available, legislation exists which explicitly addresses sexual harass ment and domestic 
violence. Despite these, almost a third of Barbadian women for married or in a union before 18 years 
of age. D emands for unpaid care within the household and cultural norms around marriage may 
impact these girls’ ability to continue schooling  and other opportunities for increasing their 
employability and independence.


---
*Page 123*
---

   
 
 
Belize 
 
Health Outcomes . According to gender disaggregated data published by the World Bank, women and 
girls in Belize have better health outcomes than their male cohorts as observed in several indicators. 
Female children have a life expectancy at birth of 74.3 years, which is hig her than the life expectancy 
of male children (67.1 years) born in Belize. It is also only slightly lower than the regional average of 
life expectancy for women born in LAC (75.7 years). However, maternal mortality and adolescent 
fertility  are higher in Belize than the average across the region. For every 100,000 live births, there 
were 130 maternal deaths in 2021 compared to the regional average of 88 maternal deaths. Adolescent fertility, measured as births per 1,000 women aged 15 -19, the re were 56.7 births 
compared to the regional average of 54.77. Among young women aged 15 -24 in Belize, the prevalence 
of HIV is 0.4% compared to 0.3% among men of the same age. Women however have higher access to anti -retroviral drugs than do men.  Women ar e more prone to NCDs - it is estimated that more than  
70% of Belizean women are either obese or have hypertension ( World Bank, 2022a ) 
 
Economic Opportunities . Labor market conditions in Belize are generally more favorable for men than 
for women. Women’s employability is limited as they constitute more than two times the share of 
young men  who are neither in education, employment or training (NEET). Of those who are employed, 
Belizean women comprise 38.5% of the total labor force and hold only 12.5% of seats in the national parliament. This lags behind the regional average (35.7%) of women  in parliamentary office  across 
Latin America and the Caribbean  and limit op portunities for female engagement in representation 
and policy -making to support female socioeconomic advancement. Unemployment is considerably 
higher among Belizean women than among Belizean men. At the national level, 15.1% of the female labor force is without work compared to only 6.8% of the male labor force. Among Belizean youth , 
aged 15 -24, female unemployment is more than twice as high as unemployment among young 
Belizean males. Many women in Belize are involved in the informal sector and so  less women are in 
receipt of or have access to a pension compared to men. These outcomes are significant since 
approximatel y 26.7% of households in Belize are headed by a woman ( World Bank, 2022).  
 
Agency and Legal Protections . Women in Belize have access to the same agency and freedoms 
supported by law. Women and men in Belize have equal agency to decision -making (leading 
households or deciding to remarry), to financial inclusion (opening a bank account), freedom of 
movement (ap plying for an owning a passport). Legislation also exists to protect women from 
workplace sexual harassment and domestic or intimate partner violence.  
 
Dominican  Republic  
 
Health Outcomes . Female children born in the Dominican Republic have a life expectancy 10 years 
higher (76.3 years) compared to 69.3 years expected of male children. While 99.2% of births in the 
Dominican Republic are attended by skilled health staff, the maternal mortalit y ratio is 107 per 
100,000 live births, while the latest available data shows adolescent fertility rates of 68.3 per 1,000 
births among young women 15 -19 years old. Among young people 15 -24 years old, there is a slightly 
higher prevalence of HIV among wome n (0.2%) than among men (0.1%), but women reportedly have 
higher access to anti -retroviral drugs for treatment than men.  
 
Economic Opportunities . Less than half (40.8%) of the labor force in the Dominican Republic are made 
up of women, who go on to hold 27.9% of the seats in the national parliament but comprise the 
majority share (56.1%) of jobs in senior and middle management. Among women and men 1 5 years 
and older, labor force participation rates are lower among women (40.8%) compared to men (51.3%) in the Dominican Republic but are comparable with the regional average. Notwithstanding this,


---
*Page 124*
---

   
 
conditions within the labor market may be a cause for concern among women in the Dominican 
Republic. Almost a third (27.5%) of female employment is considered vulnerable and more than half 
of those engaged in non -agriculture activity are women in informal employment arrangements 
(52.1%). This has implications for the women’s economic empowerment and financial independence. 
Though no data is available, the consequences of this insecurity may be more grave in female- headed 
households (FHHs).  
 
Agency and Legal Protections . Like in several other Caribbean countries, women in the Dominican 
Republic have access to equal rights under the law with respect to their movement, financial inclusion and access to credit and choice of partner. Although legislation exists to protect women against 
domestic violence and workplace sexual harassment, the latest available data shows that 17.9% of 
Dominican women have at least experienced some form of intimate partner violence. As at 2018, 
7.8% of women had reporte d incidents of physical and or sexual violence in the previous 12 months.  
 
 
 
Guyana  
 
Health Outcomes . Available data show mixed health outcomes for women in comparison to their 
male counterparts domestically, as well as in comparison with women throughout the LAC region. While female children born in Guyana have a life expectancy almost 7 years longer than  male children, 
maternal mortality and adolescent fertility are significantly higher than the average throughout the 
LAC region. Like in other Caribbean states, women enjoy greater access to anti-retroviral drugs but 
the prevalence of HIV is twice as high among women (0.4%) than among men (0.2%) which is still 
cause for concern.  
 
Economic Opportunities . Labor market conditions present an opportunity for improvements in 
gender equality in Guyana. While women comprise 35.4% of seats in the national parliament and hold 
45.9% of the jobs in senior and middle management, labor force participation among women 
significantly lags behind labor force participation among men, as well as compared to participation 
among women across LAC, shown in the Table below. Joblessness is higher among women both as a 
percentage of the female labor force as  well as at the youth level. To ensure young women do not 
miss out on opportunity due to early parenthood, Guyana has established a national policy on the 
reintegration of adolescent mothers into the formal education system (UNICEF, 2017). This is critical since almost one third of households in Guyana are headed by a woman. Of all jobs held by Guyanese 
women, 28% of them are considered vulnerable while, outside of the agriculture sector, almost 60% 
of women are considered to be working informal jobs. In co mparison, only 47& of men are in informal 
sector jobs. This has implications for job security, financial independence and higher poverty rates 
among women than among men.   
 
Jamaica  
 
Health Outcomes . Jamaican women and girls enjoy high quality health outcomes, which in most cases 
exceed the outcomes for men and are comparable with their female counterparts throughout the 
region. At birth, Jamaican girls have a longer life expectancy than Jamaican men. While almost all 
births are attended by skilled health personnel, the maternal mortality exceeds the regional average. 
Among young women aged 15 -19 years of age, there are roughly 33 births for every 1,000 women. As 
is common in other island states, women tend to access anti -retroviral treatment more than men. In 
contrast, while there is no gender disparity in the prevalence of HIV among young people, infection 
rates are among the highest in the Caribbean.


---
*Page 125*
---

   
 
Economic Opportunities . In the labor market, women’s economic participation and performance 
underperforms in comparison to men. Jamaican women comprise just over half of the national 
population but  less than half of the labor force, hold only 28.6% of seats in the national parliament 
and just about one third of entrepreneurs (31.5%) are women. Many of those who ae employed, find 
work in the informal sectors or in vulnerable working conditions. In fact,  66% of employed women 
hold jobs  in which they  struggle to earn minimum wage (World Bank, 2022b ). It is therefore not 
surprising to find that  Jamaican women are overrepresented among the poor within the country, and 
70% of them are below the poverty line. This has significant  intergenerational effects  because more 
than 40% of Jamaican  households are headed by women. Joblessness remains higher among women 
at different levels in the working population .   
 
Agency and Legal Protections . While gender equality is supported in some laws, women’s physical 
and mental safety still remains at risk. The lack of legislative protection against violence in Jamaica is 
likely a contributory factor to the prevalence of gender -based violence. At presen t, laws do not exist 
to specifically protect women from sexual harassment or from domestic violence. Thus, it is not 
unusual that as at 2018, the WB gender data portal reported 23.2% of Jamaican have experienced 
intimate partner violence and just under 6% had been victims of physical and or sexual violence within 
the last 12 months.  
 
Suriname  
 
Health Outcomes . As can be found elsewhere in the Caribbean, data show positive health outcomes 
for Surinamese women in the context of life expectancy and levels of health care for expectant mothers. Available data show that 98.4% of all births in Suriname are attended by skilled health staff, 
just higher than the 94.9% observed throughout LAC. Despite these positives, maternal mortality and adolescent fertility are higher among women in Suriname compared to women throughout LAC. 
Access to health services for sexually transmitted infections is higher among women, which may 
perhaps be linked to the higher prevalence of HIV among young Guyanese women.  
 
Economic Opportunities . Labor market prospects are narrower for women compared to men in 
Suriname. Gender imbalance, in favor of men, is observed in labor force shares between the genders. 
While women are represented in civic decision -making at the parliamentary level, it has not  translated 
into greater opportunities for women’s economic participation. Women experience higher levels of 
unemployment (as a proportion of the female labor force as well as among youth), with 17.0% of women reportedly engaged in vulnerable employment conditions. More is needed to reduce gender -
disproportionate economic engagement in Suriname by way of bringing women into the value chain.  
 
Agency and Legal Protections . Compared to regional peers, Suriname ranks lowly on gender -equal 
legal protections. Women’s financial inclusion and independence is limited by barriers which prevent ease of access in opening bank accounts compared to men. Legal barriers also exist which h inder 
women’s agency over their futures, households and safety.  
 
Trinidad  and Tobago  
 
Health Outcomes . Health outcomes for women in Trinidad and Tobago are above those for men, but 
they also outperform those of women in the rest of LAC. In the first instance, female life expectancy 
is higher than male life expectancy in the domestic context but also higher than the average life 
expectancy for women across the region. All births in Trinidad and Tobago are attended by skilled health staff, with maternal mortality and adolescent fertility among the lowest in the Caribbean. 
Similar to other islands, women in Tri nidad and Tobago continue to seek HIV treatment in higher 
proportions than men, albeit the prevalence of HIV among persons aged 15 -24 in the country is higher


---
*Page 126*
---

   
 
among young women than among young men.  
  
Economic Opportunities . Despite encouraging performance, more can be done to improve economic 
empowerment and reduce gender inequality for women in the labor market. While more women are 
engaged in the labor force in Trinidad and Tobago than the regional average across LAC, labor  force 
participation among women continues to be significantly lower than participation among men. Although women hold more than 40.0% of senior and middle level leadership roles, less than a third 
of parliamentary seats are held by  women – lower than elsewhere in the region. Such low levels of 
female participation in decision-making may prove insufficient to remove barriers to gender equality 
and women’s agency in Trinidad and Tobago. Additionally, more men are observed to be in vul nerable 
employment, but unemployment is higher among women of all ages, particularly between the ages of 15-24.  
 
Agency and Legal Protections . As found regionally, women and men enjoy the same legally enshrined 
provisions in their freedom of movement, financial inclusion and household autonomy. Interestingly however, although legislation exists to specifically address domestic violence, almost a third of 
women in Trinidad and Tobago have been victims of intimate partner violence in 2018. Additionally, 
there is no protection for women against workplace sexual harassment. Greater shares of women in 
the workplace may hav e significant impacts on productivity and profitability, but these are 
undermined if women cannot feel safe or protected from harm in their places of employment.


---
*Page 127*
---

   
 
Sources: α - Belize Country Profile, Gender and Disaster Risk Management (World Bank, 2022), Unless otherwise stated: World Bank Gender Data Portal


---
*Page 128*
---

   
 
Gender -Sensitive Sector Assessments  
 
Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Other Land Use (AFFOLU)7. Despite Caribbean countries’ position 
in global food trade as net importers, agriculture continues to be one of the main driver s of economic 
growth for several countries in the region. The sector  is also critical for employment and food security . 
However, a high level of gender -based occupational disaggregation  persists  throughout the region  
whereby agriculture is primarily seen as a man’s activity and  gender -based constraints limit equitable  
access to land, credit and other productive resources (CDB, 2016a; CDB, 2016c).8 Men dominate 
agricultural land ownership, benefit most from employment schemes and comprise  the majority of 
skilled labo r and formal jobs in the sector. Among registered farms  in the region , more than 77% are 
owned by men compared to approximately 20% owned by women  (CDB, 2016c).  Country -level data 
reflects these patterns.  In Jamaica, only 8% of agricultural land is owned by women, compared to 30% 
in Jamaica (World Bank, 2022b). In Barbados, almost 80% of registered farms are owned by men. In 
Barbados alone, data suggests that men account for 60% of skilled labor and 62.9% of total 
employment in agriculture, forestry and fisheries (AFF) . Comparatively,  women are heavily inv olved 
in informal agriculture roles  such  as subsistence and backyard farming and doing unpaid work on 
family farms , which is often not reflected in official employment statistics . In fact,  women’s 
participation i n agriculture is too small to be register ed in official statistics in some countries , while 
gender -disaggregated data is not collected  in other islands . Still, it is important to note that women’s 
involvement in subsistence farming and sale of fruits and vegetables from their backyard gardens were key to continued food security during economic downturns.  
 
Gender -based segregation  also appl ies to positions in agriculture value chains. Men are 
predominantly  engaged in hunting, forestry, fisheries and livestock farming, while women are more 
represented in market vending and retail activities , as well as sorting and packing of crops like nutmeg 
and cocoa  in factories. However, women have become increasingly involved in agro -processing of 
alternatives to wheat flour such as cassava flour  and s easonings , and small scale agribusiness. While 
this has been made possible through funding initia tives and women’s cooperative groups, women still 
face significant barriers i n scaling up their businesses due to domestic responsibilities and lack of 
credit, training and expertise , marketing and access to intra - and extra -regional markets.  This level of 
disaggregation in the value chains undoubtedly impacts women’s earning capacity and resilience compared to their male counterparts. Climate change has impacted the sector by way of crop loss 
due to more frequent hurricanes and flooding and droughts which limit irrigation. Gender inequality in access to credit limits opportunities for women in farming or agribusiness to  pursu e climate -smart 
practices  to adapt to climate change .    
 
Sustainable and resilient infrastructure. Like the agriculture sector, the construction sector in the 
Caribbean is also heavily gender disaggregated . In some islands, construction has become one of the 
two main industries driving growth and providing employment but women’s economic participation pales in comparison to men. Women also predominantly occupy administrative and technical roles  
such as storekeeping or meter readers in water enhancement projects  where they comprise less than 
20% of employees . Gend er disaggregation with respect to infrastructure in the Caribbean also extends 
beyond the labor market. A lack of potable water and adequate wash facilities stymies girls’ equal participation at school. Access to potable water within the home is sometimes limited, and this 
increases the time spent on domestic chores for women and female children. This is on account of 
social and gender norms which see women as responsible for collecting and storing water during 
periods of drought or boiling water during floods. Energy infrastructure such as adequate street lights 
is a problem in several Caribbean areas. This p oses risks to the physical and sexual safety of women 
 
7 While the fisheries subsector  is often considered an activity within the Blue Economy, fisheries data is customarily  reported  together with agriculture in 
official statistical reporting in the Caribbean .  
8 CDBa, 2016 Country Gender Assessment : Barbados; CDBb , 2016b Country Gender Assessment : Belize; CDBc, 2016 Coun try Gender Assessment  Synthesis 
Report.


---
*Page 129*
---

   
 
and girls – among whom gender -based and sexual violence is high. Because women experience a lack 
of resources differently to men, it is important to increase their  involvement in decision-making in the 
infrastructure sector. Women are best suited to provide feedback and perspectives on their own 
needs , and how infrastructure and spatial planning do not take these into account.  Increasing their 
involvement can provide gender responsive solutions to climate change  and allow for more 
sustainable development.  
 
Electricity including renewable energy  and energy infrastructure . Existing gaps in the energy sector 
range from gender -differentiated energy us e, financial circumstances and access to opportunities. 
Lack of data on energy use is a constraint. Still, s ome communities within the Caribbean are still have 
limited access to electricity supply, particularly in the rural areas of Belize, Guyana, Jamaica and 
Suriname  (CDB, 2018) .9 High electricity  costs and connection fees pose additional barriers to access  
and this reduces the quality of life in these homes . Women, and where applicable the eldest female 
child in the household, take on  an uneven burden of domestic and unpaid care work such as cooking, 
caring for young children or the elderly , or other domestic chores. Energy poverty  makes these 
activities more time consuming and reduces their availability for income -earning employment or 
continuing their schooling. This may also pose multidimensional risk as the use of coal or burning fire 
as fuel sources for cooking has negative health implications on women who most often take up this 
task.  Data suggests that FHHs are highly represented among the poorest households in the Caribbean, 
which puts these women and their families at a greater disadvantage  (CDB, 2018), since these women 
carry  the sole burdens of care and socioeconomic provision. Broadened access to energy services will 
not only increase women’s time availability, but it will improve access to information, online 
education, and e-commerce opportunities for women who run at -home businesses like personal 
services or food preparation. Improved access to e nergy will also improve GBV outcomes as women 
in rural areas are more prone  to sexual and or physical threat in dimly lit areas. Women-owned SMEs 
who already face difficulty in accessing credit will find it difficult to invest in energy -efficient 
technology or the energy transition of their businesses. Improvements in gender -disaggregated data 
on energy use is needed to support gender -sensitive policy and realize more inclusive service delivery .  
 
In terms of economic engagement, women form  only a small proportion of the energy -related labor 
force. Although the region has made progress toward gender parity in education, existing stereotypes 
about subject choices see less women than men enrolled in science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics (STEM) programs. This has domino effects as a limited number  of women in these roles  
is not sufficient representation or mentorship to encourage young girls wanting to get into these fields. Increasing the proportion of women in the energy sector can  be supported by targeted 
recruitment schemes by universities  as well as employers to build awareness of the variety of 
opportunities in the sector.  
 
The energy  transition and the variety of renewable energy sources provided by the climatic 
characteristics of the Caribbean present opportunities to close existing gaps. Various islands including 
Trinidad and Tobago are pursuing renewable energy and low  carbon initiatives. Globally, it is 
anticipated that job expansion in the energy sector will contribute 122 million jobs by the yar 2050, of which 43 million is expected to be in renewable s
10. Women tend to hold a greater share of 
renewable energy jobs compared to fossil fuels – in Trinidad and Tobago, the region’s oldest energy -
based economy women only account for 27% of the labor force . The region could leverage these 
opportunities to increase women ’s participation  in the energy sector value chain  and benefit from 
improved  productivity, profitability and decision-making which often result from more gender -diverse 
workforces.  
 
 
9 CDB, 2018 Integrating Gender Equality into the Energy Sector  
10 See blog  post  The Gender and Energy Nexus: A call for T&T’s green hydrogen industry .


---
*Page 130*
---

   
 
Sustainable Transport.  Women’s experience in the transport sector , and/or with transport 
infrastructure,  differs from that of men both at the level of consumer  and staff  and the integration of 
gender -sensitive perspectives is key.11 Gender norms involve a higher appetite for risky behavior  
among men which often manifests in reckless driving. As a result, a higher proportion of men are 
involved in vehicular and road accidents in the Caribbean, compared to women. This has the potential 
to increase the already high proportion of FHHs in the region and increase financial strain on these women to provide for their families.  The design of transport facilities  often does not  account for  
gender differentials. W omen’s higher burden of domestic responsibilities  mean that they run more 
errands and have less access to private means of transport.  Due to a  lack of safety measures, and 
lighting infrastructure, sexual and physical violence is common on buses and taxis and dimly lit 
terminals and waiting areas.  Lack of security at air and seaports have also resulted in the Caribbean 
becoming both a hub and destination for trafficking of women and girls.   
 The transport sector has also been impacted by climate change. Increased sea level rise,  flooding, 
hurricanes, storm surges and landslides affect disrupts  air and sea transport and access  to roads  – all 
of which have implications for continued livelihood. Additionally, at the level of staff and/or contractors, research shows that women  rarely consider  careers in the transport field which reduces 
opportunities for gender -inclusive solutions  in planning, design and development of the sector. As 
such, there have been increased calls to collect gender -disaggregated data to identify  differentiated 
needs and vulnera bilities at levels in transport projects as well as policies to promote gender -equal 
employment.
12 
 
Tourism . Tourism, and by extension hospitality services, is a main source of economic activity and 
employment in several Caribbean islands . For instance, tourism accounts for almost a quarter of 
national income in Belize - employing 1 in 7 people and engaging 1 in 3 households in some way (CDB, 
2016b). In other island states, tourism provides almost a third of employment . However, the  
integration of women and men in the sector varies at the country level. In Belize, the proportion of 
women and men  employed in the sector is somewhat equitable (55% among men, 45% among 
women ), but their specific jobs are affected by gender  disaggregation. In other islands , the sector 
provides almost a third of all jobs, but more than 80% are filled by men (CDB, 2016d ).13 Women’s 
economic participation in senior management is perhaps highest in  Barbados  – except for hotel and 
guesthouse ownership.  
 A synthesized gender report on the Caribbean (CDB, 2016c) finds that although  policies to develop the 
tourism sector are said to be gender neutral, a lack of gender responsive planning exacerbates existing 
inequalities in the value chain . Men make up the majority of owners and managers of hotels, 
guesthouses and restaurants as well as tour and taxi operators. Gender-segregated employment in 
the hotel and guesthouses subsector also reflects the division of labor within the home. Men  are 
primarily involved in groundwork and building maintenance while women are predominantly  
employed in administration, cleaning and /or housekeeping, and hair -braiding. Many of these women 
are single mothers and access to childcare services remain an issue given the working hours of hotel 
and hospitality activities . More effort is needed to integrate women into higher -earning positions in 
the sector. Sex-tourism is now  a growing subsector within the region , which mainly employs women 
but the activities are managed by men.  
 
Waste Management . Approximately 70% of the region lacks access to sanitation services which poses 
many environmental and health risks. Additionally, some countries within the LAC region have some of the fastest -growing cities which rapidly generate waste. Improper practices  for waste management 
contributes to the region’s growing flooding problem and greenhouse gas emissions. Plastic pollution 
 
11 CDB, 2018b. Integrating Gender Equalit y into the Transport Sector Operations  
12 See blog: Data: The Key to Gendered Transport in Guyana  
13CDB, 2016d. Country Gender Assessment: Saint Lucia


---
*Page 131*
---

   
 
is commonly found in internal waterways and on shorelines. In the Dominican Republic for instance, 
approximately 10,000 tonnes of plastic are used each year, of which only 24% is recycled.14 The 
expansion of manufacturing sectors, without proper waste or circular economy activity, will compound these issues.  
 Data on the sector is limited in its disaggregation and women’s involvement is not properly reported. Still, women have significant potential to be agents of change in waste management and climate 
action given the tasks they hold within the household and community.  Many women work in the 
sector as recyclers, waste pickers, sorters, intermediaries, business owners, and within state disposal services. Among an estimated 4 million people in the region who do waste picking as their main source of income, many of these are women who find this activity to be conducive with their childcare and domestic responsibilities. Gender pay gaps also exist within the sector and women often have less 
access to valuable recyclables. Sexual violence is also common in urban dum psites. Women have also 
become increasingly involved in starting initiatives to raise awareness of the importance of recycling, 
composting and climate- smart community gardens as well as setting up infrastructure for these 
activities to encourage the practi ce in their communities.
15 Some of these groups are run by women, 
with limited access to credit. While countries in the region establish their commitments to address 
waste management, existing policies are not gender sensitive. Gender roles limit the involvement of 
in the sector with respect to recruitment and their lack of access to credit, transport and networks limit female involvement in leadership and ownership roles. Still, the region presents many opportunities for engagement to increase women’s involvement in waste managemen t at formal and 
informal levels.  
 
 Other areas of gender -differentiated vulnerability  
 
Financial Inclusion  
 
Sex-disaggregated data on financial inclusion is limited throughout the Caribbean. In the Dominican 
Republic, legislation prevents gender- based discrimination in access to credit for women but there 
still exists some degree of gender imbalance in participation in the financial system. Among Dominican 
people at least 15 years of age, 47.6% of women have an account at a financial institution, of which 
27.3% have access to a debit or credit card and another 6.1% use some form of mobile banking account. These a re all lower than the level of financial inclusion among Dominican men – 51.6% of 
men have a bank account, 33.6% own at least a debit or credit card and 9.1% use mobile banking.  In 
Jamaica, more than 70% of persons 15 years and older hold at least one account at a financial 
institution - more than within the rest of the LAC region. While men are only slightly more included in 
the modern banking system and more men own debit or cr edit cards, there is gender-parity in the 
proportion of Jamaican women and men who have access to mobile money accounts. Although there 
is room for improvement, this data is still favorable. It signals high levels of women’s financial inclusion which is likely to lead to greater financial independence and socioeconomic circumstances for 
Jamaican women.  Levels of female financial inclusion are highest in Trinidad and Tobago, despite 
some data limitations. A significant proportion of the female population 15 years and older own an 
account at a financial institution and more than half of  that population own at least a debit or credit 
card.  
 
 
 
 
14 See USAID Fact Sheet: Women’s Economic Empowerment and Equality in Solid Waste Management and Recylcing – Latin American and Caribbean Landscape   
15 See UN Women blog: https://caribbean.unwomen.org/en/stories/from -where -i-stand/2022/03/from -where -i-stand -of-course -we-had- no-money -but-the-
problem -was-big-enough- for-us-to-tackle- even -without -financial -resources


---
*Page 132*
---

   
 
Climate change and disaster risk . Climate change and gender equality are among the world’s most 
pressing and complex development challenges. The location and tropical climate of the Caribbean 
region make the islands extremely vulnerable to climate change. In just the last ten years, the effects 
of human -induced climate crisis have become more profound.16 Where most islands previously 
experienced a somewhat predictable dry season (January  to June) and rainy season (July to December)  
each year , departures from  climate -norma ls have seen record- breaking warm weather, long periods 
of drought and extreme f lash f looding. Activity during the  Atlantic Hurricane Season,  which runs from 
June 1 to November 30 annually , has also become more violent in recent years. While climate change 
and gender equality are independently dangerous and consequential, their intersection exacerbates 
pre-existing vulnerabilities arising from socio -economic structures, gender biases, 
institutionalised discrimination, and social norms and expectations.  As a result, e xposure to 
vulnerability, socio economic fallout and coping in the post -disaster context are gender differentiated.  
 
Preparedness and vulnerability . Although limited data exists to assess the extent of a digital divide 
and ICT use, it is thought that women and men respond differently to early warning system (EWS) 
messages given gender differences in their time use  and bargaining power within their households 
and socioeconomic circumstances ( World Bank, 2022a ; World Bank, 2022b;  World Bank, 2022c ).17 
Indigenous and rural communities of women will be placed at a further disadvantage compares to 
their female counterparts in urban areas who have access to greater ICT coverage and means.  Women 
are heavily represented among the poor in the Caribbean, especially FHHs and women make up a large 
share of those in informal employment . Less financial security  make women more vulnerable than 
men to climate change and natural disaster and limits their capacity for resilience.  
 
Care work . Flooding is known to increase the likelihood of waterborne diseases , which puts women 
and girls at greater risk than men given their unequal share of unpaid domestic work which often 
involves collecting water and cleaning. In rural areas, the collection of water is usually done by women . 
As water scarcity is becoming more common in the dry season (January to June in most Caribbean 
countries ) due to climate change, women may have to travel longer distances to find water for their 
domestic work. On the contrary, following floods, women spend significant portions of their time 
purifying and storing water ( World Bank, 2022c ).  
 
Resource planning . A lack  of gender sensitivity and women’s involvement  in resource planning puts 
women and girls at a greater disadvantage than men. Women are also underrepresented in decision -
making positions in disaster management. In Belize for instance, of 10 emergency district coordinators, only 1 is a woman and all 3 regional coordinators are men. In the post -disaster context,  
shelter layouts  lack sufficient  privacy  and women and girls are often subjected to physical or sexual 
violence in shelters. i t is often the case that incidents of GBV increase following women and girls’ stays 
at shelters. Additionally, b reastfeeding mothers do not have sufficient privacy or storage facilities. 
Women and girls are often among those most in need of psychosocial sup port.  
 
Social  services . Access to health services is unequal between men and women in several Caribbean 
states  (World Bank, 2022) . Climate disasters effect significant damage to roads and other 
infrastructure such as health centers. This has gender -imbalanced impacts as there is a higher 
prevalence of NCDs among women in several Caribbean countries who may not be able to access vital 
medication or those who need perinatal care. For instance, an assessment following Hurricane Ivan in 
2004 showed that more than 12,000 children were deficient in folic acid due to nutrient shortages in 
pregnant women. Women in rural and Indigenous communities, for example Mayan women in Belize 
or Indigenous women in the Guyanese hinterlands, have even lower access to perinatal care than their 
 
16 IPCC, 2021. Synthesis Report of the Sixth Assessment Report, A Report of the Inter governmental Panel o n Climate Change   
17 World Bank , 2022a . Belize Country Profile: Gender and Disaster Risk Management; World Bank , 2022b : Guyana Country Profile:  Gender and Disaster Risk 
Management ; World Bank, 2022b: Jamaica Country Profile:  Gender and Disaster Risk Management.


---
*Page 133*
---

   
 
urban counterparts. For these women, damage done by climate disaster threatens to cut off their 
access to vital resources entirely.  
 
Labor market segregation . Climate change and natural disasters also have gender -differentiated labor 
market effects given women and men’s differing involvement in the value chain. For instance, women 
tend to be heavily involved in small-scale and backyard farming  of fruits but lost these opportunities 
following crop loss due to the passage of hurricanes in recent years ( World Bank, 2022a; World Bank, 
2022b ). Climate change has affected marine life and activity. Female farmers also have less access to 
credit and thus cannot pursue climate -smart farming  practices. Following natural disasters, it is easier 
for men to find work in manual activities such as road clearing and construction. Men are also able to 
migrate to other communities in search of work while women’s movement is limited by their  
obligations for looking after the home . Women, instead, are engaged in domestic assistance.


---
*Page 134*
---

   
 
Part II: Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan  
The Latin American and Caribbean (“LAC”) region's socioeconomic context makes it highly vulnerable 
to the effects of climate change. Poverty accentuates vulnerability to climate change impacts, and 
extreme weather events linked to climate change push more people into poverty. These effects are 
more severe for vulnerable groups18, as people who are socially, economically, culturally, politically, 
institutionally, or otherwise marginalized have limited adaptive capacity.19 For instance, gender 
inequality increases women’s vulnerability to climate change, while I ndigenous peoples are among 
the first to face the direct consequences of climate change, due to their dependence upon and close 
relationship with the environment and its resources. In fact, women are over -concentrated in climate -
vulnerable sectors (for exa mple agriculture) and under -represented in emerging, high potential 
climate-friendly sectors (e.g. low -carbon transport and green construction).20  
The effects of climate change are more severe for women and vulnerable groups , compared to men . 
For instance, gender inequality increases women’s vulnerability to climate change. A large portion of 
women’s livelihoods is dependent on natural resources, and yet women have unequal access to, and 
control of, land, water, and other natural resources affected by climate change. Indigenous peoples and traditional communities are among the first to face the direct consequences of climate change, due to their dependence upon, and close relationship with, the environment and its resources. Climate change exacerbates the difficulties already faced by indigenous communities including political and 
economic marginalization, loss of land and resources, human rights violations, discrimination, and 
unemployment.
21 Although women and vulnerable groups are at the forefront of the impacts of 
climate change, their voice and participation in climate solutions is limited. As an example, women comprise just 21% of the workforce and 8% of the members of board of directors in the wind and 
energy industry.
22 In the Caribbean only, two -thirds of women -owned firms reported access to finance 
as a major obstacle to business.23  
Be that as it may, businesses that adopt competitive low carbon or climate resilient practices become themselves more competitive, leading competition to implement similar actions, while contributing to the overall resilience of the value chain. In additio n, firms that cater  directly to underserved 
populations (e.g. through the provision of goods and services, or employment) contribute to increased 
equality and inclusion. Research has shown that the higher presence of women on corporate boards 
is positively correlated with disclosures of carbon emissions.
24  Hence stimulating innovation in climate 
technologies, business models and social practices can drive inclusive growth, emissions reduction, and climate resiliency concomitantly.  
 
1. IDB Invest Gender Strategy  
 The first group-level Gender and Diversity Action Plan (GDAP) for 2022-2025 was approved in 2022. It 
is the key instrument for translating the IDB Group's commitments to gender equality and diversity into concrete actions.  These frameworks guide the IDB Group’s work on policies to promote gender 
and diversity (G&D) equity in the region by addressing structural inequities, unequal treatment, and weak institutional capacity to design and implement G&D policies.   
 The Gender, Diversity, and Inclusion (GDI) team is a fundamental component of IDB Invest's Advisory Services Team. Advisory Services has been one of the core instruments of IDB Invest since its founding, 
working with companies to enhance their performance,  competitiveness, and sustainability, 
 
18 United Nations, 2008.  
19 UNFCCC, 2018.  
20  “Green jobs for women can combat the climate crisis and boost equality”, World Bank 2022.  
21 United Nations, 2008.  
22 IRENA, 2020.  
23 Reigniting Women- led Businesses in the Caribbean with Better Access to Finance . IDB Invest, 2022.   
24  Why women need to be at the heart of climate action . UN, 2022


---
*Page 135*
---

   
 
ultimately ensuring that their success contributes positively to lasting development impact. Its 
portfolio includes advisory services (AS), technical cooperation (TC), and technical assistance (TA), 
encompassing the transfer, adaptation, mobilization, and application of services, skills, knowledge, 
technology, and engineering. These processes build capacity continuously and support the structuring 
of investment transactions. The ability to develop and combine a comprehensive suite of financial and 
non-finan cial products and services is a value -added characteristic of IDB Invest, distinguishing it from 
commercial and agency actors, allowing IDB Invest to reach segments on a scale not available in the 
LAC region.  
 
At IDB Invest, we have made a simple and clear promise: we are 100% committed to gender equality 
as well as diversity and inclusion.  Our aim is to close the gender and diversity gaps25, contributing 
toward a more diverse, equitable, and inclusive economy.  We use a  holistic approach, that seeks to 
support business across their sphere of interest on how they engage with women and diverse groups – be it as buyers , sellers , users of their products and services; as their employees or leaders; or how 
the engage women -owned SMEs across their value chains and their surrounding communities where 
they operate.  To do so, we offer a combination of financial and non -financial solutions such as advisory 
services, resource mobilization and blended finance.   All this accomp anied by a strong pillar of 
knowledge and collaboration with other partners and networks with similar objectives to reach scale 
and further influence business action in the region.  
 In parallel, IDB Invest's ESG Compliance on g ender ensures that  any client  seeking funding and support 
from IDB Invest commits to the identification  of potential gender -based risks and to implement 
effective measures to avoid, prevent or mitigate such risks . In this regard, the Program will integrate 
gender considerations through the following plan.  
  
2. Gender Action Plan  
The integration of gender, diversity and inclusion in the projects supported by this program will be conducted at two  levels  set on a spectrum from risk to opportunity : the first one, as a baseline, is the 
application of IDB Invest's policies and procedures which all projects in IDB Invest's portfolio are 
subject to. The second level, in selected transactions, is by offering non -financial additionality to 
actively promote gender, diversity and inclusion in the opportunities identified by the pr ivate sector 
clients and projects under this program which have a high potential for impact.  
The Gender Action Plan below covers all activities to be undertaken at the program level and is 
applicable to  all the countries and participating entities. Once the projects have been identifie d, 
gender, diversity and inclusion will be mainstreamed in accordance with IDB Invest's gender analysis  
framework and other policies and procedures, as applicable , and to which all projects in IDB Invest's 
portfolio are subjected. IDB Invest's gender analysis framework looks at both the gender related risks 
and opportunities of 100% of projects  and categori zes them into tiers . Where gender, diversity and 
inclusion gaps are identified and are material, a ction plans will be developed with specific gender 
activities and targets will be identified and executed as required  with relevant timelines  – of the 100% 
screened projects, 40% will have a gender , diversity and inclusion component  IDB Invest has also found 
that gender disaggregated data and diversity data are key to clos ing gender and diversity gaps  in the 
private sector.  
As such, we have set a target of disaggregating data in 99% of our projects even those categorized 
under Tier 1 (lowest tier  with no gender considerations ). For a transaction to qualify under Tier 2 some 
gender elements, it must have a diagnostic, an identified gender gap or gaps, and an action to close 
 
25 Diversity: At IDB Invest we work with Afro -descendants, Indigenous and Traditional Peoples, LGBTQ+ Individuals, and People with 
Disabilities . These groups make up most of LAC population, but still face  barriers in access to labor markets, basic services, and financial 
services that hinder their ability to fully contribute in  the economy and society.


---
*Page 136*
---

   
 
the gender gap. The three elements should form part of the project's central vertical logic, such as in 
the case of the WB or EBRD, or can also be part of a parallel vertical logic to address a gap or issues 
identified that are relevant to the project but not part of the core development objectives of the 
operation. For a transaction to qualify as Tier 3 , it must have outcome level indicators, and for Tier 4 
at least 50% of the funds must go towards gender.  
All projects that IDB Invest finances or invests in, with its own or third -party resources, is subject to 
the IFC performance standards26 and the recently approved IDB Invest’s Environmental and Social 
Sustainability Policy27. The former includes prohibitions on discrimination based on gender, such as 
assessing gender inclusivity in consultations. The latter mandates social and environmental appraisals 
for all projects, consistent with IFC standards, and recognizes areas of focu s in the social space, 
particularly gender and vulnerable groups (e.g. Indigenous peoples, people with disabilities). It also 
states that IDB Invest will promote the responsibility of business to respect human rights, requiring its 
clients to have in place an approach to assess potential human rights risks and impacts, respect  human 
rights, avoid infringement on the human rights of others, and address adverse human rights risks and 
impacts in IDB Invest-supported project. These policies are also  in alignmen t with the GCF’s  Gender 
Policy which gives equitable consideration to the  contributions of women and men and empower 
women through the allocation of funds and operations. Like all IDB Invest transactions, projects will 
mainstream gender and minimize gender -related risks while supporting climate change mitigation and 
adaptation actions. 
Gender - related Risk Assessment  
Following IDB Invest’s  Sustainability Policy, IDB Invest is also committed to the identification of 
potential gender -based risks and impacts and requires clients to implement effective measures to 
avoid, prevent or mitigate such risks and impacts. IDB Invest carries out a gender risk assessment as 
part of the environmental and social due diligence and will require the client to address these risks and impacts.  
IDB Invest has an internal tool, the Gender Risk Assessment Tool (GRAT) - that guides social and 
environmental specialists to: i) identify gender -related risk factors of the transaction, ii) evaluate 
prevention and mitigation measures of the client, iii) recommend specific actions for each of the risks and gaps identified. The gender -risk assessment  also takes into consideration sector -and country -
based factors, as well as contextual -risks factors, that are analyzed both at national and regional level, 
with  the support of IDB Invest Contextual Risk Tool; and, at project level , during due diligence  site 
visits , with consultations with beneficiaries, affected communities, and other stakeholders. The result 
of the environmental and social due diligence is registered in the Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS). The ESRS includes a section on Gender, that summaries the gender -risk assessment  
results , including the main gender -related risks and impacts of the project, as well as current gender -
related risk management programs and gender policies of the client.  
When gender -related risk factors and impacts are identified, IDB Invest requires clients to implement 
gender -related risk management actions. These  actions are formalized in an Environmental and Social 
Action Plan (ESAP)
28 that is included in the legal documentation of the transaction  and is a contractual 
obligation that clients must comply with . The ESAP  includes: a description of each required action; the 
deliverables and evidence required; and deadlines.  
Previously to Board approval, transactions must comply with disclosure requirements. For all projects, the ESRS  and ESAP must be disclosed at least thirty (30) days prior to the Board approval of a 
transaction.  
Once approved, expected outputs of the transaction are included in the Results Matrix (RM) of the 
project.  The environmental and social specialist are responsible for supervising project’s 
 
26 IFC Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability , 2012. 
27 IDB Invest, Environmental and Sustainability Policy , 2020 
28 For more information about the application of IDB Invest’s Sustainability Policy, please refer to section M.


---
*Page 137*
---

   
 
environmental and social performance and client’s imple mentation of the ESAP. The supervision is 
conducted through project’s documentation and evidence review ; regular site visits ( trimestral, 
semestral, annual or biannual, depending on the project’s E&S risk categorization). Clients are also 
contractually obliged to present an Environmental and Social Compliance Report (annual or semestral) 
for IDB Invest environmental and social sp ecialist review; where, in addition to present evidence of 
the advances in ESAP activities, they must provide updates in all environmental and social matters of 
the project.  
 
Project -specific Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Opportunities  
The projects identified through the implementation of this program will seek to promote gender 
equality, diversity and inclusion in the opportunities created by climate change mitigation and 
adaptation activities by focusing on addressing the existing gaps highlighted in Part I above, but with 
emphasis on  (i) access to financing for women and diverse populations , WMSMEs  and financial 
solutions ; (ii) access to leadership positions; (iii) ac cess to quality employment, including in male -
dominated fields such a s construction and energy sectors  and in the growing green economy ; (iv) 
access to markets for women and diverse populations . By including these considerations, the projects 
are expected to contribute to increasing the participation of women and vulnerable groups in opportunities created by low -carbon and resilient economies  as well as increasing benefit sharing of 
the green transition . Through advisory services and performance-based incentives, IDB Invest will 
allocate resources to a dvance gender equality, diversity and inclusion in the selected project s in 
sectors such as AFOLU where women, Indigenous Peoples and traditional communities, as well as 
other diverse groups, are the most exposed to climate change or are underrepresented  in the growing 
economy  
The IDB Invest team’s scans the project pipeline, looking at projects by segment to identify gender 
opportunities. Based on the results of this analysis, the potential for impact, and the client's 
sustainability priorities or materiality, specific GDI advisory interventions are proposed.
29 
The overall project s will be  subject to  an annual supervision report (ASRs) , as well as a final supervision 
report (XSR) . The ASR is led by the Portfolio Management Division, where the PTM officer contacts the 
client either virtually or via supervision meeting to collect the data needed . The XSR is IDB Invest’s 
version of A Project  Completion Report and is  led by  the Development Effectiveness Division and 
additional information that may  be outstanding to assess the success of the project can be requested 
from the client.  
 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost  
Impact statement:  Empower women in the Caribbean and ensure equal  access to  opportunities  for women 
and men  in the just transition to net zero econ omies.  
Outcome statement:  Women and girls, in any role as stakeholders of a client’s  transaction, will not be 
discriminated or at risk , and are equally  able access to the benefits of the pro ject.  
Output 1: Gender -specific risk assessments  
Project -level gender risk 
assessments will be 
conducted to understand 100% of projects under 
this program will comply with IDB Invest’s 5 years  
 IDB Invest GDI 
team, supported by consultants . 
Gender -specific USD 312,130 
 
29 IDB Group . 2020. IDB Group Corporate Results Framework 2020 -2023 . Technical Guidance Note


---
*Page 138*
---

   
 
any gender -
differentiated 
risks/impacts of 
identified projects.  
Significant risks will be 
addressed through the 
projects’ Environmental 
and Social Action Plans (ESAPs).  
 
 Sustainability 
Framework. Gender -
disaggregated 
assessments and 
management of risks 
and impacts are 
required of all projects 
as an integrated part of 
the Sustainability 
Framework. 100% of 
projects will undertake a 
gender -specific risk  and 
opportunity  assessment.   
Potential adverse gender -differentiated 
impacts will apply the mitigation hierarchy in 
the Sustainability 
Framework, where risks 
are avoided where 
possible, minimized, and mitigated or 
compensated where 
unavoidable.   
As projects are identified , 
as part of IDB 
Invest’s due 
diligence 
process and 
clients’ 
environmental 
and social 
assessment 
process.  risks will be 
assessed and overseen by IDB 
Invest’s Social, 
Environment, 
and Governance 
team (SEG), 
coordination 
with the GDI 
team.  
Output 2: Gender Mainstreaming and Performance Based Incentives30 
Dedicate the required 
human and financial 
resources to leverage IDB 
Invest's gender 
mainstreaming process 
and screen projects to 
understand the gender -
differentiated impacts of climate investment and the most material gaps 
for private sector clients.   
(i) Projects will be 
screened in 
accordance  with 
IDB Invest's 
gender 
mainstreaming process  
(ii) Screened 
projects will be 
assigned a tier, 100% of investment 
projects (under  
Component 2 ) of this 
program will be subject 
to IDB Invest's  gender 
analysis to screen for gender -specific 
opportunities and 
actionable plans to close 
identified gaps. 
(i) At least 40 % of 
investment projects (under 
Component 2) 
of this program 
will have 
Performance -
Based 
Incentives  to 
recipients  for 
successfully 
closing their  
5 years  
  As projects 
are identified   IDB Invest 
Blended Finance 
and GDI team , 
client -appointed 
GDI point of 
contact, with 
support of 
consultants ; IDB 
Invest Development 
Effectiveness 
(DVF) team 
(monitoring and 
evaluation)  USD 624,259 
 
30 Note that as individual projects are not yet in the pipeline and identified, gender action plans and KPIs listed among the indicators and 
targets in this table will be clearly outlined in the implementation phase and not in this document.


---
*Page 139*
---

from 1 to 4, 
according to the 
client's level of materiality and 
gender -specific 
actions identified 
(iii)Support clients increating a nd
identifyinggender -specific
action plans , as
applicable to
projects
(iv)Promote the useof sex -
disaggregateddatagender gaps, 
which could include creating  
action plan wi th 
activities specific to closing gender, diversity and 
inclusion gaps 
identified such as upskilling women with regard to 
resilient 
agriculture or  
developing criteria for investing in 
women -led 
enterprises. 
Where applicable, 
project -level KPIs will be 
developed to track 
progress in closing the 
identified gender gap and other outcome -level 
gender targets will be identified. For example 
a minimum threshold of 
women employed/recruited in projects related to sustainable transport. . 
__________