=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20240211192311+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.8.20470
/ModDate: D:20240211192311+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.8.20470
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
4 – 7 March 2024  
Kigali, Rwanda  
Provisional agenda item 10 GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
12 February 2024  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum  VII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 227 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Increase Resilience to Climate Change of Smallholders 
Receiving the Services of the Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains Programme 
(DEFIS +) "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.38/02 /Add.07  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  93 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  94 
Secretariat’s assessment  97 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   117 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  126 
Gender documentation  129


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Increase Resilience to Climate Change of Smallholders 
Receiving the Services of the Inclusive Agricultural Value 
Chains Programme  (DEFIS+)  
Country(ies):  Madagascar  
Accredited Entity:  International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)  
Date of first submission:  2020/04/24  
Date of current submission  2023/ 11/21 
Version number  V.008


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
 Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G  GCF POLICIES  AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H  ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
● Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
● Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
● The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time.  
● The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
● Under the  GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
  
A. PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated%age of GCF and Co -financers’ 
contribution  devoted to it. The total of the%ages when summed should be 100% for GCF and 
Co-financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total  0% 0% 
☐  Energy  generation and access    
☐ Low-emission transport    
☐ Buildings , cities, industries and appliances    
☐ Forestry and land use    
Adaptation total  100% 100% 
☒ Most  vulnerable people and communities  30 %  30 %  
☒ Health  and well -being, and food and water security  25 % 20 % 
☒ Infrastructure  and built environment  20 %  20 %  
☒ Ecosystems  and ecosystem services  25 % 30 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome   
Mitigation co -benefit of 1 
672 669 tCO 2eq 
 A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome   
3,990,920  (1,995,460 females and 
1,995,460  males)2 
 
number of direct 
beneficiaries  
447,20 1 number of 
indirect 
beneficiaries  
3,543,7 19 
% of direct 
beneficiaries vis -
à-vis total 
population  
1.6% % of indirect 
beneficiaries vis -
à-vis total 
population  
12.7% 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  150 847 444  USD  
A.9. Project size  Medium (Up to USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  53 861  003 USD  
 
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the  GCF 
contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme descr ibed in the 
funding proposal.  
2 An annex is included elaborating the estimates and calculations of the beneficiaries for different project interventions.  
3 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒ Grant           41 045 298  
☒ Loan           12 815 705 
☐ Guarantee   ☐ Equity     
☐  Results -based payment     
A.11. Implementation 
period  6 years, 0 months.  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years (as in Economic and 
Financial Analysis)  
 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  March  2024 A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and  GCF ESS Standards  
to assess your FP category.  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used to 
prepare this FP?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The Republic of Madagascar (RoM) through its Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and 
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MINAE).  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Madagascar has been ranked the fifth most vulnerable country to climate change in the world, and the ND -Gain index, 
which ranks the climate adaptation performance of 181 countries, has classified Madagascar’s exposure  and sensi tivity 
to climate change as high  and ability to adapt to the negative impacts of climate change as one of the least (rank 169 
out of 181 countries). Madagascar belongs to the group of least developed countries (LDCs), more than 80% of the 
population lives below the poverty level  of US$ 2 per day and 80% of the population lives in rural zones, most  of them 
in very remote areas with limited access to basic infrastructure. The poverty rate (at $1.9/day) is estimated to rise in 
2023 ; it was 74.3% in 2019, corresponding to an increase of 1.38 million people in just one year (2020).  
 
Madagascar has experienced unprecedented, excessive and consecutive droughts from 2017 to 2022, affecting crop 
production  and food and nutrition security across the country.  The southwest and the extreme south of the country are 
characterised by semi -desert environments with erratic and low rainfall of less than 800 mm per year. Thus, a change  
in average annual  precipitation , ranging from -8 to +1%, is projected by 2050 and it is predicted that there will be an 
increase in the amplitude of inter -annual rainfall variability with greater likelihood of extreme events.  This is particularly 
true in the project area, which is formed by six regions (Figure  4A, Annex 16) named Amoron’i Mania, Haute Matsiatra, 
Vatovavy, Fitovinany, Atsimo -Atsinanana, and Ihorombe in the south central and south east of the country. The great 
variability of rainfall in the project area leads to either droughts or situations where the water balance is very much in 
surplus due to heavy rains and resulting floods. Projected temperature increases in the southern regions of Madagascar


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
  
4 https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR131/PR131.pdf  
5 Malagasy government: Madagascar’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution   are estimated to be between +1.2°C and +2.1°C by 2050.  In the next decade, under the RCP4.5 scenario, the number 
of days subject to extreme heat events is projected to increase from 9.2 days to 18.5 days and by 2050, the average 
number of days subject to extreme heat events will increase from 32.4 days to 54.7  days, posing extreme high risks to 
human lives.  
 
The high occurrence of climate related disasters, limited climate investments, lack of access to formal safety nets and 
markets, characterise the vulnerability of rural Malagasy smallholders in the project area. The main climate -related 
changes include: (i ) the decrease in the amount of annual precipitation, with more marked and/or more frequent periods 
of drought; (ii) a delay in the arrival of the rains, which requires adaptation (lag) in the agricultural calendars; (iii) th e 
increase d intensity of extrem e climatic phenomena (cyclones, droughts, floods, storms and strong winds); and (iv) a 
very high temporal and spatial variability in rainfall, which makes farming and water supply less predictable . Additionally, 
smallholders are frequently exposed to pest and disease outbreaks , which cause significant crop and income losses. 
Since 2010, some of the regions  most affected by drought events have been in the project area, including the Atsimo -
Atsinanana, Vatovavy and Fitovinany regions. The GHG emissions in Madagascar come predominantly from the land -
based sectors: agriculture, forestry and land use change (AFO LU) and represent 80.5% of Madagascar’s national 
emissions. The emissions are mainly from livestock (enteric fermentation and manure) and agriculture (methane from 
rice cultiva tion, poor soil management, deforestation for agricultural purposes and fertiliser application).   
 
The proposed project, Increase Resilience to Climate Change of  Smallholders Receiving the Services of the Inclusive 
Agricultural Value Chains Programme ( DEFIS+ ) has the ambition of reducing the negative impact of climate change by 
applying sustainable  and nature -based  adaptation measures  with mitigation co -benefits . Thus, DEFIS+ is built on 
positive lessons learned from past IFAD projects , and from an ongoing pro -poor agricultural investment programme, 
DEFIS, funded by IFAD and the OPEC Fund for Internation al Development (OFID) and other national financiers .  
The UN World Food Program has  described the recent humanitarian crisis in Madagascar, as the world’s first climate 
related famine  and it has been exacerbated by the Covid19 pandemic. The burden of malnutrition in the country is 
heavy with children living in DEFIS+ regions being among the most affected4. According to UNICEF, the proportion of 
under -five Malagasy children, suffering from acute malnutrition, which has been declining from 1992 to 2018, is now 
increasing due to the  recent famine caused by the negative impact of climate change . Small -scale farming households 
are among the most affected by malnutrition, driven by extreme climate events, poverty, food insecurity and insufficient 
access to basic services such as health, education and WASH. The effects of h eavy rainfalls and floods caused by 
climate change are exacerbated  by poorly planned and design ed rural roads . Sub-optimal  design  leads to fast 
degradation during floods , which massively and repeatedly reduces the access of rural people to agricultural markets 
and basic services such as education, health and social services.  Only 11% of the Malagasy population has access to 
road networks, meaning the development of agricultural businesses and livelihood resilience is hampered due to poor 
connectivity. Roads play a vital role in strengthening the socio -economic development and climate change resilience 
of isolated communities with critical connections to health, education and markets. Road infrastructure needs to be 
made more resilient in order to  enhance  the climate change resilience of local people through improved accessibility.  
The project area is facing significant adaptation challenges that require urgent technical, financial and institutional 
support to: (i) mitigate the negative effects of climate change; (ii) improve the resilience of human population in the  
rural areas; (iii) improve the agricultural value chain production, food security and nutrition of smallholder farmers  and 
their communities ; (iv) make roads more flood resilient; (v) improve  livelihood options and convert current production 
systems that lead to deforest ation, land degradation and use of grey technology  into nature -based and nature 
conserving green technologies ; (vi) improve sustainable water management; and (vii) support systems and climate 
resilient  infrastructures to facilitate access to markets and other social services to boost people’s adaptive capacities 
and increase resilience to climate change.  
 
The objectives of DEFIS+ are to strengthen the resilience of agricultural production systems and vulnerable marginal 
communities to the impacts of climate change while contributing to enhance mitigation co -benefit s such as GHG 
emission reduction , promoting intensive/improved rice farming techniques (SRI/SRA) , and implementing Climate Smart 
Agriculture (CSA).5 Thus, DEFIS+ will be organised around the following three complementary outcomes , which are 
strategically conceived to contribute to climate change adaptation with mitigation  co-benefit s:  
 
Outcome 1: Strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production systems through enhancement and 
maintenance of ecosystem services by: (i) improving access to efficient water management systems for sustainable 
agriculture, which includes enhancing the resilience of 15,000 ha of irrigated schemes and 8,100 ha of sub -watersheds 
through nature -based flood protection and ecosystem -based approaches  to restore 5,500 ha of landscape; (ii)


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 improving access to regular and appropriate agro -climatic information for weather forecast and disaster risk reduction 
using automated agro -meteorological  stations for flood and drought monitoring;  (iii) improving the climate resilience of 
food production systems for 45,000 small family farms through the promotion of climate resilient farming technologies 
and practices , water conserva tion and storage technique s and integrated pest management techniques ; and (iv) 
promot ing resilient fodder production , CSA  and agroforestry good practices . 
 
Outcome 2: Increased income generation through improved market accessibility. This outcome revolves around 
promoting green roads  for water approach , supporting the climate resilience of rural infrastructure for access to markets 
and utilising the water harvesting potential of roads.  This includes: (i) investing in reinforcing works including well-
designed  cross drainage systems on 540 km of rural roads to protect the roads from damage due to climate hazards, 
such as  heavy rainfall  and floods and to harvest water f or drought resilience by efficiently managing the runoff water 
from catchments upstream of roads  with water retention and artificial recharge infrastructure associated with roads ; (ii) 
training 2,000 trainers, construction workers and technicians  on construction and maintenance standards that build 
upon a labour -intensive construction approach, which will be more sustainable in the long -term due to the reliance on 
local green technology;  and (iii) improving climate resilience by introducing water harvesting options for increased 
water availability for farming, soil moisture improvement and aquifer re charge.  
 
Outcome 3: Improved food and nutrition security through managing knowledge on food production systems. Local 
skills and knowledge will be leveraged for instance, through the development of operations manuals  for Farmer Field 
Schools , in order to scale up innovations  such as stress tolerant seed varieties and CSA practices .  Outcome 3 will also 
promote non -timber forest products (NTFPs) and neglected and underutilised climate -tolerant food species (NUS), as 
a strategy to adapt to climate change, improve agri cultural diversification, livelihoods and food security. The 
technologies that will be disseminated will not only help respond to the climate change challenge  but will also contribute 
to reducing women’s workload and time burden during farm and off -farm activities, with a positive impact on their health, 
education and those of their children. This outcome is inherently linked to Outcomes 1 and 2 as it benefits from the 
introduction of climate -smart practices and from increased income generation, both of which result in enhanced food 
and nutrition security and mitigate the negative impact of extreme climate events.  
The DEFIS+ proposal aligns well with both the NDC priorities, and the GCF Sector Guide on climate change, agriculture 
and food security, especially regarding  the investment pathway on CSA, which focuses on adaptation in agriculture. It 
is also aligned with the GCF Sector Guide on Ecosystems and Ecosystems Services through the pathway on 
landscape -level protection and restoration to maintain the ability to mitigate e missions  (project co-benefit) . Also, 
DEFIS+ aligns with the GCF Sector Guide on Water Security  through the pathway on s trengthening integrated water 
resources management.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
  
B. PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Climate baseline.  Madagascar's geographical location, maritime influence and wind regime result in great 
climatic diversity. Madagascar has two main seasons: a hot, rainy season (November to April), with maximum 
rainfall received between December and January, and a cooler,  dry season (May to October), which has less 
rainfall received between September and October. During the dry period, light rainfall is mostly restricted to the 
southern and eastern coasts.6 The eastern coast is hot and humid and receives between 1700mm and 3700mm 
of rainfall per year. The highlands enjoy a tropical climate with cold winters and average rainfall ranging from 
900mm to 1500mm per year. The southwest and the extreme south are characterised by semi -arid environments 
with erratic and low rainfall of less than 800 mm per year. Temperatures vary significantly across the country, due 
to topographic differences between the west and east coasts. Average annual temperatures range from 23°C – 
27°C along the coast and from 16°C – 19°C in the highl ands.7 Temperatures are the highest on the west coast, 
reaching 36°C between October and November.  
Temperature trends.  The University of Cape Town estimates that the average temperature  in Madagascar 
increased from 21.5 °C to 22.4°C from 1961 to 2005.8 Another estimate by Razafitsalama et al. (2018)9 indicates 
that the average  annual temperature linearly increased at a rate of about 0.2°C per decade from 1961 to 2017. 
Additionally, as shown in Figure 1, average temperature trends have increased from 22°C to 23°C from 1970 to 
2020.10 Comparison with other timelines from the EWEMBI climate database11 also indicates an increase in 
temperature by 0.72 - 0.84°C between 2000 and 2020 compared to the 1960 -1990 period. Finally, over the period 
1961 -2017, minimum and maximum temperatures have increased by 0.04 and 0.05°C/year, respectively.12 In 
parallel, temperature indicators show an upward trend in extreme heat waves . The highest increases of over 
0.84°C are noted in central and southern Madagascar (Figure 2).  
Figure 1: Madagascar observed annual temperature trends from 1970 to 202013 
 
 
 
 
6 University of Cape Town (2008). Climate Systems Analytical Group. Climate  Change in Madagascar; recent past and future  
7 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/madagascar/climate -data-historical  
8 University of Cape Town (2008). Climate Systems Analytical Group. Climate  Change in Madagascar; recent past and future.  
9 Razafitsalama et al (2018). Climate Change Forecasting in Ronohira, Southern Madagascar, using Liner and ARIMA Models. Intern ational 
Research Journal of Environmental Science. Vol. 7(12), 12 -20. 
10 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/madagascar/climate -data-historical  
11 Lange, Stefan (2016) EartH2Observe, WFDEI and ERA -Interim data Merged and Bias -corrected for ISIMIP (EWEMBI). GFZ Data 
Services. http://doi.org/10.5880/pik.2016.004  
12 DGM, 2019  
13 Adapted from World Bank 2020


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 Figure 2: Changes between 19 60 and 1980;  and between 2000  and 20 2014 
 
Precipitation trends. Even though data at the national level indicate no obvious trend in annual average 
precipitation, rainfall has changed significantly across different regions. It has increased in some parts and 
decreased in others over the last decades, in parallel with an increased length of dry spells (Figures 3 and 4B).15 
Figure 3: Precipitation changes in different regions16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 EWEMBI climate dataset, https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/madagascar/climate -data-historical   
15 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/madagascar/climate -data-historical   
16 EWEMBI, https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/madagascar/climate -data-historical


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 Figure 4A: DEFIS+ project area (in green)  Figure 4B: Evolution of precipitations in Southern 
Madagascar17 
  
       
In contrast to the rainy season, the dry season is characterised by low rainfall during May  to September, especially 
in the regions of Amoron'i Mania, Haute Matsiatra and Ihorombe. La Niña brings about the possibility of slightly 
increased  precipitation during the wet season in the western part of Amoron'i Mania and Haute Matsiatra and a 
normal season in Vatovavy, Fitovinany and Atsimo Atsinanana. El Niño contributes to the risk of drought in 
Amiron'i Mania, Upper Matsiatra and Ihorombe and the southern parts of Ats imo Atsinanana, Vatovavy and 
Fitovinany as well as to a slightly wet ter season on the  coast of the Vatovavy and Fitovinany regions and the 
north coast of the Atsimo Atsinanana region. During the 2015/2016 El Niño event, there was a 28% reduction in 
rainfall (JFM), resulting in approximately 80% yield loss for 2016. Data provided by the Nat ional Meteorological 
Agency (NMA) highlights that up to 60% of the south regularly faces water shortages, which have experienced a 
marked increase, both in frequency and length, since the beginning of the century. Furthermore, rainfall patterns 
have become  more erratic and extreme rain events more intense, thus exacerbating the risk of floods and 
negatively impacting the irrigated perimeters and lowlands in Madagascar. Thus, the increased intensity of rainfall 
variability, cyclones and El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events exacerbate the frequency and duration of 
droughts in the south of Madagascar.  
Temperature projections . Projected temperature increases in southern Madagascar are estimated to be 
between +1.2 and +2.1°C by 2050. In the Mid -Warming Scenario (RCP4.5), in the near future, the multi -model 
mean temperature is projected to increase from 0.5°C (HC) to 0.7°C (HC) i n the dry season. By mid -century, 
average temperature could increase from 1.1°C (HC) to 1.4°C (HC) in the dry season and from 1.2°C (HC) to 
1.4°C (HC) in the rainy season. Under RCP4.5, in the near future, the multi -model mean numbe r of days subject 
to extreme heat events is projected to increase from 9.2 days to 18.5 days.18 By mid -century, the average number 
of days subject to extreme heat events could increase from 32.4 days (HC) to 54.7 days (HC).  
 
 
 
 
 
17 Finres, 2020 (Annex 2)  
18 Finres  (2020). Climate Risk Assessment for IFAD Funding Proposal to Green Climate Fund.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 Figure 5: Projected annual SPEI drought index  
 
Precipitation projections . The number of days with intense rainfall (above the 95th percentile) is slightly 
increasing, whilst the maximum daily rainfall amount shows a slight downward trend with drought events from 
1.5°C on the rise (Figure 5).19 A change  in average annual precipitation, ranging from -8 to +1% is projected by 
2050  and an increase in the amplitude of inter -annual rainfall variability, i.e., greater extremes, is predicted (Annex 
2a).  
In the regions of Vatovavy, Fitovinany and Atsimo Atsinanana, a decrease in rainfall occurs mainly during the 
cool months (June, July, August and September). The inter -annual variability of precipitation manifests itself in 
two ways: in terms of annual amount and at the beginning of the season. Wet, normal and dry years can occur 
depending on weather conditions, but the proba bility of exceeding 1500 millimetres per year in the Ihorombe 
region does not exceed 20%. The projected changes in precipitation and mean temperature are depicted below 
(Figures 6, 7, 8, and 9).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 USAID, Madagascar Climate change risk profile, 2016 and IPCC: 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/factsheets/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Regional_Fact_Sheet_Africa.pdf


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 Figure 6: Projected changes in precipitation and mean temperatures20 
 
Figure 7: Projected precipitation anomaly  
 
 
 
20 FINRES, 2020 (Annex 2).


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 Figure 8: Projected climatology of precipitation  2080 -2099   
 
Figure 9: Projected climatology of days with precipitation > 20mm, 2080 -2099  
 
Climate hazards.  From 1980 to 2010, fifty-three  (53) natural hazards - including, droughts, earthquakes, 
epidemics, floods, cyclones and extreme temperatures - affected Madagascar and caused economic damages 
of over US$1 billion. Of these, cyclone -related damage has been the most significant. High poverty rates and a 
lack of functional institutions increase vulnerability to natural and climatic hazards such as floods, droughts, 
cyclones, extreme temperatures and sea level rise.21 According to the Think Hazard Index, there is a high risk of 
 
21 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/madagascar/vulnerability


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 floods, landslides, cyclones, wildfires and extreme heat in the country in the coming years.22 The great variability 
of rainfall in the DEFIS+ project area (Figure 4A ,B) leads to either droughts or situations where the water balance 
is very much in surplus (Annex 2a).23 As the groundwater storage is limited, the surplus will create runoff and is 
not available as groundwater during the dryer season.  Madagascar is subject to recurrent droughts and the 
drought phenomenon is cyclical for the southern semi -arid areas (in particular in the Vatovavy and Fitovinany 
Regions), with some areas receiving less than 400 mm of rainfall each year, and is exacerbated  by the El -Niño 
phenomenon.24 Historical records indicate that, particularly in south of Madagascar, droughts are common 
leading to famines in 1903, 1910, 1916, 1921 and 1943 among other years. Recently, Madagascar experienced 
an unprecedented climate induced famine in 201625 and 2021, following a four -year drought, the worst recorded 
in 40 years26. This drought has depleted groundwater resources as shown by GRACE data by NASA and 
integrated modelling of the water balance using MSWEP data (Figure 10).  
Climate change is the primary cause of recurrent droughts and cyclones, which are the leading causes of food 
insecurity and frequent needs for emergency assistance in the project area.27 For example, the 2017 -2018 
drought reduced agricultural production by 60% and threatened 1.3 million people with food insecurity. According 
to UNICEF, the proportion of Malagasy children under 5 suffering from malnutrition, which has been declining 
from 1 992 to 2018, is now increasing due to the recent famine. Madagascar’s economy shrank by 4.2% in 2020, 
despite a fast-growing  population. Furthermore, droughts also lead to a decline in the fertility of the natural 
environment. Degradation usually begins with a change in vegetation and with a decrease in biomass production. 
The soil, which is less protected, is subjected to the mechanical action of precipitation, which causes a 
modification of the surface conditions and the progressive destruction of the soi l. A spiral of degradation is formed, 
and without any intervention, it leads to irreversible desertification. Desertification is an environmental problem, 
exacerbated by climate change, that is inseparable from the issue of sustainable development of dryla nds. 
Droughts affecting the project area are expected to increase, disrupting yields, crops, livestock production and 
the resilience of the agricultural sector. Monitoring the occurrence of droughts for agricultural production activities 
is very important for building human and climate resilience.28  
Figure 10: Development of groundwater storage in the projected area from GRACE Data (NASA, 
Earthobserver) and from the Global Land Assimilation System (NASA, Earthobserver) . 
The groundwater bodies in the study area are predominantly Precambrian basement rocks  (Figure 10 left, map 
by BGR, WHYMAP, UNESCO, 2023, brown colo ur). Their key characteristic is that they have very limited storage , 
 
22 https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/150 -madagascar  
23 The droughts are meteorological i.e., being the result of a rainfall deficit compared to normal during a given period (season) and over a 
given region, agricultural i.e. If this situation affects crops or hydrological i.e., a decrease or scarcity of water resources (rivers, lakes and 
water bodies)  
24 UNICEF . (2021). Wash Technical Paper. Accessed a t: 
https://www.unicef.org/madagascar/media/5661/file/Simplified%20Drought%20Monitoring.pdf  
25FAO (2021). The impact of disasters and crises on agriculture and food security. Accessed at https://www.fao.org/3/cb3673en/cb3673en.pdf   
26 Harding, A. (2021). Madagascar on the brink of climate change induced famine. Accessed at https://www.bbc.com/news/world -africa -
58303792  
27 The UN Migration Agency (2017). Evidencing the Impacts of the Humanitarian Crisis in Southern Madagascar on Migration, and th e 
Multisectoral Linkages that Drought induced Migration has on other Sectors of Concern. Accessed at 
https://www.iom.int/sites/g/files/tmzbdl486/files/country/docs/Madagascar/IOM -Madagascar -Southern -Madagascar -Assessment -Report -
EN.pdf   
28 Crop evapotranspiration is measured using FAO’s Irrigation & Drainage Paper No.56 approach, evapotranspiration (et0) is estim ated 
following the Penman -Monteith equation and crop -specific Kc coefficients for the four main phenological phases. By combining 
evapotranspiration with crop coefficients at the different phenological stages of the crop, ETc provides an indication of cro p water use under 
normal conditions.


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 storing only between 0.1% and 5% of their volume. As a result, these basement rocks are poor aquifers for 
groundwater storage and deplete quickly during drought. The measurement of groundwater storage with satellites 
(Figure 10 right) from 200 4 until 2022 shows a decline in groundwater storage from 334.3 mm to 136.6 mm for 
the south -eastern  basins of Madagascar, corresponding to a loss of groundwater of 11 mm/year. The natural 
recharge has been extracted (shown in blue , Figure 10 right ). The potential impact of the measure of colle cting 
surface runoff at road intersections, upgraded in the study area as part of the project, and using the collected 
runoff as artificial recharge for a scenario calculation since January 2016 is shown (green dotted curve). The 
potential addition by the measure can compensate for the climate induced loss in storage (red curve) and yields 
10.8 mm/year of recharge according to the scenario model which compensates for the storage loss.  
Typology of cyclones.  Due to its insular nature in the Indian Ocean, Madagascar, and the project area in 
particular, are frequently affected by tropical cyclones. Not only are tropical cyclones more frequent in this ocean 
basin, but they are also more intense than in other part s of the world. On average, 13 tropical systems with wind 
speeds exceeding 63 km/h are reported to form each year. Madagascar has one of the highest cyclone risks 
among African countries, with an average of three to four cyclones affe cting the country every year. Climate 
change is associated with a higher frequency of cyclones, resulting in lower rainfall in the project area. However, 
the intensity of such cyclones is projected to increase by 46%, along with the intensity of associated  floods. Due 
to the negative impact of climate change, the project areas and central regions (Amoron'i Mania, Haute Matsiatra, 
Ihorombe and Atsimo Atsinanana) are expected to experience more intense and frequent cyclones during the 
wet season and will be subject to more frequent flooding. On the other hand, during the dry seaso n, these same 
regions are likely to experience periods of increased water deficits. The accentuation of such extreme climatic 
events could have a strong impact on agriculture, and particularly  on rice growing, the main source of economic 
activity in the pr oject area. Increases in average tropical cyclone wind speeds and associated heavy precipitation 
are projected to result in category 4 -5 tropical cyclones ( Figure 1 2). Intense rainfall events caused by strong 
storms and tropical cyclones, coupled with poor land use practices and increasing deforestation, can lead to 
significant and damaging floods across the country and a high number of human and animal deaths. Floods 
represent the second highest impact disaster, affecting more than 300,000 people during th e 1961 -2017 period. 
Over 30 floods or heavy rainfall events have affected Madagascar in the past 30 years, killing hundreds of people 
and affecting thousands (Figure 1 2). During the passage of Tropical Cyclone Dzumazil, the water levels of the 
Matitanana River in Vohipeno increased by 5 metres and the Manapatrana River in Farafangana increased by 4 
metres causing significant flooding with extensive damage and high human casualties. During the rainy season 
of 2007 -2012, the Vatovavy and Fitovinany regions ap peared to be the most threatened by floods. The intensity 
of these hazards will be even greater due to an exacerbation of climatic extreme events such as an increase in 
the average intensity of tropical cyclones, the amplitude of storm surges and the assoc iated rainfall, particularly 
if greenhouse gas emissions remain high.29 
Figure 1 1: Number and typology of cyclones from 1988 -1989  to 2017 -2018  
 
 
29 Atlas des risques naturels et climatiques de Madagascar, BRGM (Géosciences pour une Terre Durable), Cellule de Prévention et gestion 
des urgences, Pilot programme for climate resilience, World Bank, 2020.


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 In the project area, other climate hazards include soil erosion and landslides. With regard to soil erosion ( Figure 
13), the effects go beyond the loss of fertile land, with an increase in pollution and sediment deposits in streams 
and rivers and in the clogging of reservoirs and dams, leading to a threat to aquatic flora and fauna (rivers, lakes 
and lagoons). Thus, the e rosion leads to a loss of fertility on arable land and therefore, a decrease in agricultural 
yields. Lavaka  is a Malagasy word meaning “ho le”, used in geomorphology to describe a spectacular form of 
erosion. It is characterised by a large, ten -meter -deep, roughly ovoid depression that narrows downstream to 
form an outlet. At this outlet, the materials spread out in the form of a cone. Lavakas  are common on the slopes 
of the central highlands of Madagascar, at high altitudes between 900mt. and 1250mt.30 
           Figure 1 2: Floods risk map                                       Figure 1 3: Soil erosion risk   
USAID, Madagascar, WRI Aqueduct 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate Impacts and vulnerabilities. Madagascar has been ranked the fifth most vulnerable country to climate 
change in the world31. ND-Gain measured Madagascar’s exposure  and sensi tivity to climate change as high and 
ability to adapt to the negative impacts of climate change as low and classified it in the 169th place out of 181 
countries32. Being an island country by virtue of its geographical position, Madagascar is exposed to recurrent 
climate risks that greatly affect its economy, the living conditions of its population and its natural resource capital.33 
Sectors such as agriculture, water resources, livestock, human health, infrastructure, terrestrial and marine 
biodiversity and the environment are vulnerable to climate change to varying degrees . An example are the social 
infrastructures that have been destroyed (including schools, basic health centres, and dispensaries), agricultural 
infrastructures have been damaged and administrative buildings, urban roads and rural roads  have been severely 
impacted by extreme weather events, particularly cyclones, all of which are directly linked with the negative impact 
of climate change.   
Agriculture and Climate Change.  Agriculture, the backbone of Madagascar’s economy,  accounts for 20% of its 
GDP and  employs 80% of the population, with women and youth representing an important proportion. The 
agricultural sector is predominantly rain -fed, characterised by subsistence farming and based on traditional 
practices and technologies, such as slash and burn, w hich contribute to deforestation and soil erosion, further 
aggravating the sector’s climate vulnerability. Indeed, rural populations’ dependence on low -yielding rain -fed 
staple crops and their over -reliance on single commodities (most often rice) make them  extremely vulnerable to 
climate change.34 
Climate -related extreme events such as increased rainfall during the rainy season lead to increased 
sedimentation, soil erosion and siltation, which compromise the flat lowlands and lead to flooding and crop 
diseases. On the other hand, insufficient rainfa ll and increased drought conditions will result in (i) lower agricultural 
productivity, crop damage and yield reduction, (ii) higher rates of evapotranspiration, reduced humidity and 
increased soil degradation, (iii) more difficult access to drinking water ; increased climate -sensitive diseases 
 
30 Atlas des risques naturels et climatiques de Madagascar", BRGM (Géosciences pour une Terre Durable), Cellule de Prévention et  
gestion des urgences, Pilot programme for climate resilience, World Bank, 2020  
31 Maplecroft, 2012   
32 https://gain.nd.edu/our -work/country -index/rankings/   
33 Climate Trends and Future Climate Change in Madagascar 2019  
34 COI, 2011


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 (dengue, malaria, typhoid fever, etc.) and (iv) loss of biodiversity. For example, maize production is projected to 
decrease in large areas of Madagascar due to reduced rainfall .35 Extreme climatic seasonal events such as 
cyclones can destroy crops and the flooding they generate, especially in heavily deforested areas, can leave 
behind a layer of sand that makes land uncultiva table.36,37  
In irrigated systems, rice yields are expected to decline by as much as 10.98% over the next 30 years, whereas  
in non -irrigated systems, wheat will decrease by as much as 37.45% and maize by 30.68%38, representing a 
significant threat to the livelihoods and wellbeing of the rural population. Extreme climate events will exacerbate 
these projections even further.  Variation in rainfall patterns and temperatures, along with the growing intensity of 
extreme climate events, is modifying farming calendars and consequently, increasing crop failure.39 
Faced with the effects of climate change, farmers cannot adopt adaptation measures in the absence of reliable 
agro-met information. Meteo Madagascar is the natural provider of climate and agro -met services, but demand 
generally outpaces their capability to  respond in terms of spatial and temporal accuracy. The lack of reliable agro -
met information compromises farmers’ adaptive capacity to climate change. The availability of agro -met 
information would help farmers better adapt to climate change; therefore, i mproved access to agro -met 
information is essential to reduce  the climate vulnerability of rural and marginal communities in the project area.  
Food insecurity, malnutrition, and climate change . All six regions in the project area have experienced 
extreme dry episodes and the situation has caused precarious conditions (malnutrition, undernourishment) in 
recent years, following the drought related to El -Niño and several cyclones.40 In 2021, four consecutive years of 
drought reportedly resulted in one of the world’s first famines caused by climate change registered in modern 
times, with people forced to eat locusts, insects and wild animals to survive.41 Famine is the highest internationally 
recognised level of food insecurity. Climate related drought effects have also led to agricultural losses of up to 
60% in the most populated provinces42. Thus, it should be noted that famine and food insecurity are also driven 
by non -climatic direct and indirect drivers, such as sub -optimal agricultural practi ces that result in low productivity 
for the farmers as well as land degradation. These factors are addressed through the promotion of good 
agricultural practices, which include CSA. These practi ces will improve agricultural productivity at the household 
and community levels, thus improving food and nutrition security in communities.  
 
Roads  and the impact of climate change . Roads play a vital role in strengthening the socio -economic 
development and climate change resilience of isolated communities with critical connections to health, education 
and markets.  The important interaction between the road network and the river network for the study area with 
basin boundaries is show  in Figure 14 . Road networks are crossed by and aligned with rivers. Road construction 
so far has not explored and used the potential of surface runoff for harvesting. While one focus of the project is 
to improve rural road resilience towards erosion  and floods, a second innovative aspect is to use road 
infrastructure for water harvesting. The water from upstream of the road is collected by check dams along the 
road. 
Madagascar’s poorly developed railway network and limited inland waterway transportation increase the country ’s 
reliance on road transportation. Most of the roads nowadays are in very poor condition, with the majority being 
unpaved and difficult to access, especially during the rainy season. With an estimated road network of 31  640 
km, Madagascar has one of the lowest road densities in the world. In the year 2000, 1.6  % of major roads were 
exposed to river floods at least once a year. By 2080, this value is projected to increase to 2.0  % under RCP2.6.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 Shi and Tao 2014, Ngwakwe, 2019  
36 Llopis, 2018  
37 Gay-des-Combes et al. 2017; Niang et al. 2015  
38 Climate Adaptation in Rural Development Assessment Tool (CARD): https://www.ifad.org/en/web/knowledge/publication/asset/41085709  
39http://www.commissionoceanindien.org/fileadmin/resources/Acclimate%20Etudes%20Asconit -Pareto/20110818_vulnerabilite -
madagascar.pdf  
40 https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/IPC_AcuteFoodSec_Madagascar_2019July2020June_English%20summary.pdf  
41 https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/9/3/madagascar -is-on-brink -of-first-climate -induced -famine -un-warns  
42 Ibid 
43 GIZ, Climate Risk Profile: Madagascar, accessible at: https://agrica.de/wp -content/uploads/2021/01/GIZ_Climate -Risk-Profile -
Madagascar_EN_final.pdf


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 Figure 14. Network of roads and river  
Hence, investments will have to be made 
to build climate -resilient road networks 
and improve the resilience of local people 
through improved accessibility. In 
particular,  floodwater is the single largest 
factor in road damage and is considered 
the prime enemy of road infrastructure. 
According to Chinowsky & Arndt (2012), 
water is responsible for 80% of damage to 
unpaved roads and 30% of damage to 
paved roads. Road damage mak es them 
unusable and increases maintenance and 
rehabilitation costs.  
Climate change will exacerbate the 
frequency and intensity of meteorological 
phenomena posing more risks for water -
related damage to roads and the 
surrounding landscape. Therefore, to turn 
the problems above into opportunities for 
beneficial water management and climate resilience, the internationally acknowledged Green Roads for Water  
(GR4W) approach will be adopted in DEFIS+. The aim of GR 4W is to transform the way roads are built and 
maintained, by incorporating water management and climate change adaptation into the design and construction 
of roads. The GR4W is a simple approach that (i) reduces water -related damage to the roads, thanks to  well-
designed cross -drainage systems, maintenance works and the promotion of seasonal roads ; (ii) minimises 
adverse impacts of roads on the surrounding landscape, such as flooding, waterlogging and land degradation ; 
and (iii) manages water beneficially, either for the benefit of roadside water users (agriculture), or by improving 
the sustainability of water resources, by reducing water scarcity and climate disaster risks. Annex 2a and 2b 
contain  an extensive analysis of climate change impacts, models and vulnerabilities of  Madagascar.  
Market, market access and climate adaptation strategies . The Global Competitiveness Index ranks the quality 
of the country’s roads at 2.2 on a scale of 1 to 7 (World Bank 2017). Farm -to-market routes are commonly unpaved 
and highly susceptible to degradation from increasing flooding and erosion.44 More than 30 floods or heavy rainfall 
events have affected Madagascar over the last 30 years. The most damaging floods were those caused by 
cyclones  Eline and Gloria, which killed 20 people, and tropical cyclone Elita, which killed 363 people and affected 
one million, while  also causing economic damages of over US$250 million.45 Improving transport mobility will 
lower disruptions in the movement of goods and people and contribute to reducing the GHG emissions of exhaust 
gases into the atmosphere as a result of reduced travel time, reduced number of operations while driving vehicles, 
stabilising speed at a level that all ows for running of vehicles at optimum consumption levels, increasing 
considerable energy efficiency and reducing the consumption of fossil fuel. Accessing basic services, such as 
schools and hospitals, is problematic  in rural areas of Madagascar .46 Lack of access to health services and care 
increases vulnerability to climate change, diseases and malnutrition. Damage to infrastructure caused by extreme 
climatic events such as heavy rain, cyclones and sea level rise, is a critical issue, especially since the population 
is expected to increase by 40% by 2030. For example, in early 2000, a series of three particula rly devastating 
cyclones affected more than a million people and caused nearly USD 85 million (equivalent to 2% of the GDP in 
2000) in damage to agricultural infrastructure.47 In terms of jobs, investments in emergency road works have 
amounted, for the last 10 years, to approximately USD 94 million.48 Damages due to floods and cyclones from 
2010 to 2015 were estimated to be 470 -490 million USD a year. Other structural economic and institutional issues 
further undermine human resilience (e.g., limited access to credit, high interest rates, obstacles to market access, 
etc.).  
Resilience to climate hazards . Addressing the aforementioned hazards in an integrated manner, as 
summarised in Tables 1 and 2 A below , is crucial to increasing  the resilience of smallholder farmers and their 
 
44USAID (2018) Climate Risk Profile. Madagascar. [online] Available at: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/180404_USAID -ATLAS_Climate -Risks -in-Urban -and-Urbanizing -
Geographies.pdf   
45 GFDRR 2011 Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile, Madagascar.  
46 http://www.fao.org/3/ca3933en/ca3933en.pdf  
47 East African Agriculture and Climate Change: comprehensive analysis Madagascar, International food policy research institute,  Dec 2012  
48 Strategic program for climate resilience: Madagascar pilot program for climate resilience, 2017


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 agricultural production systems to climate change in the project area. This entails the adoption of improved 
farming practices and technologies (drought and stress tolerant crop varieties, soil moisture conservation, mixed 
cropping and crop diversification , irrigation efficiency, agroforestry and afforestation, etc.),  as well as climate -
proofing basic rural infrastructure such as soil protection from erosion and climate resilient  roads. Annex 2 
provides various options for climate change adaptation for the value chains included in the DEFIS+ pro ject, those 
that are seen as the most technically feasible and cost effective are selected and pr ioritised . By enhancing 
resilience at the household level, the risk of further natural resource exploitation during “lean” periods is reduced. 
Watershed restoration and infrastructure rehabilitation will also strengthen ecosystem services, improve land 
productivity , mitigate the negative impact of climate change, and further reduce dependence on natural resources 
for economic gain.  
 
The prioritisation of the climate change adaptation options is a process that starts with the use of the Adaptation 
Framework, Annex 23.  The Adaptation Framework is a tool that uses a multi -criterion analysis system 
incorporating factors such as cost -benefit, climate -risk relevance, farmer capacities, mitigation co -benefits and 
biodiversity support when selecting adaptation options during p roject design. Its selection of the best adaptation 
measures is informed by analysis of climate change risks and impacts in the project locations. The available 
options are scored by technical teams on the ground with IFAD experts on the design teams. The prioritised 
options are the suitable ones with the higher scores in the completed tool for the project.  These options are then 
further assessed with the climate modelling results and scenarios and costed for inclusion in the project.   
 
Table 1: Overall adaptation measures proposed by DEFIS+ to improve resilience to climate hazards  
Adaptation 
measures  Primary justification  
Irrigation 
system  Lower precipitation throughout the rainy season (Figures 7 and 8). Irrigation is required to compensate 
for the decrease in rainfall. Combined with increasing temperatures, evapotranspiration could increase 
– measures limiting it are required to make irrigation more cost efficient.  
Irrigation could become especially relevant at the onset of the rainy season, as the number of dry days 
is expected to increase the most in October and November (Figure 5).  
Road 
infrastructure  The Southern regions face flooding risks even though the number of extreme wet days is not projected 
to increase (Figure 9).  
Road infrastructure could be used for water catchment purposes as a response to decreased 
precipitation and a shorter rainy season.  
The  Green Roads for Water  (GR4W) approach will be adopted in DEFIS+. This modern, sustainable, 
and eco -friendly approach can guarantee a small footprint impact. More information is available in 
Annex 2a and 2c.  
Evaporation 
limiting 
measures  The number of hot days in the rainy season is projected to increase over time, especially at the onset 
of the rainy season (Figure 6). Measures protecting crops, particularly seedlings against heat stress 
(agroforestry good practices and natural shading) are essential. Such  measures would also reduce 
crop stress induced by increased evapotranspiration.  
Crop shifting & 
improved seed 
selection  Lower precipitation throughout the rainy season could cause crop  production  to fall below optimal 
levels (Figures 7 and 8). The increase in precipitation in January –March does not offset the reduction 
in October -November.  
Need for crops with shorter growing cycles as a response to the overall decrease in length of growing 
season. An extensive analysis with additional information is available in Annex 2a and 2b.  
Climate 
information  Potential progressive delay in the onset of the rainy season (Figures 7 and 8) – lower precipitation in 
October and November.  
An overall decrease in the length of the growing season is analysed and discussed in Annex 2a.  
Climate information is essential to improving the resilience of the local population to climate shocks.


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 Table 2 A: From climate change impacts to identified responses at the farm level  
Key climate change 
impacts identified by 
the project  Impact  Major challenges 
associated with key 
climate c. impacts  Short - and long -term response 
measures to alleviate climate 
negative impacts  
Temperature increase will 
enhance the intensity of 
rainfall and delay their 
onset  Crop yield s reduced  Farmers (and their farming 
systems) must contend 
with:  
● Short -/medium -term 
changes in the timing, 
distribution and availability 
of water, with associated 
heat stress, resulting in 
negative impacts on crops  
● Reduced soil moisture 
levels, which adversely 
impact crop productivity  
● Long -term water 
scarcity, aggravated by 
inefficient irrigation 
infrastructure  
● Increased risk of 
extreme weather events 
and related infrastructure 
loss  Support farmers, through agricultural 
extension/advisory services on 
practices that build  resilience to 
climate extremes:  
● Promote landscape restoration 
and reforestation  
● Adopt agroforestry good practices  
● Adopt locally adapted cropping 
systems, practices and varieties that 
are more resilient to extreme climate 
events  
● Adopt renewable energy -efficient 
technologies  
● Develop/support water harvesting 
techniques  
● Promote water use efficient 
irrigation schemes  Extreme weather events, 
such as droughts, floods, 
El Niño  Crop yield s reduced  
Damage to 
irrigation and road 
infrastructure  
Temperature increases 
will result in associated 
increased water deficit 
stress, reduced river flow 
and groundwater 
reserves associated with 
increased rainfall 
intensity and surface 
runoff  Increased drought 
and 
evapotranspiration  
Extreme weather events, 
such as cyclones, sea 
level rise, droughts and 
floods  Losses of rural 
infrastructure, land 
degradation 
(erosion, 
sedimentation) and 
local flooding and 
waterlogging which 
in turns causes 
losses in 
agricultural 
activities  More frequent and 
extreme weather events 
pose new risks to roads, 
landscapes and water 
resources  Support the short - and long -term 
rehabilitation and climate proofing of 
rural infrastructure, especially 
irrigation schemes and  feeder roads 
linking farmers to markets and feeder 
roads close to agricultural activities  
 
Target regions and the beneficiaries of the project.  The DEFIS+ project will complement and catalyse climate 
adaptation and mitigation investments in six regions (Amoron ’i Mania, Haute Matsiatra, Vatovavy, Fitovinany, 
Ihorombe and Atsimo Atsinanana, Figure 4A) and target 447,200 direct beneficiaries. These regions were 
selected based on their vulnerability to climate change, high incidence of rural poverty, food and nutrit ion 
insecurity  and high potential for agricultural development and for facilitating access to markets.  
The six regions of intervention of DEFIS+ can be grouped into two zones:  
(i) The south -east zone (Atsimo Atsinanana, Vatovavy, and Fitovinany) is characterised by a humid climate, 
high exposure to cyclones, erratic and intense rainfall; and  
(ii) The south -central highlands zone (Ihorombe, Matsiatra Ambony and Amoron’i Mania) is characterised by 
a humid climate and increasing droughts and floods.  
The design of DEFIS+ also addresses the urgent adaptation and mitigation needs of Madagascar as outlined in 
its NDC, which identifies southern Madagascar as the most vulnerable  region to climate change. At least 50% 
and 30% of DEFIS+ direct beneficiaries will be women and youth, respectively. The disaggregation of the 
beneficiaries is presented in Table 2B . 
 
Table 2B: Beneficiaries of the DEFIS+ project.  
 
 
Beneficiaries


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
  Direct  Indirect  Totals  
Women  223,60 0 1,771,8 60 1,995,460  
Men  223,60 1 1,771,8 59 1,995,460  
Totals  447,20 1 3,543,719 3,990,920  
 
Complementarity.  DEFIS+ will complement DEFIS’s efforts to transform the climate vulnerable and low -
performing agricultural sector from its subsistence nature to a climate resilient market -oriented and profitable 
sector of the economy, which also contributes to improved fo od and nutrition security. DEFIS focuses on 
economic development through improving agricultural productivity while DEFIS+ will focus on climate resilience 
building of the communities specifically their livelihoods  and the ecosystems they depend on . Both initiatives 
(DEFIS and DEFIS+) will work hand in hand, making a decisive contribution to the attainment of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) in Madagascar.  DEFIS+ will also complement the GCF -funded project of Conservation 
International and the European Investment Bank (EIB) entitled “Sustainable Landscapes in Eastern Madagascar” 
which is implemented in the watershed not far from DEFIS regions by rehabilitati ng and climate -proofing key rural 
infrastructures and establishing synergies to further d evelop the value chains targeted by the respective projects. 
In the southeast area, DEFIS+ will complement UN Environment’s project entitled “Adapting Coastal Zone 
Management to Climate Change in Madagascar Considering Ecosystem and Livelihoods” (PAZC) in the regions 
of Vatovavy and Fitovinany by providing communities with improved farming techniques and promoting crop 
diversification and climate -smart agriculture. DEFIS+ will also scale up the results of the African Development 
Bank/GEF “Enabling Climate R esilience in the Agriculture Sector in the Southwest Region of Madagascar” project 
in the six DEFIS+ target regions. Finally, DEFIS+ will complement the GIZ -funded “Adaptation of Agricultural 
Value Chains to Climate Change” (PrAda) project by supporting th e development of value chains and the AfDB’s 
PAPAM project by replicating and scaling -up the agro -ecological production techniques of its areas of 
intervention.  
Additionality.  DEFIS+ is strategically designed to increase the climate resilience of the socio -ecological systems 
in six regions. The GCF resources will be very important for making DEFIS+ investments in the six target regions 
more resilient to climate change and for p romoting activities that will help reduce GHG  emissions and provide 
other benefits that will be discussed in this and the next section. As a result, DEFIS+ resources from the GCF will 
provide benefits for adaptation that are not possible with  just national economic development projects. Without 
the GCF ’s resources, interventions to enhance climate resilience in the six regions would not be possible.  
With GCF resources, DEFIS+ investments in the project area will also contribute to climate change adaptation by 
improving the aquifers that are critical to supporting agricultural systems. Thus, GCF resources for efficient water 
management systems and GR4W  will be critical in improving the water retention in the catchment area, thereby 
contributing to recharging aquifers. The construction of GR4W  involves environmentally friendly , simple,  and low -
cost techniques to systematically manage the run -off across t he entire catchment.49;50 The support for fuel-
efficient cooking stoves to reduce fuelwood use will also contribute to maintaining or improving groundwater 
sources and combating deforestation. Deforestation has negative impacts on the water table and surface water 
systems as it loosens soil, favours runoff, decreases the absorption of water in the so il and increases GHG 
emissions.  
Enhance national policies and strategies on climate change . DEFIS+ is consistent with and complementary 
to the government ’s policies, plans and strategies to address climate change issues, linking them with climate 
resilience, poverty reduction, food security and nutrition. Table 3 provides a summary of DEFIS+ contributions to 
the relevant policies and strategies.  
 
 
 
 
49 Madhu, S.A (2013). Green Road: an ecological road construction method for the preservation of mountain environment and landsc ape in 
Nepal  
50 Van Steenbergen, F., Arroyo -Arroyo, F., Rao, K., Hulluka, T. A., Woldearegay, K., & Deligianni, A. (2021). Green Roads for Water. 
Washington, DC: World Bank)


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 Table 3: DEFIS+’s contribution to national strategies and policies in the climate change sector  
Policy or strategy  Goals  Contribution of DEFIS+ to climate 
change policy or strategy  
National 
Adaptation Plan of 
Madagascar (NAP)  Madagascar’s NAP revolves around six strategic 
priorities: Axis 1 (Regreening Madagascar, through 
reforestation and rehabilitation works); Axis 2 (Green 
and Blue Economy, through promoting sustainable 
value chains and job creation); Axis 3 (Climate 
Change and Energy Transition, thr ough 
enhancement of climate change resilience and 
energy sovereignty); Axes 4, 5 and 6 on education, 
information, green diplomacy and governance.  DEFIS+ activities will contribute to the 
implementation of these NAP strategic 
axes, in particular Axes 1, 2 and 3.  
 
National Risk and 
Disaster 
Management 
Policy  It is a tool of reference and guidance for decision -
making in the context of Risk and Disaster 
Management. It is a transversal, inter -sectoral and 
multi -stakeholder framework for risk management, 
both in terms of response to climate shocks, but also 
prevention and mitigation.  DEFIS+ contributes to the 
implementation of the policy by taking 
into account the climate prevention and 
mitigation dimension in project activities.  
National Climate 
Change Strategy 
for the Agriculture, 
Livestock and 
Fisheries Sectors 
(SNCC / AEP)  This document outlines the strategy adopted by the 
Agriculture -Livestock -Fisheries Sector in the context 
of climate change. The strategy aims to establish 
technical, social, economic and financial bases in 
order to reduce the climate vulnerability of the 
agriculture, livestock, and fisheries sectors to the 
impacts of climate change.  DEFIS+ integrates consideration of 
climate change (reducing vulnerability, 
increasing resilience and reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions) in all project 
actions.  
National Climate 
Change Strategy 
and action plan of 
the dissemination 
of Climate -Smart 
Agriculture in 
Madagascar  Strategy and action plan for strengthening livelihood 
resilience to climate change. The capacities of all 
actors can be strengthened so as to stimulate the 
scaling up of the dissemination of CSA and that 
actions should be carried out at the level of the 22  
regions to have a national scope.  The DEFIS+ project largely contributes 
to the implementation of the national 
strategy through the main strategic axes: 
foster the adoption of AIC practices 
through optimization, the adoption of 
CSA practices through the facilitation of 
access to means and factors of 
production as well as capacity building 
actions to combat the negative effects of 
climate change and improve productivity.  
National Policy to 
face Climate  
Change  Comprehensive and multisectoral policy framework 
adopted by Madagascar with a view to achieving 
sustainable development to face climate change.  The DEFIS+ project largely contributes  
to this policy  by the nature of its activities 
to the fight against climate change in 
several vital sectors.  
National REDD + 
Strategy 
(Reduction of 
Emissions from 
Deforestation and 
Forest 
Degradation)  The REDD+ mechanism in Madagascar contributes 
to the reduction of 14% of GHG emissions from the 
forestry sector, through the increase of forest cover 
and the control of forest fire emissions from the 
forestry sector, also through the increase of forest 
cover and the control of deforestation and forest 
degradation in its investment areas.  DEFIS+ contributes to the 
implementation of 2 major strategic axes 
of the national strategy: (i) promotion of 
the development and efficient use of 
land and water in rural areas; (ii) 
improvement of the standard of living of 
local populations through good 
agricultural practices and the reduction 
of unsustainable fuelwood for cooking.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 Nationally 
Determined 
Contributions 
(NDCs)  Madagascar NDCs includes both a mitigation 
component, aiming to reduce 14% of the national 
emissions and an adaptation component which aims 
to strengthen agriculture’s resilience to climate 
change.  DEFIS+ will promote activities to 
improve climate resilience, reduce the 
vulnerability of smallholder farmers to 
climate shocks by investing in agriculture 
and livestock systems, maintain 
ecosystem services and access 
appropriate climate data by improving 
information systems.  
Third National Plan 
of Action on 
Nutrition (NPANIII)  The Plan, which is aligned with SDG2, seeks to 
improve the nutritional status of the most vulnerable 
populations by implementing complementary multi -
sectoral interventions, including food security and 
social protection, resilience to climate change, and 
strengthening the development -emergency nexus.  DEFIS+ will promote more tolerant seed 
varieties with a higher nutritional value. 
The project activities will also contribute 
to food and nutritional security, enhance 
the livelihoods of the most vulnerable, 
and improve the climate resilience of 
those in n eed.  
 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)  
Rational e: The Theory of Change diagram (Figure 15) demonstrates how the project shifts the BAU from poorly 
managed climate risks in the DEFIS+ regions to a climate resilient and sustainable approach for smallholder 
farmers  and their communities . The project’s outcomes and outputs are in -line with GCF’s adaptation goals and 
objectives.  The paradigm shifting aspects of the project will include the data driven climate -proofing of modern 
and sustainable infrastructure, water security, CSA and a focus on the last -mile en gagement of vulnerable rural 
communities. The theory of change shows that IF infrastructure is made sustainable, agricultural production  is 
made resilient, and improved water management is implemented THEN  sustainable agricultural adaptation 
practices will be in place and contribute to NDC adaptation targets BECAUSE  water, infrastructure and food 
systems will be made less vulnerable to climate shocks.  
Figure 15: Theory of Change Diagram


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 Madagascar is a low -income country that ranks 164th out of 189 countries on the Human Development Index and 
frequent ly experiences  climate hazards.51 The vast majority of the Malagasy population, estimated at 75% in 
2019, lives in extreme poverty. Food insecurity and malnutrition are also prevalent in the country. This reality is 
particularly prevalent in rural areas, where the population’s main activi ty is low -productivity subsistence 
agriculture. Moreover, the climate change vulnerability of Madagascar and its population is exacerbated by their 
high exposure to the effects of climate change that adversely affect living conditions, the environment and basic 
infrastructure.52 
The climate change vulnerability in the DEFIS+ project area is linked, inter alia, to: (i) the decrease in the 
availability and reliability of water for food and agriculture; (ii) the limited access to and degradation of irrigation 
systems; (iii) the high level of soil erosion and the degr adation of natural resources, as a consequence of 
deforestation and unsustainable slash and burn farming practices in rainfed areas; (iv) the limited availability of 
climate resilient agricultural inputs and technologies a nd relevant knowledge and adoption of farm management 
practices; (v) and the limited access to rural basic infrastructures. Thus, the vulnerability of rural people in the 
project area is further exacerbated by the underlying high incidence of extreme pover ty, reaching 87.6% of the 
population living below the absolute poverty line.53 Women and girls experience the greatest impacts of climate 
change, which amplifies existing gender inequalities and poses unique threats to their livelihoods, health and 
safety. To be able to overcome these barriers, the financial resources of the GCF wil l be used to reduce the 
vulnerability to climate change of the rural communities in the DEFIS+ six regions (Section B5).  
In view of the climate rationale detailed in the ToC, the planned activities under DEFIS+ will aim at: addressing 
the impacts of climate change risks on agricultural production, supply chain infrastructure and road infrastructure; 
increasing the availability of water for irrigation and agricultural productivity; and enhancing the resilience of 
communities living around road infrastructure to the i mpacts of climate change. This can be done through:  
● The establishment of early warning systems that provide information on the start and cessation dates, 
duration and amount of rainfall to help farmers determine their planting schedule and crop selection. This will also 
include the integration of phytosanitary surveillance, agricultural warnings, drought alerts and food and nutrition 
surveillance, in particular.  
● Strengthening awareness raising on climate change among men, women and youth, including 
policymakers (IEC and behaviour change). Climate resilience will require a national program of information, 
awareness, education and capacity building at all levels: po pulation, local authorities and decision makers.  
● Establishing a large -scale restoration program for the most threatened ecosystems. Madagascar has 
already committed to restoring four million hectares of degraded forest landscapes by 2030, with appropriate 
planning and methods.54 However, to significantly increase this commitment, international climate finance and 
this project can be secured to help support climate change adaptation activities across the country.  
● The implementation of reforestation programs for watersheds, which could fulfil a quadruple objective, 
namely: (i) the preservation of water resources while limiting erosion phenomena; (ii) the creation of climate refuge 
for endangered species; (iii) large -scale reforestation; and (iv) sequestration of GHG s. 
● Improving water infrastructure and promoting small - to medium -scale irrigation to help farmers manage 
variable and unpredictable heavy rainfall.55 This will reduce walking distance to fetching water for domestic use 
for women reducing their workloads.  
● Improving soil and water conservation strategies, upgrading production infrastructure, intensifying 
production and providing training and technical assistance to promote the adoption of new climate -friendly 
techniques to help farmers adapt to the changing climate and reduce drudgery associated with farm 
workloads.56,57 
● Scaling up the dissemination of conservation and CSA through the replication of innovative practices 
currently conducted on a small scale. This measure has co -benefits in terms of GHG emission mitigation and 
water resource conservation.  
 
51 The human development index value of Madagascar is 0.528 in 2019, UNDP  
52 Eckstein D, Hutfils ML and Winges M. Who Suffers Most From Extreme Weather Events? Weather -related Loss Events in 2017 and 1998 
to 2017  
53 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/538821468271809604/pdf/781310PRIORITY0English0Apr900May012.pdf  
54 SNRPF, 2017  
55 Asafu  Adjaye, 2014  
56 Dawson 2016, Desbureaux and Damania 2018, Zougmoré et al. 2018; Asafu -Adjaye 2014, Rakotondravony et al., 2018  
57 Delille 2011, Gay -des-Combes et al. 2017 ;  Zougmoré et al. 2018


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 ● The current unsustainable rain fed agricultural practices need to be transformed into a climate -resilient, 
market -oriented and profitable economic sector supported by adequate climate -resilient infrastructure and timely 
and reliable climate information. Th is will benefit the end -users and guarantee higher incomes, better food and 
nutrition security, and stable access to water and markets.  
● Developing appropriate program(s) including training technicians and workers on the GR4W approach. 
This modern, sustainable, and eco -friendly approach will be used as the basis for the rehabilitation and 
maintenance of national and rural roads, adapted to resist extreme climatic events.  
 
Building blocks. The three  key building blocks for  the paradigm shift  are as follows:  
i.Strengthen the climate resilience of production systems, through:  
a. The development of efficient water management systems, while ensuring the integrated management of 
the watersheds;  
b. Regular access to reliable -climate data to inform risks assessments and planning;  
c. Diffusion and adoption of climate resilient inputs and of new technologies and management practices that 
reduce GHG emissions . 
 
ii. Improve the climate resilience of basic rural infrastructure, particularly unpaved rural access roads with cross 
drainage systems to improve access to food markets and protect the landscape around roads with runoff water 
collection systems set up to harness water resources collected along the roadways.  
a. Improved roads will allow for increased access to markets. This is crucial for the generation of income, the 
sharing of knowledge, and the ac cess to basic services and acquisition of basic necessities. Thus, a 
modern approach to road construction and rehabilitation has a minimal carbon footprint, while BAU road 
management has a large carbon footprint.  
b. Improved roads will allow for sustainable water management, increase water availability for farming, and 
reduce the isolation of communities, which directly contributes to lowering their climate change 
vulnerability .  
c. Improved roads will lower the risk of accidents and also allow remote communities to access facilities (such 
as health care centres) especially for women and children, thus contributing to overall health (co -benefit).  
 
iii.Scale up technological innovations on climate change adaptation and knowledge management among family 
farmers and decentralised actors, for enhanced nutrition, through:  
a. Training on climate change and capacity building services;  
b. Knowledge management on the adaptation of food production systems to climate change . 
 
This building block on knowledge generation and management will reinforce the previous t hree and ensure a 
paradigm shift in the daily lives of the smallholder farmers supported by the project.  
 
The proposed approach has high transformative potential as it will combine key adaptation interventions that will 
strengthen the capacities of family farms and their production systems , create an additional positive feedback 
loop by improving the overall climate resilience of beneficiaries and contribute to reduc ing emissions.   
Barriers.  However, some barriers and risks may hinder the achievement of the outcomes and the overall goal of 
the project. Mitigation measures for such risks are already integrated into the project design.  
Barrier 1: Poor watershed management and land use planning , lead to soil erosion, siltation of irrigated perimeters 
and lowlands and disruption of road infrastructure, which results in low agricultural productivity and undermines 
the functionality of the ecosystems on the landscapes.  This will be overcome through activities under 
Outcome1 through the focus on sustainable agriculture and watershed management as well as Outcome 2 
through the GR4W approach and climate proofing of the rural infrastructure.  
Barrier 2: Limited capacity to generate and disseminate timely climate information for decision making , for 
farmers, and the  rural population  to be able to predict the changes in climate patterns in order to better plan ahead 
and adjust, shift crop calendars, adapt cultivation practices and techniques . This will be overcome through the 
activities under Outcome 1 which consists of strengthening the climate resilience of agricultural and animal


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 production systems through the improvement and maintenance of ecosystem services, and Outcome 3 which 
includes  increasing access to and adoption of technological innovations for climate change adaptation.   
Barrier 3: Limited technical expertise and financial access to invest in climate resilient technologies , which hinders 
the dissemination and access to climate smart technologies and therefore the resilience of communities and their 
livelihoods. In particular, to tackle Barriers 1, 2 and 3 the following activities are key:  
i. Exchange visits on the adaptation of food systems to climate change and the application of  sustainable farming 
practices;  
ii.  Capitalization of best practices and knowledge on climate change adaptation measures;  
iii. Installation of agro -meteorological stations and development of water, flood and drought monitoring and 
forecasting system ; 
iv.  Capacity building on access to finance and governance  (SRM & DRAEP).  
 
Barrier 4: Limited capacity and resources to improve and maintain infrastructure, which hinders rural populations 
from accessing basic services  and increases food insecurity at the regional level . 
Barrier 5: Limited awareness and skills to adopt new technologies,  which result in inefficient use of resources 
such as water and use of traditional methods and therefore low adaptive capacity of communities and their 
livelihoods . 
In particular, to tackle Barriers 4 and 5 , the following activities are key:  
i. Barrier 4 will be overcome through outcome 1, and 2 respectively, focusing on the promotion of water efficient 
technologies, sustainable GR 4W initiative, access to markets and income generation activities . 
ii. Barrier 5 will be overcome through outcome 3, by implementing modern and green sustainable technology that 
will enhance the climate change resilience of rural communities against climate shocks.  
In addition  minor barriers to th ose listed above require risk mitigation tools and contingency plans , which  are 
extensively discussed in Annex 2a (Feasibility Study).  
The assumptions that apply to the results of the proposed project and the respective activities and that would 
allow the project to succeed in its objectives are listed below:  
- Farmers are willing and able to adopt the practices promoted by DEFIS+, also because they have local and 
sustainable access to quality inputs promoted by other IFAD projects  such as DEFIS ; 
- Government entities are willing and have the necessary means, both financial and otherwise, to maintain 
roads, infrastructure, and market access;  
- There are enough buyers (local and regional) for the agricultural products of farmers;  
- Climate information systems can produce information that is relevant, accessible and appropriate for 
agricultural production. Farmers are able to use such information to improve their farming practices and 
enhance productivity.  
Policy and gender.  The DEFIS+ activities have been defined according to the climate change adaptation 
perspectives in relation to the priorities set out in the Madagascar National Climate Change Adaptation Plan 
(NCA) and the NDCs that the country has adopted following the Paris Agreement and the National Policy for the 
Fight against Climate Chan ge, which focuses on the sectors of Agriculture -Livestock -Fisheries, Water Resources, 
Public Health, Biodiversity and Forestry, Coastal Zones, Infrastructures, Management/Reduction of Climate Risks 
and Disasters. This strategic priority refers to the NDC which foresees, between 2020 and 2030, the strengthening 
and updating of multi -hazard Early Warning Systems by integrating climate hazards warnings, phytosanitary 
surveillance, crop war nings, flood and drought alerts, and food and nutrition surveillance. In addition, Table 3 
includes a list of DEFIS+’s contribution to national adaptation strategies and policies in the climate change sector.  
Gender empowerment and social inclusion is an integral part of the overall DEFIS+ and will therefore be 
mainstreamed into project activities, complemented by targeted interventions to overcome any specific barriers 
as necessary. This approach will enable p roject opportunities to be expanded to women and youth, while also 
addressing the main gaps and barriers they face to inclusion. This approach recognises the need to identify and 
address social norms that perpetuate gender empowerment and social inclusion inequalities and exacerbate


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 barriers to access productive agricultural assets, project services and attaining climate resilient and improved 
livelihoods.  An extensive analysis of the gender dimension is included in Section G.2  and a gender action plan is 
included in Annex 8 . Youth outreach will be improved by working with Technical Vocation centres  that are 
supported through FORMAPROD / PROGRES, which are IFAD financed projects in Mad agascar.  
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the 
contributing GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.   
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and 
access  
 MRA 2  
Low-
emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry 
and land 
use ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, 
well-
being, 
food 
and 
water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
 Outcome 
1:  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
 Outcome 
2:  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ 
Outcome 
3:   ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co -benefit table below to map each co -benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note.  
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Improved health  ☐ X ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Improved WASH   X X X X ☐  ☐ 
Improved 
mitigation  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ X 
Biodiversity 
conservation  X ☐ ☐ ☐ X X 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Background of the project.  The DEFIS+ project will be part of a larger ongoing programme named DEFIS, 
which benefits from 40 years of IFAD presence and experience in family farming in Madagascar. DEFIS is a multi -
actor funded programme (IFAD, OFID, the government and beneficiaries)  that will scale up tested results and 
best practices focusing on the value chains identified in Annex 2  and prioritised based on the value chain studies 
(covering climate change, production potential and challenges in value chain development). DEFIS cover s two 
funding cycles for IFAD for a total of 10 years. DEFIS was designed under IFAD’s tenth replenishment cycle 
(IFAD10, 2016 -2018) which, based on country driven demands, focused on agricultural value chain development 
as the pillar of an integrated approach to rural economic development.  The first batch of financing was approved 
by the IFAD’s Executive Board (EB) in December 2017, entered into force in March 2018 and is expected to 
complete activities in 2027. In December 2021, IFA D's EB approved the sec ond batch of financing. As part of 
IFAD’s increased focus on climate resilience, in IFAD12 (2022 -2024) there is a substantial increase in the 
availability of funding for climate activities (40% of total IFAD financing) and thus the GoM requested the DEFIS+


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 project to increase climate resilience of the food production and socioecological systems in six out of nine regions 
of DEFIS.  
Complementarity.  DEFIS and DEFIS+ complement each other because DEFIS aims to improve productivity in 
select agricultural value chains, while DEFIS+ aims to increase the resilience to climate change of smallholders 
benefiting from the services of the improved agricultural value chains.  The decision that DEFIS covered nine 
regions and DEFIS+ only six out of nine (Figure 16) was taken by the National Designated Authorities and the 
GoM because the other three regions were included in other projects. Thus, to avoid overlapping with these new 
projects, it was decided to exclude them from DEFIS+.  DEFIS+ design took advantage of and capitalised on 
experiences and emerging lessons identified during the ongoing implementation and supervision of the DEFIS 
project. In addition, DEFIS+ benefitted from exchanges with other actors in rural development, pa rticularly projects 
financed by IFAD (AD2M, AROPA, FORMAPROD) and those of other development partners.  All these initiatives 
will be carried out with a view to continuous ly learning and improving performance. The inclusion of the poorest 
and most climat e change affected people in local development dynamics requires specific targeting mechanisms. 
These mechanisms for targeting vulnerable people (AROPA) and  boosting micro -projects (AD2M and 
FORMAPROD) with climate change and gender components have been tested and approved.  
In addition to complementing on -going projects and programmes , DEFIS+ is perfectly aligned with the GCF 
Sectoral Guides, as summarised in Table 4.  
Table 4: DEFIS+ alignment with GCF Sectoral Guides  
Sector  Pathway  Interventions  Description  
Climate, agriculture 
and food security  Pathway 1:   
Promoting climate 
resilient 
agroecology  
 Improved climate -
resilient crop varieties, 
crop diversification 
(including promotion of 
foods with high 
nutritional value such as 
Non-Timber Forest 
Products and Neglected 
and Underutilised 
climate -tolerant food 
species), improving land 
and water management , 
and appropriate financial 
mechanisms.  DEFIS+ investments respond to the main 
climate hazards of droughts and floods 
and the specific risks they pose to 
agricultural production, while building 
more resilient communities through 
improved farming systems and practices. 
DEFIS+ activities focus on climate change 
adaptation while also ensuring 
productivity and diversification gains for 
the farms and production value chain 
actors, and food and nutrition security for 
the populations. DEFIS+ production 
technologies and practices are therefore 
climate -resilient, and focus on low -
emission agriculture, through agroforestry 
practices and the use of renewable 
energy.  
Pathway 2:  
Facilitating climate 
informed advisory 
and risk 
management 
services  Information about daily 
weather, future climate 
risks, how to face them, 
and what risk 
management services 
are available.  DEFIS+ includes an expansion of the 
agro-meteorological network to improve 
the collection of meteorological data and 
climate information. The regional officers 
will also receive training to interpret the 
data to inform the seasonal planning in a 
timely man ner to help smallholder farmers 
plan and manage natural resources.  
Climate hazards and 
water security  Pathway 2: 
Strengthening 
integrated water 
resource 
management and 
predict climate 
hazards  Preserving existing 
water resources, 
identifying new sources 
of water supply, and 
protecting communities 
from water related 
climate hazards.  DEFIS+ investments include the 
protection of irrigation schemes against 
climate change impacts, sustainable sub -
watersheds management and landscape 
restoration, strengthening the capacities 
of Water Users Associations and the 
construction of REEP tanks for  improved 
water availability for both crops and small 
livestock.  
Ecosystems  Pathway 1: Carbon 
sequestration: 
ecosystem -based 
management of Landscape -level 
protection, and 
restoration to maintain DEFIS+ investments in landscape 
restoration , CSA, and agroforestry  will 
contribute to maintaining resilient and 
healthy ecosystems that will deliver a


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 terrestrial and 
freshwater 
ecosystems  the ability to store and 
sequester carbon.  range of services that will contribute to 
adaptation, carbon sequestration, 
sustainable livelihoods for the 
smallholders, and other benefits for 
biodiversity, local communities, and wider 
society in the targeted areas.  
 
Figure 16: Regional graphical i nterconnection  of DEFIS+ with the IFAD programme (DEFIS)   
 
 
Objectives of DEFIS+.  DEFIS+ will be implemented over six years in six regions (Ihorombe, Haute Matsiatra, 
Amoro n’'i Mania, Vatovavy, Fitovinany and Atsimo Atsinanana –- Figure 16 , Figure 4A ). In targeting the 
beneficiaries, DEFIS+ will also adopt a participatory approach that will make it possible to involve local authorities 
and representatives of Farmer Organisation (FO) beneficiaries in the identification and validation of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries. The average income of farmers  (household s per year)  by region is presented in the below 
table, and in general, it is low compared with other categories in the same regions.  
 
Region  Amoro n’'i 
Mania  Atsimo 
Atsinanana  Upper 
Matsiatra  Ihorombe  Vatovavy and 
Fitovinany  
Average 
income of 
farmers,  
household per 
year      (Ariary, 
Ar) 
(United States 
Dollar, US$)  3,017,924  Ar 
666.70 US$  
 
 
exch. 1US$=   2,424,177  Ar 
535.54 US$  
 
 
4 526,65 Ar  3,508,226  Ar 
775.02 US$  3,138,589   Ar 
693.36 US$  4,295,280  Ar 
948.89 US$


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 Currently, farmers sell very little produce due to i) extreme climate hazards that destroy large areas of crops every 
year; ii) low production levels; iii) low access to markets due to poor roads; iv) crop diseases (i.e., insects, virus es 
and infections) ; v) poor weather forecast information and, v i) inaccurate climate change predictions. The low 
production levels also limit household food consumption levels, resulting in food and nutrition insecurity. Self -
targeting will make it possible to define and vali date with the local populations the eligibility criteria based on the 
level of poverty, climate vulnerability, access to resources and markets, food insecurity and malnutrition status. 
Thus, it will facilitate the identification of poor and vulnerable bene ficiaries within the communities/villages and/or 
the area with their participation and that of the FOs.  
Geographically, the DEFIS+ project will intervene in areas with a relatively high concentration of poor and 
extremely poor people, where climate hazards are not predicted on time, food insecurity , infection diseases,  and 
malnutrition prevalence are high, and the negative effects of climate change affect the productive capital of the 
populations. Thus, specific actions proposed for women and young people in vulnerable situations will facilitate 
their access to knowledge, productive capital, income -generating  activities and green jobs.  
Expected impacts and outcomes of DEFIS+ . The expected impacts of DEFIS+ are: (i) increased resilience to 
climate -related shocks and food and nutrition insecurity and improved livelihoods of family farmers; (ii) improved 
resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services ; (iii) increased resilience of basic rural infrastructure to the 
effects of climate change; and (iv) reduced GHG emissions from forestry and land use.   
The expected outcomes are:  
● Strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production systems and increased carbon sequestration 
through: (i) the adoption of energy and water efficient technological innovations and climate smart practices that 
reduce GHG emissions,  (ii) improved and secure water availability, including the protection of sub -watersheds 
from climate shocks and the restoration of landscapes; and (ii) enhanced agro -climatic information system.  
● Increased income generation through  improved market accessibility through (i) enhanced  robustness of 
roads; (ii) training of trainers on new construction standards for small -scale, climate -resilient rural infrastructure 
for local communities; and (iii) runoff water collection systems set up to harness water resources collected along 
the road ways.  
● Improved food and nutrition security, through scaling up innovations on climate change adaptation, 
knowledge management and the exchange of best agricultural practices.  
 
The outcomes , outputs and activities of DEFIS+ are extensively discussed below, and a summary of the project 
approach is depicted in Figure 17 .


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 Figure 17: Project’s approach  
 
 
Outcome 1: Strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production systems  
DEFIS+ will place emphasis  on the dissemination and adoption of climate smart agronomic practices, stress 
tolerant varieties, species and fodders, as well as additional investments needed to improve water use efficiency, 
and the resilience of basic infrastructure to climate shocks.  The dissemination of improved climate -friendly 
agricultural and livestock management practices  as well as energy efficiency tools  will be supported through 
Farmer Field Schools (FFS), which allows for a long -term paradigm shift towards sustainable agriculture  and 
green energy solutions . In addition, through the FFS, the project promotes the transfer of skills in improved 
cropping practices, integrated pest management, and the use of sustainable agricultural inputs.   
 
Output 1.1: Improved water management for sustainable agriculture  
In order to sustain agricultural production, certain measures are a priority. Investment in and development of 
water resource management systems (irrigation, drainage and retention) is a major issue. However, it is also 
necessary to overcome the pressures linked to co mpeting  uses, through an integrated and sustainable 
management of these resources. The objectives are to reduce climate change vulnerability in the targeted 
watersheds by strengthening the agricultural and livestock sectors  on the basis of an  Integrated Water Resources 
Management (IWRM) approach and improving governance in order to protect and enhance the natural resources 
within the limits of each watershed or sub -watershed. To achieve the IWRM foundatio n, water cycle management 
analyses will be carried out at the watershed level and will make it possible to indicate or specify the main issues 
linked to water resources, both in terms of quality and quantity. Thus, the analysis will identify the problems and 
their causes within the sub -watersheds, inform the IWRM system to be implemented and determine the scope of 
activities in priority areas to enhance water preservation mechanisms.  
The activities planned under Output 1.1, which will be undertaken using the IWRM, are the following:  
Activity 1.1.1. Protection of irrigation schemes against climate change impacts


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 A large majority of existing irrigation schemes in different regions of Madagascar and in the DEFIS+ regions were 
built by the rural engineering department or by other projects in the 1960s. The infrastructure is old and needs to 
be rehabilitated and reinf orced because of the evolution of water and soil problems linked to climate change 
(floods, erosion, cyclones, decrease in water resources during the dry season, etc.). GCF funds will therefore 
allow the financing of the rehabilitation of irrigated perimet ers and the construction of new ones with improved 
drainage systems. Thus, the regeneration of the irrigation schemes and any other activity that enables further 
water extraction will be carefully designed once the water balance is analysed without further  harm to communities 
and exacerbation of climate issues related to water scarcity. This will happen in parallel with IWRM system 
implementation. Furthermore, the rehabilitation/construction of irrigation schemes will contribute to increase d 
production and diversification (including the production of nutrient -dense foods such as cereals and legumes ) to 
improve the food and nutrition security at a household and community level with particular benefit to women and 
young children . This activity will be complemented by Activity 1.1.3 (Strengthening capacities of Water Users 
Associations  (WUAs) ) to ensure the sustainability of the investments. Special attention will be given to ensuring 
and increasing women’s access to irrigated plots through engagement with tradi tional authorities and community 
engagement to provide allocation quotas for women and youth and avoid potential backlash. In addition, a 
comprehensive water cycle management analysis will be conducted to identify the main issues linked to water 
resources,  both in terms of quality and quantity and in relation to implications for women and men, in the DEFIS+ 
regions. W UAs will be provided with small start -up and spare equipment to maintain these rehabilitated irrigated 
perimeters. However, complex constructi on will be conducted by contractors or procured by construction parties. 
Thus, procurement is carried out by the person in charge of procurement at the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock, with the support of the DEFIS+ Procurement Manager.  
Activity 1.1.2. Sustainable sub -watersheds (adjacent to irrigated schemes) management and restoration of 
landscape  
This activity entails watershed development plans by the communities. The climate adaptation plans will include 
priority landscape restoration, ecosystems restoration, natural water purification, rainwater harvesting aimed at 
reducing workloads for women a nd capacity building to promote non -regret solutions. This will be complemented 
with the adoption of biological (planting herbaceous or shrub species, along curves or perpendicular to prevailing 
winds) and structural (benches, terraces, techniques to preve nt gullies and lavakas) measures to protect sub -
watersheds near irrigated perimeters from wind and water erosion, improve vegetation cover, improve water 
infiltration and reduce erosion. The plans will apply IWRM  principles, bringing together the different actors for joint 
planning. As a result, the technical departments of MINAE, the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable 
Development, the project’s  implementing partners, and representatives of the beneficiaries, farmer ’' 
organizations, the chamber of agriculture, and the technical departments concerned will hold technical workshops 
to validate the adaptation plans.  
Activity 1.1.3. Strengthening the capacities of Water Users Associations to manage water and apply sustainable 
water management practices.  
WUA members and local technicians (including building inspectors, engineers, architects and designers) will be 
trained on the Hydro -agricultural Infrastructures Against Floods and Inundations (NIHYCRI), climate change risk 
management and climate change adaptation practices. The NIHYCRI -related training builds capacity on the 
installation, operation and maintenance of climate change adaptation technologies, the implementation of early 
warning action protocols and operational procedures for long -term monit oring. DEFIS+ will ensure the application 
of these standards to small - and large -scale  water infrastructure through capacity building to be financed by the 
private sector and the Government and provided by specialised technical institutes in Madagascar. Special efforts 
will be made to strengthen women’s participation in WUAs and their repre sentation in leadership positions (with 
a quota of at least 30%) and the development of water resource preservation and management plans.  
Activity 1.1.4. Construction of climate smart water tanks for drip -irrigation and for small livestock.  
This climate adaptation technique will consist of building a surface smart climate water storage system to irrigate 
the terraces and reduce runoff, along with the strengthening of design offices and construction companies in 
terms of NIHYCRI, the protectio n of the irrigated perimeters and the development of anti -erosion devices on the 
watersheds.


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 Climate smart water tanks can either be conventional water storage tanks (gravity water tanks) or buried sand -
filled water tanks (REEP s)58. The storage capacity of the tanks is estimated between 50m3 and 250m3 or even 
more, depending on the availability of water resources (rainfall). Other than REEP s, there is also the ISAA or 
Giant Impluvium for gravity collection and storage of large amounts of rainwater for agriculture, which co nsists of 
a rainwater harvesting system via road gutters to be connected via runoff channels dug in hillside and transport 
them to large reservoirs (hill reservoirs) sealed and equipped with a drainage system to distribute water to crops, 
animals, and/or villages. The two rainwater harvesting techniques represent a modern climate  change  adaptation 
tool, saving time and labou r often associated with water collection especially by women. It is labour intensive and 
necessitates tools and techniques that are mastered by Malagasy farmers and materials that are easily available 
in Madagascar, without the need for importing material from abroad, drilling, pumping, electricity generators or 
sophisticated engineering equipment. This technique has a very limited climate and environmental footprint. This 
activity will include WASH trainings on hand washing and hygiene targeting households . 
The expected results of Output 1.1 are: (i) conducting comprehensive  water cycle management analyses; (ii)  
improved climate resilience of 15 000 hectares of irrigated schemes; (iii) anti -erosion measures are implemented 
on 8 100 hectares of sub -watersheds that drain into irrigated perimeters, of which 5 500 hectares of landscape 
are restored  by women  and youth , and 900 technicians are trained; (iv) 1 400 WUA members and technicians 
are trained on climate change adaptation, water resource preservation and management plans; (vi) 150 units of 
climate smart water tanks  are installed; and (vi) 268 321 farmers, including women and young people, are 
engaged in the effective management of sub –watersheds and irrigated perimeters.  
Output 1.2: Enhanced agro -climatic information systems , new technologies and initiatives  
The activities planned under this Output are the following:  
Activity 1.2.1. Installation of automated agro -meteorological stations and development of flood and drought 
monitoring and forecasting system  
DEFIS+ will support the upgrading of agrometeorological information systems by strengthening the network for 
collecting and processing agro -meteorological data in target areas, which is part of the national network. The 
project will support the collection of accurate climate information (temperature, precipitation, wind, humidity, etc.) 
and promote the expansion of the existing national network through the acquisition and installation of automated 
agrometeorological stations. The stations will be located in  the DEFIS+ project area to fill the gap in the existing 
network of stations. The national hydromet agency will be the implementing partner and will be responsible for 
the operation and maintenance of the stations. Comprehensive collection of meteorologica l data and climate 
information and its correct interpretation will ensure that detailed weather, climate, and agricultural hydrological 
forecasts will support precise short - and long -term climate projections, predict extreme climate events long in 
advance,  manage water resources, crop modelling and seasonal planning in a timely manner to help smallholder 
farmers plan. Satellite data will be assessed together with hydromet variables, drought indices and climate risk 
indices for a drought early warning system  including the use of 1 - to 10 -day flood forecasting for better accuracy.  
The Directorate General of Meteorology already provides  some climate services and makes use of different 
platforms to disseminate information , but many of them are out -of-date.  These services can be further upgraded 
and enhanced with the help of the project. A state -of-the-art flood and drought monitoring system will be 
developed for focused and tailored climate services for hydrological hazards. The system will be driven using 
precipitation from the scientifically valida ted Multi -Source Weighted -Ensemble P recipitation (MSWEP) dataset, 
which merges station s, statistical model s, and satellite information using a sophisticated algorithm. Based on the 
system, the following products will be promoted:  
● Customised rainfall and drought information on a daily/seasonal/longer term basis linked to early warning 
systems for management actions and decision making based on the climate update and monthly climate summary 
is sent to all agriculture and livestock personnel by email;  
● An agricultural newsletter is published quarterly and includes information on seasonal weather outlooks 
(accessible online);  
 
58 REEPS is a technology combining the collection, storage and mobilisation of water that the ENERGIS FD Company developed and p atented 
in 2011 to solve the problems of drying up and evaporation of water collected in the water table and on the surface. It is  based on a biological 
retro filtration in the surface and is a system for storing and reusing rainwater at a lower cost while rigorously respecting  the ecological aspect.


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 ● Special brochures (visual illustrations) are published (e.g., on mulching techniques, agroforestry, etc.) 
that are specifically designed to help farmers in times of climatic stress ( e.g., drought) with translation to local 
languages ; 
● An ICT system will be established and will operate for the development of new advisories and warnings 
for agriculture and water management and their dissemination through the media, including SMS and radio.  
● DEFIS+ will offer a diverse range of options for accessing the information to accommodate the specific 
needs of women, and for this reason, a gender needs assessment will be carried out with the aim of providing 
gender -specific information.  
Activity 1.2.2. Capacity building of decentralised government (SRM & DRAEP)  
The project  will also provide support at the regional level to the staff of the Regional Meteorological Services 
(SRM) and Regional Directorates for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (DRAEP) through capacity development 
for the analysis, communication and dissemina tion of agrometeorological and climate information. National 
institutions and relevant civil society organisations will be trained and mobilised to better inform farmers and their 
rural organisations and build their capacity for the integration  of climate risk into their decision -making processes 
and good farming practices. In these trainings, specific attention will be given to the gendered dimension of access 
and preferences regarding climate information.  
Training will be provided to SRM staff for data collection and information generation to support the use of new 
technologies such as the flood and drought monitoring system, GIS, and the development of new products, 
including reduced and additional timesca les for weather forecasting to produce information adapted to end users.  
Popularization of climate information will be through local agents, agents of the Regional Directorate of 
Agriculture, technicians, FFS, agents of the SRM and the use of mass media, local radio and fairs. Farmers will 
have access to localised and timely we ather services and long -term weather forecasts and will receive training 
on how to manage weather risks and better plan their farming and livelihood activities.  
To overcome obstacles to local livelihood planning, the project will also establish new partnerships to strengthen 
the producer -user interface, including engaging with NGOs to establish sustainable and cost -effective service 
transfer modes. This will also build user -level capacity for the interpretation of climate data and advice.  
Activity 1.2.3. Promotion and dissemination of Meteorological and Climate Smart Agriculture practices  
DEFIS+ will promote the dissemination of meteorological and CSA information to strengthen the climate resilience 
of dryland farming systems and rainfed upland farming systems (with respect to irrigated areas) through the 
promotion of climate resilient agricultural production, including afforestation, mixed cropping systems and 
improved technologies such as adapted varieties, planting materials and water harvesting.   
DEFIS+ will rely on the local network of seed multiplier farmers and seed producing sites. The multiplication and 
dissemination of locally climate adapted seeds and planting materials will be carried out using community -based 
participatory approaches  (e.g., FFS) , integrated with meteorological information and disseminated among the 
farmers and stakeholders.  Learners at the FFS level will not only be supported in resilient agricultural techniques 
but will also be provided with seeds for the first production season. The seed production centres exist in the 
DEFIS+ regions, but their skills will be improved as will the materials and equipment for the production of basic 
seeds. Thus, DEFIS+ will support the Agnarafaly Seed Production Center (CPSA) and Kianjavato Center in the 
multiplication and promotion of certified or quality declared seeds.  
In addition, agroforestry and landscape management systems will be promoted for the improvement of micro -soil 
bunds, trenches and pits to prevent erosion, as well as several agroforest ry and landscape operations at the local 
level. Water pumping will be done using solar pumps to ensure reduced diesel and gasoline use (full scale up 
and nationwide adoption). The summary of the CSA activities and locations is available in Table 5.2.  
Activity 1.2.4. Promotion and dissemination of sustainable home technologies and social initiatives  
DEFIS+ will promote low -cost on - and off -farm modern  technologies, such as improved cooking stoves and 
handmade briquettes, by using local materials, thus reducing deforestation . Other technologies include solar 
pumps for irrigation, biogas production along with livestock systems, solar milling and dryers for product 
processing. These technologies will contribute to improving efficiency and production while also reducing


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 women’s time burden and workload (thereby impacting their health and nutrition status and indirectly those of 
their young children) . DEFIS+ will promote these technologies and invest in the training of trainers  for the use of 
the technologies and youth associations and groups for the maintenance of the technologies . The scale of the 
technologies will be assessed through a feasibility study and an assessment of the adoption of the technologies 
as well as their supply chains. The technologies will be both hou sehold/farm level and multi -household/farm level  
and will be procured through the DEFIS+ procurement team and local municipalities .  
Some of these tools and technologies (e.g.,  cooking stoves) will be provided to vulnerable households for 
demonstration  and catalytic purposes i.e., generating demand . In IFAD’s experience working with the most 
vulnerable and poor populations in rural areas, transfer of goods is necessary in situations where beneficiaries 
do not have sufficient wealth and liquidity to purchase productive assets. The free distribution targeted at the most 
vulnerable households is  important to enable them to improve  their production systems  and also demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the technologies to promote adoption by other community members who can then invest in the 
technologies . Doing so, they will be able to emerge from poverty and perhaps support other businesses and move 
other people out of poverty. Without external support, th e change in their economic conditions  is less likely . Well 
targeted support to the most vulnerable households will not  distort markets because these individuals, at the 
bottom of the wealth pyramid, are not able to access markets with their own resources today. The project is 
expected to contribute to move them out of poverty so that they eventually become bu yers themselves and 
consequently stimulate the growth of the market.  DEFIS+ will also engage youth groups and associations to 
participate as entrepreneurs in the supply chain of the technologies once the demand is generated working 
through other IFAD financed projects such as FORMAPROD/PROGRES.  
The expected results of Output 1.2 are: (i) six automated agro -meteorological stations are installed and 
operational; (ii) a flood and drought monitoring and forecasting system is developed and operationalized; (iii) 24 
DRAEP and SRM teams are trained and involved in processing and disseminating agro -meteorological data; (iv) 
178 881 farmers  will use agro -meteorological  and CSA  information during  the agricultural production seasons ;  
(v) 268 321 farmers use low-cost and modern  technologies; ( vi) support is provided to  CPSA for the production 
of basic seeds of stress -tolerant varieties ; (vii) a t least three new methods of integrated pest management 
techniques adapted to the context of smallholder farms in the project area are promoted and  resilient fodder 
production is integrated on 1 500 ha; and (viii) CSA, afforestation and agroforestry approaches are implemented 
on 10  000 hectares of land.  
Outcome 2: Increased income generation through improved market accessibility  
In Madagascar, floods and road submersion by runoff are frequent, especially in the DEFIS+ area. Besides, most 
of the communal roads are unpaved, so they are practically impassable  in the rainy season. There are also many 
crossings given the important hydrographic network of the area, but their condition often handicaps the 
accessibility of the villages and the outlet s for production. This makes it difficult to get products to market. Extreme 
climatic events, such as floods and cyclones, in combination with  poor quality and conventionally designed roads, 
often cause erosion and flooding in the surrounding environment or the road embankments , which result in losses 
of agricultural land and products.  DEFIS+ will, therefore, invest in: (i) harvesting water for agricultural purposes 
using rural roads while improving their resilience; and (ii) implementation of a wide variety of GR 4W techniques 
to secure the transport function of roads year-round , protect the environment and agricultural activities around 
rural ro ads. 
According to Madagascar’s  NDC and the National Adaptation Plan, the adoption of climate resilient infrastructure 
is among the sectoral priorities for adapting to climate change. In fact, to link small producers to the market, 
DEFIS+ will strengthen the climate resilience of rural roads, in particular with regard to rainwater, which is the 
main factor of damage and the main enemy of rural roads infrastructure. Other support and technology transfer 
already implemented in other countries under the GR4W approach will be useful for the implementation of the 
climate resilience -building activities for rural road infrastructure under DEFIS+. Also in this case, there might be 
some unexpected negative externalities resulting from road upgrading, such as GHG emissions although in the 
case of Madagascar given the low levels of road infrastructure development the o verall impact will be low.


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 The G R4W techniques that will be used in the DEFIS+ project will be drawn from the recently published World 
Bank Guideline on GR 4W59,60, which documents a wide variety of strategies and techniques on how to use roads 
as instruments for beneficial water management and climate resilience in different geographies. According to the 
GR4W Guideline s, the opportunities are abundant,  and an extensive  analysis is available in the infrastructure 
feasibility study (Annex 2c).   
The rehabilitation of rural roads will improve access to markets, a priority identified in Madagascar's national 
development plan. It will lead to an increase in traffic and therefore an increase in GHG emissions. However, this 
increase in emissions, which  is linked to the implementation of the National Development Plan and efforts to 
increase the resilience of the most vulnerable population, is considered marginal. It will not contribute significantly 
to national GHG emissions and does not contradict the c ountry's NDC or the Paris Agreement, which recognises 
that the fight against climate change is always linked to national development and food security. Madagascar 
accounts for just over 0.10% of global GHG emissions.  
Output 2.1: Reinforced rural access roads  
To minimise damage, water will be systematically directed to the land rather than running along the road surface. 
To direct water to the land, different design parameters will be considered, such as regular slope reversal, 
avoidance of sunken roads and inclusion of basic drainage. In addit ion, a wide variety of techniques will be used 
to preserve unpaved roads, enable water harvesting and reduce erosion including water bars, rolling dips, 
infiltration bunds and vegetative measures among others.  More information is available in Annex 2c.  
The activities planned under this Output are the following:  
Activity 2.1.1. Reinforcement of unpaved rural access roads to reduce climate change impacts and water 
collection along these roadways for agricultural use  
In the context of DEFIS+, the following GR 4W techniques will be explored while rehabilitation works are performed 
through structured labour -intensive work:  
● Using road -surface cross drainage systems: a series of rolling dips (small depressions with a small bump) 
or water bars (small, slanted humps) to divert water from the road surface to the land for productive use. These 
structures have two purposes: (i) pre vent water from flowing beside the road surface by diverting it from the road, 
(ii) through the diversions water is conveyed to an area where it can be  beneficially  deployed, e.g., recharge of 
groundwater, feeding a spring or directly flowing into an on-farm pond to be used for irrigation.  
● Using infiltration bunds to slow down the side erosion from the roads and promote recharge of aquifers. 
This is a typical issue on many unpaved roads where road runoff builds up, causing erosion and sedimentation. 
It is best combined with vegetative protec tion to reduce the erosive effect of runoff from the road template, in 
particular if no side drain is provided and the road template is out sloped  or crowned.  
● Monitoring groundwater recharge percentages will employ borehole dippers, also known as Water Level 
Dip Meters. DEFIS+ will use Water Level Dip Meters to determine the water level within a borehole, piezometer 
pipe or sump .61 It should be noted that the potential concomitant impacts, such as extension of flood duration and 
reduction of peak discharge with the proposed structures for underground water systems, are well captured in 
the DEFIS+ ESMP’s section related to the constr uction of water tanks –  including measures of mitigation and 
indicators of achievement/sources of verification.   
● Complementing a range of bioengineering methods to revitalise vegetation in the road adjacency. 
Bioengineering is the use of plants for slope stabilisation and runoff control. It involves using plant parts such as 
roots, cuttings and stems as a cost -effect ive and locally adaptable means of erosion control. It ranges from 
planting deep -rooted species to a combination of vegetation with civil engineering structures. It helps not only to 
preserve the slopes, in addition, it buffers the water through higher inf iltration capacity.  
● Routine maintenance, periodic maintenance and rehabilitation/reconstruction works will need to be 
systematised and applied along the construction and rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads. DEFIS+ will give 
special attention to ensuring  that women are involved in maintenance and rehabilitation/reconstruction works . 
 
59 Van Steenbergen, F., Arroyo -Arroyo, F., Rao, K., Hulluka, T. A., Woldearegay, K., & Deligianni, A. (2021). Green Roads for Water: 
Guidelines for Road Infrastructure in Support of Water Management and Climate Resilience.  
60 This tool can be found on p. 86 of MetaMeta’s publication “Guided Learning on Roads Water Harvesting”.  
61 Geotechnical Centre. (2019). Water Level (dip) Meter https://25489 -813672 -raikfcquaxqncofqfm.stackpathdns.com/wp -
content/uploads/2018/08/Water -Level -Dip-Meter -V1.1.pdf


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
  
The expected results  of Output 2.1 are: 540 km of unpaved rural access roads are re habilitated  or improved 
with climate -resilient planning, including cross -drainage systems, and the project contributes to recharging 
aquifers. This also includes maintenance services for the entire duration of the project.  
 
For Activity 2.1.1, IFAD as AE will ensure the EE conducts, prior to undertaking any construction works, 
comprehensive technical assessments and feasibility studies for each of the sub -projects identified and this shall 
be done prior to launching of the design and constructio n works. The designs to be implemented for each of the 
sub-projects shall be informed by the output and results from these feasibility studies.   
 
The feasibility studies to be conducted encompass analysing  the baseline situation, identifying location -specific 
climate risks and devising appropriate measures for climate proofing the infrastructure under consideration 
against the identified climate hazards and integrating the climate resilience measure into th e designs. The 
methodology involves a systematic assessment utilizing data, local knowledge, stakeholder engagement, and the 
development of the appropriate adaptation approach. The expected deliverables include a detailed technical and 
feasibility report, climate -proofing design approaches, and the recommendations for integrating the resilience 
measures into the construction to be submitted to the GCF’.  This also applies to Activities 1.1.1, 1.1.2 and 1.1.4.    
 
 
IFAD , in collaboration with the EE , has clearly defined criteria that were used in the selection/prioritization of the 
roads and irrigation schemes to be rehabilitated/retrofitted under this project. Hence, if a particular sub -project 
that has been earmarked and listed in the FP could no l onger be implemented due to changes in the site condition 
during implementation, an eligible replacement would be identified by applying the same criteria.  The selection 
of sub -projects is based on the identification and prioritization of projects using specific criteria aimed at 
maximizing their impact on adaptation and resilience building in the regions in Madagascar considered.  
 
Output 2.2: Improved capacity to build and maintain rural infrastructure  
 
DEFIS+ will equip technical staff with the basic design, construction, operation and maintenance of Green Roads, 
well-tuned to the local conditions, so as to make rural roads and the surrounding environments more resilient to 
climate change.  
The activities planned under this Output are the following:  
Activity 2.2.1. Training on construction standards related to climate change  
The Malagasy Standards for the Construction of Road Infrastructure Resistant to Floods and Geological 
Phenomena, developed in 2020, are based on the Guide for Road Protection Against Floods in Madagascar 
(GPRCIM). The Standards will be part of the training  that will be provided to key municipal staff as well as several 
other construction areas. Thus, they will be trained on the operational procedures for the long -term maintenance 
and the scaling of the technologies of climate -resilient roads and of water co llection according to the operation 
and maintenance plans and road construction standards. The training will include the design and implementation 
of a long -term monitoring framework for road -specific climate proofing measures.  
In accordance with the categories of personnel working in the municipalities, one recommendation would consist 
of designating the Mayor as the first person in charge in matters of Authority capable of enforcing these standards, 
s/he must be assisted direct ly by the technicians of the Town hall who would be trained in these standards and 
will have to ensure the relay between the municipality and the road contractor . 
The expected result of Output 2.2 is: 178 881 regional and local technicians are trained on road construction 
standards related to climate change, such as the Flood Protection Standards. Half of them are women and 
vulnerable people.  
Outcome 3: Improved food and nutrition security  
To promote greater uptake and ensure that food and nutrition security will be long -lasting, knowledge products 
on best practices will be elaborated and disseminated under DEFIS+.


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 Output 3.1: Knowledge on climate change and food security  generated and shared  
The activities planned under this Output are the following:  
Activity 3.1.1. Training rural development actors on climate change and food production systems for enhanced 
nutrition  
Training smallholder farmers will build their capacities, especially those of women, to improve agricultural 
resilience and productivity by effectively identifying their needs, managing rainwater and soil moisture and 
reducing or potentially eliminating wa ter stress during periods of short -term  drought. The innovative aspects of 
DEFIS+ are linked to the adopted methodology. The FFS methodologies will create a tiered training system that 
will draw on farmer experience and institutional agronomic science to e nsure the adoption of climate smart farming 
practices. Training of trainers and farmer -to-farmer training will ensure peer support, exchange of experiences 
based on on -farm practices (for example, conservation agriculture and drip -irrigation) and increased  institutional 
experience and capacities for agricultural extension.  Rain-fed farmers will be able to manage soil, water and 
biomass in order to maximise water availability through on -site or off -site water collection and improve water 
productivity through  the use of water -saving technologies. To complement the training on climate change, training 
on cross -cutting topics, such as nutrition and gender empowerment in the context of climate change will be 
organised and integrated  into the FFS.  
DEFIS+ will support each FFS (approximately 25 people per training course) through: (i) the installation of a plot 
of 0.5 ha, made available by a producer/member of a CBO or community within the development pole (with priority 
given to women); and (ii) the  application of technical itineraries and new practices at the level of individual farmer ’s 
plots. The main beneficiaries of the FFS will primarily be young people (male and female) who will use their plots 
for training, facilitating demonstrations, exchan ges and reporting results. The FFS organisation must therefore be 
flexible to allow women to participate actively.  DEFIS+ will use the FFS structures already established under 
DEFIS and integrate the climate change resilience building practices and technologies.    
The FFS approach is intended to support the strengthening of farmer  knowledge through field observations.  The 
FFS approach is an effective peer to peer learning  system that enables farmers to identify challenges they face 
in their agricultural production activities and identify solutions in a collaborative facilitated manner.  Among other 
things, the project will prepare learning materials for the FFS, train farmers in climate change adaptation practices 
for sustainable production, provide tools and training  to enable them to adopt more efficient soil, water and input 
management practices, and train farmers in agricultural techniques such as the Sustainable Intensive/Improved 
Rice Cultivation ( SRI/SRA ) systems.  
Activity 3.1.2. Exchange visits on climate resilient food systems  
To promote the exchange of knowledge and best practices related to climate resilient farming practices, DEFIS+ 
will support exchange visits and study tours at the community and local levels. Specific measures will be taken to 
ensure the involvement of wome n in these exchange visits ( e.g., using a participant quota of at least 50%; 
organising women -only exchange visits and planning visits to successful female producers).  
The participants will be identified in a participatory, transparent, and consensual process involving the beneficiary 
communities, representatives of local and regional farmer organizations, strategic partners (Government and 
State representatives) and DEF IS+’s team. Eligibility criteria based, on age, gender, degree of vulnerability, level 
of schooling, socio -economic status, etc., will be defined. Thus, the approach will ensure that target groups, 
especially the most vulnerable, are the beneficiaries of D EFIS+ support.  
 
Activity 3.1.3. Capitalization of best practices and knowledge on food and nutrition security measures  
Local skills and knowledge will be leveraged, for instance, through the development of construction operations 
manuals, in order to scale up innovations. DEFIS+ will also support knowledge capturing studies on the climate 
adaptation and mitigation options and strategies developed by smallholder farmers,  by developing and proposing 
the design and composition of a package of materials, and communication formats , e.g., Documentary Clip 
Abécédaire game, educational games, radio broadcasts, technical data sheet and vo ice mess ages. These 
knowledge products will pay special attention to gender dimensions  for access and use .


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 As part of this capitalization process, DEFIS+ will consolidate the efforts made by programs financed by the World 
Bank to enrich and improve the database on LAUREL (Land use planning for enhanced resilience of landscape) 
for assessing, simulating, evaluat ing and re -orienting land use and land use change processes and to develop a 
land degradation baseline and a Prototype Land Use Change Simulation Platform (LANDSIM -P). The platform is 
essential for evaluating changes in land use  and forms of degradation or  restoration in order to make decisions 
on the orientations to be taken on the watershed within the framework of territorial planning.  
It should be noted that DEFIS+ has already arranged and discussed the specific requirements and procedures 
for obtaining licenses, permits, and authorizations for access to private/public land with all stakeholders and will 
provide, on a case -by-case basis , the necessary licenses, authorizations and permits. For example, in the case 
of private property, access to land rights requires either a land title issued by the Ministry of Land Management 
and Land Services (MATSF), or a land certificate issued by dece ntralized authorities (communes) in areas where 
there are Land Offices. This issue and all its details are extensively discussed in Annex 9.  
The expected results of Output 3.1 are: (i) 447 20 1 farmers are trained on farming practices adapted to climate 
change, mitigation, use of stress -tolerant seed varieties and materials through FFS, as well as nutrition (including 
healthy diets) and gender; (ii) 30 exchange visits are held to disseminate goo d practices on climate change 
adaptation; (iii) land degradation baseline is enriched (updated with assessment of current levels of degradation 
and regional specificity); and (iv) at least 20 thematic know ledge products are published on best practices for 
climate change adaptation.  
The activities to be financed by each co -financier are summarised in Table 5. Also, the table includes the 
implementing  partners for the GCF financed activities .    
Table 5: Summary of the activities split between GCF and IFAD financing        
GCF Financed Activities  IFAD Financed Activities  
Outcome 1. Strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production systems  
1. Protection of irrigation schemes against climate change impacts 
(PCU/Service providers/ Contractors)  
2. Sustainable sub -watersheds management and restoration of 
landscapes (PCU/ Service Providers/WUAs/ FOs/ Communities)  
3. Strengthening consultants and construct ion companies’  
capacities to apply  improved standards (PCU/ILO/Technical 
Institutes/ Government Agency)  
4. Strengthening local communities’ capacities in sustainable 
integrated watershed management (PCU/Service Providers/ FOs) 
5. Training/exchange visits/tours for Water Users Associations 
members in water use efficiency (PCU/WUA)  
6. Installation of automated agro -meteorological stations  
(Meteorological Department/CPGU (Emergency management 
and prevention unit)/PCU)  
7. Capacity building of decentralised government agencies 
(SRM&DRAEP/ PCU/ Technical Institutions)  
8. Promoting new (CSA and renewable energy) technologies: 
(PCU/ Service Providers/ FOs/ Communities)  
9. Construction of water tank for drip -irrigation and development 
of sustainable mitigation technology (PCU/Service Providers/ 
Contractors/ FOs)  1. Rehabilitation of irrigation systems  
2. Expansion of existing irrigation systems  
3. Development new irrigated perimeters  
4. Formation of Water User Association for new 
schemes  
5. Organisational behaviour training for existing 
Water User Associations.  
6 Support youth enterprises in agriculture and 
livestock management  
7. Leadership and functional literacy training for 
women and youth   
8. Improvement of agricultural and climate change 
statistics  
9. Improving access to quality seeds and vegetal 
material and genetic climate resilient materials in 
rural communities  
10. Establishment of seed multiplication systems 
for uptake of improved varieties  
11. Support youth enterprises in agriculture 
developing innovative mitigation and carbon 
sequestration tools


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 10. Support for the production of basic climate resilient seeds and 
crop varieties (PCU/ FOFIFA  (National Center for Applied 
Research in Rural Development)/Seed Production Center/ 
extension Services)  
11. Support to the Seed Production Center for the development 
of crops and plants (PCU/ FOFIFA ( National Center for Applied 
Research in Rural Development)/ Seed production Center)  
Outcome 2. Increased income generation through improved market accessibility  
1. Reinforce unpaved rural access roads to reduce the impacts of 
climate hazards: drainage systems, embankments  
(PCU/ILO/Service Providers/ Contractors/ Government Agency)  
2. Training on construction standards related to climate change 
(PCU/ILO/Technical Institutes)  
3. Training and capacity building on GR4W techniques  1. Development of rural access infrastructures by 
labour -intensive approach  
2. Market studies  
3. Capacity building of Farmer Organizations  
4. Establishing partnerships among Farmer 
Organizations and Market Operators  
5. Establishment of commodity platforms  
6. Improved access to finance   
Outcome 3. Improved food and nutrition security  
1. Training rural development actors on climate change (PCU/ 
CPGU (Emergency management and prevention unit) and other 
government Agencies/ Service providers)  
2. Exchange visits on adaptation of food system to climate change 
and carbon sequestration (PCU/ FOs/ Communities)  
3. Capitalization of  best practices and knowledge on climate 
change adaptation measures (PCU/ Service Providers/ FOs) 
4. Diffusion of resilient agricultural practices (PCU/ Extension 
Services/ Service Providers/ FOs), and promotion of NTFP -based 
enterprises  
5. Communication and awareness -raising of beneficiaries on the 
effects of climate change (PCU/Service Providers (NGOs)/ FOs/ 
Communities)  1. Local support and nutrition education, with 
gender and climate change  
2. Institutional support to national Farmer 
Organizations  
3. Institutional support to regional Farmer 
Organizations  
4. Organization of Farmer Fields Schools (FFS)  
5. Extension of systems for food security and 
climate change vulnerability   
 
Table 5.1 Summary of crops and prioritisation  
Type of crop  Location*  Level of priority**  
Cassava  Center  High priority for DEFIS+  
Groundnut  Center  High priority for DEFIS+  
Rice All DEFIS+ areas  High priority for DEFIS+  
Maize  Center  High priority for DEFIS+  
Coffee spp  Centre  High priority for DEFIS+  
Robusta coffee  South -East High priority for DEFIS+  
Onion  Center  High priority for DEFIS+


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 *South -East (Vatovavy, Fitovinany, and Atsimo -Atsinana) Center (Haute Matsiatra, Amoron’ i Mania, and 
Ihorombe).** High, medium, low  
Table 5.2. Summary the Climate Smart Agriculture activities and locations  
# Type of activity  Location  Benefits  
1 Resilient seeds research 
and production  Convention with 
Research centers 
(Vatovavy, Haute 
Matsiatra)  - Drought tolerant seeds to stabilise 
production during times of water stress from 
droughts thus reducing  negative climate 
impact in farm systems  
- Increased productivity  
- Preservation of local varieties  
- Conservation of genes that can be used in 
the selection of new stress -resistant traits  
 Specialized equipment for 
seed production  All DEFIS+ regions  - Modern tools to be used for the 
multiplication and dissemination of seeds of 
varieties resilient to climate change  
- Reduction of use of pesticides  
2 Agroforestry (including 
afforestation, restoration, 
mixed cropping systems)  All DEFIS+ regions  - Enhanced biological diversity  
- Creation of microclimates  in the agricultural 
production systems   
- Reduction of soil erosion due to windbreaks 
and limitation of evapotranspiration  
- Improvement of carbon sink capacity  
- Improvement of water storage capacity, soil 
fertility, biological activity and limiting pest 
attack  
- Added economic value due to economic 
services (timber, wood energy, fruits, etc.)  
3 Land management (soil 
improvement)  Terraces only in 
Amoron'i Mania, 
Fianarantsoa, 
Vatovavy, but all 
landscape restoration 
and reforestation 
activities in all DEFIS+ 
zones.  - Rehabilitation of the terraces  
- Protection of soil from erosion, fertility, and 
water conservation  
- Rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage 
systems  
- Improved yields and crop diversification  
4 Solar pumps for agriculture 
irrigation  All DEFIS+ regions  - Enhance the use of renewable energy in 
agriculture  
- Improved sustainability of farm systems  
- Reduction in GHG emissions  
- Enhance d productivity  
5 Water efficient technology  All DEFIS+ regions  - Reduction and conservation of scarce 
resource s, such as water


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 - Improved  water management and supply of 
water in dry seasons and periods of drought  
- Reduction of soil erosion and mitigation of 
the risk of floods  
 
Table 5.1 summarizes the adaptation measures for important food crops by area and priority. Some of the 
interventions such as the agro -forestry and improved soil and water conservation measures are no -regret climate 
change adaptation measures that are accessible to and feasible for the farmers to adopt. Furthermore , an 
extensive discussion is available in Annex 2b  on the various climate change adaptation options . Table 5.2 
synthesises the CSA benefits for the DEFIS+ regions.  
DEFIS+ capitalizes on the lessons learned from past IFAD projects. A summary of such lessons is included below.  
● Drip irrigation technology is emerging as a suitable solution in Madagascar dry regions.  
● The innovative underground water collection technology (REEP) has proven to be very relevant in the 
current context of drought, helping to provide access to water. It will be further developed within the framework of 
DEFIS+ for the collection of surface water at the level of road  networks . 
● The use of improved rice cropping techniques (SRI/SRA) has proven its success with a remarkable 
increase in yield and rice productivity in its intervention zones and will be further developed by DEFIS+.  
● The implementation of agroecological blocks in the DEFIS regions (not the DEFIS+ regions) has 
confirmed the effectiveness of this technique in terms of climate change resilience. The first perceived changes 
concern a better control of the agricultural calendar, the use of quality seeds, a better knowledge of the optimal 
doses of fertilisers (particularly organic fertilisers), better water management, and the adoption of better pest  
control techniques. The blocks will be further developed in DEFIS+ regions, taking into account the specific agro -
ecological characteristics of each area.  
● IFAD ha s trained champion farmers and livestock breeders from the FFSs who are able to disseminate 
their skills to other producers. The training sessions for trainers in the FFS and the association of producers into 
POs have helped to strengthen social cohesion.  
● IFAD projects  have included a module on climate change in the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) 
(a community -led empowerment methodology that uses principles of inclusion to improve income, and the food 
and nutrition security of vulnerable people in a gender -equitable wa y), which besides improving gender relations 
is also allowing for the adoption of good practices in adapting to climate change and preserving the environment. 
The methodology works with households (both females and males) to influence shifts towards positive gender 
relations and social norms and behaviours.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
The Executing Entity is the Republic of Madagascar (RoM) through its Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) 
and Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MINAE). The GCF funds will be received by MEF and the Funded 
activities will be implemented by MINAE.  A legally binding Financing Agreement (Subsidiary Agreement) , which 
will be signed by MEF  shall detail the  specific roles and responsibilities of the relevant governmental ministries, 
MEF and MINAE, involved in the implementation of the Project. The Subsidiary Agreement shall establish the 
terms for the financing and implementation of Outcomes, Outputs and Act ivities and include the relevant 
obligations of the Executing Entity in respect of the implementation of the overall Funded Activity, including 
compliance with the eligibility criteria (as set out in the “Eligibility Criteria”) and the Project Implementati on Manual. 
The Executing Entity through MINAE will select the beneficiaries of all Activities of the Project (the “Final 
Beneficiaries”) and procure service providers for specific Project Activities in accordance with the Eligibility Criteria 
and the PIM. The Executing Entity through the MINAE will enter into contracts for procured services with the 
selected service  providers.  
From a legal point of view, MEF will sign the Financing Agreement as the government's representative, but there 
are cases where it is MINAE that sign s the FA as the governor of IFAD. In the case  of DEFIS+ , MEF will represent 
the Government of Madagascar in accordance with Decree 2019 -093 setting the attributions of the Ministry and 
its general organization. MEF ensures the planning, coordination and monitoring -evaluation of the country's 
medium - and long -term development programs and projects at all levels and the coordination of cooperation at 
the national level. MEF also manages, controls,  and evaluates external funds and contributes to the harmonization


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 of cooperation with donors. Both MEF and MINAE are fully committed to DEFIS+ and ensuring its successful 
implementation . 
The DEFIS+ activities to be funded by the GCF (DEFIS+) will be fully integrated62 into the DEFIS program, which 
is a large agricultural program of the Malagasy Government that has been placed under the technical supervision 
of MINAE.  MINAE has been working with IFAD for 40 years and houses a permanent unit that oversees program 
and project implementation (CAPFIDA). Owing to an implementation arrangement that rests on country systems 
at both national and decentralised levels, DEFIS+ int erventions will be in synergy with the on -going and planned 
investments of all technical and financial partners in the areas of climate change, nutrition and gender.  
Management, coordination and supervision of DEFIS+ activities  
National Steering Committee  
A National Steering Committee (NSC) will oversee the activities of DEFIS+ at the national level. The Secretary -
General of MINAE will chair the NSC, which will comp rise the following members: (i) the General Project 
Coordinator of MINAE; (ii) a Director in the Ministry in charge of Finance; (iii) a Director in the Ministry in charge 
of regional planning; (iv) a Director in the Ministry in charge of the Environment; (v)  the National Climate Change 
Officer; (vi) a Director in the Ministry of Public Works; (vii) a representative Director in the Ministry in charge Social 
Protection and Gender; (viii) The President and three senior representatives of the Chamber of Agricultu re; and 
(ix) the President and one senior representative of the Federation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry. The 
secretariat will be provided by the Coordinator of the PCU. The NSC will meet twice a year and its main role is to: 
(i) validate DEFIS+ ann ual work plans and budget (AWP/Bs); (ii) evaluate progress made on project activities, 
their results and their alignment with strategies for rural areas and (iii) manage project -related grievances that 
cannot be resolved at the regional level.  
Regional Steering and Monitoring Committee  
Regional oversight will be provided by the Regional Steering and Monitoring Committees (RSMCs). The members 
of the RSMCs are: the Head of the Region; the Directorate of Rural Development; Directors of the Regional 
Directorate of Agriculture and Livestock a nd Fisheries and the Inter regional Directorate for the Environment and 
Sustainable Development (DIREDD); representatives of the Regional Steering and Allocation Committee; the 
Assembly of Regional Agriculture (RACs); and Regional Farmer  Organisations . The Coordinator  at the regional 
level will assume the secretariat of the RSMC.  The RSMC will meet twice a year and its main role is to: (i) review 
DEFIS+ annual work plans and budget (AWP/Bs); (ii) assess progress made on project activities and their results 
and (iii) manage project -related grievances.  
Programme Coordination Unit  
The Programme Coordination Unit (PCU) will coordinate and manage DEFIS+ resources and activities in 
accordance with the financing agreement, project manuals (operations, financial management and administration 
procedures , monitoring and evaluation) and AWP/Bs, under the supervision of the RSMC, the NSC and IFAD.  
The PCU will be responsible for: (i) the management of the project’s human, financial and physical resources; (ii) 
the preparation of AWP/Bs and project procurement plans; (iii) the coordination of the implementation of the 
activities; (iv) the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project’s activities and results; (v) the coordination and 
monitoring of the work/activities of partners and service providers; (vii) reporting and submitting activity and 
financial reports to MEF, MINAE and IFAD on a regular ba sis (minimum twice a year in the case of IFAD, so as 
to fulfil IFAD’s semi -annual reporting obligation vis -à-vis GCF); (viii) liaising regularly with regional government 
authorities and decentralised services and other actors in the DEFIS+ intervention zon es; (ix) ensuring the 
compliance of IFAD’s safeguards during project implementation activities (i.e. ESMP, Gender Action Plan).  
Planning and coordination of activities at the regional level will be provided by two inter -regional coordination units 
located in: (i) Fianarantsoa for the Ihorombe, Haute Matsiatra and Amoro n’'i Mania regions; (ii) Manakara for the 
Vatovavy, Fitovinany and Atsimo Atsinanana regions.  
A participatory approach will be used to identify and prioritise rural roads. Once identified , the feasibility studies 
and technical designs will be undertaken during the first and second year of project implementation. The feasibility 
studies will include environment and social impact assessments  and the development of site-specific  risk 
management plans. The works on the roads will be undertaken during years two, three and four of project 
implementation to allow for the evaluation of use and benefits in the last two years of project implementation. The 
sequencing of studies and works will also apply to the irrigation infrastructure to be rehabilitated. The execution 
will include beneficiaries’ contributions through materials and labour, control and superv ision by the enterprise 
 
62 The full integration refers to activities being incorporated (timing, sequencing, approach) in the implementation to ensure t he results and 
overall objectives outlined in DEFIS are achieved in a cost effective and efficient manner.


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 and by the rural engineering department. Further details on the sequencing of the studies and works in the 
different regions are included in Annex 2c.  
For the activities related to the low emission agricultural production system, the implementation approach will 
start with the identification of sites based on a needs assessment , beneficiary awareness raising and technical 
feasibility. Structuring and mobilisation of in-kind contributions from beneficiaries  (5%) will be developed to 
enhance ownership and sustainability of the adopted  measures . Lessons learned from previous IFAD projects: 
use of drip technology, underground water collection technology, surface water collection at road level for 
agricultural use, agro -ecological blocks, will be capitalised.  
To strengthen  knowledge generation o n climate change, the implementation  approach will consider the profiling 
of the target group (location, roles,  and importance in economic life). An analysis of the socio -economic profile of 
the target group (women, youth, illiterate) and an inventory of training needs and capacity building in the sites will 
be conducted to ensure an alignment between needs and knowledge . Training streams/themes will be validated 
and prioriti sed, followed by the development of training plans by theme  and by target group category. Forms of 
post-training support will be identified . 
For the implementation of the activities, the PCU will adhere to the Project Implementation Manual that will be 
elaborated detailing the approach. On the ground implementation will entail establishment of  operational 
partnerships with state institutions and service contracts with private operators and NGOs awarded through 
competitive processes. For both private and public sector operators, the condition for the continuation of their 
collaboration on the pr oject is the delivery of the annual results defined in the conventions/contracts/protocols. 
Identified partners included government institutions such as the National Office of Nutrition and Regional Offices 
of Nutrition, and NGOs such as FAFAFI, CTAS, AFAFI, CFAMMA, FOFIFA, FIFAMANOR and private sector 
players such as STOI , Société 3S, SSM, OM Kompiva, agrival LFL, Tozzi Green, MAC SIOU KING Alixia 
(ENTREPRISE PLUS), Sté 3S Union MAMIBE and La Myriade.  
DEFIS+ climate change adaptation activities will be implemented to complement the interventions of other 
partners, namely the GIZ -supported PRADA project; AfDB’s PAPAM project; the CI/EIB Sustainable Landscapes 
in Eastern Madagascar Project, among others. The project will also take into account initiatives for which other 
agencies plan to submit funding proposals to the GCF.  
To support the PCU team ( Figure 18 ) with the implementation of climate change adaptation activities, six 
personnel will be recruited through a competitive process carried out in accordance with the modalities in effect 
for IFAD -supported projects. The positions are: one climate change adaptation specialist; one finance officer; one 
M&E officer for the climate change adaptation activities; one M&E assistant for knowledge, GIS and database 
management; one social and environmental safeguards expert who will also be responsible for the environmental 
and social management plans (ESMPs) and one gender expert, both also involved in M&E procedures; the latter 
four will be integrated in the DEFIS M&E unit; all personnel will be hired on one -year contracts that may be 
renewed after a performance assessment has been done. The CAPFIDA will also  support the PCU by providing 
advice and expertise on specific aspects, including monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management and 
financial management.       
National Designated Authority (NDA)  
Through its responsibilities, the National Designated Authority (NDA) of the Green Climate Fund of Madagascar 
will contribute to the monitoring and evaluation of the project throughout its cycle. Thus, it will monitor the 
implementation of project activitie s in the field and assess project indicators including the reduction of greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions and the assessment of the degree of communities’ vulnerability.  Thus, the NDA’s 
Adaptation Unit (NDA -AU) will have an active role in the national adaptation planning p rocesses and its 
contribution will be incorporated into relevant DEFIS+ activities.  The monitoring will be based on secondary data 
produced by recurrent statistical surveys and framework surveys carried out at the national level and on the 
results of studies and surveys allowing for measuring  the changes brought about by the project at the target level. 
Results including progress on the Gender Action plan will be assessed during supervision missions. The impact 
of the activities on GHG emissions will be analysed using the EX -ACT tool. Adaptation activities will be analysed  
and monitored in consultation with the NDA -AU. Further details are available in Annex 11 on Monitoring and 
Evaluation.  
Joint supervision of the program will be provided by the Government of Madagascar (MINAE, MEF, MEDD DNA; 
NDA, and ONE) and IFAD. Supervision missions will be carried out twice a year and their main goals will be: (i) 
to assess progress on the implementatio n of each of DEFIS +  components; (ii) evaluate progress on the expected 
outcomes and outputs for each of the project’s components in comparison to what had been established in the 
concept note or other project documents; (iii) assess the quality of targeti ng and gender equality; (iv) analyse the 
different fiduciary aspects of the project (funding allocations, payment and disbursement commitments, conformity


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 of expenditures with AWP/Bs and concept note, accounting records) and review outcomes of the external audits 
conducted in accordance with IFA D handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing. A midterm review will be held 
to evaluate the actions taken in relation to the project’s objectives, analyse the effectiveness and appropriateness 
of the methodologies used, verify the level of disbursement o f resources and determine the need to reallocate 
available resources.  
 
Figure 18: Organisational chart of the DEFIS+ program  
 
Fiduciary aspects  
The financial management and procurement procedures to be used for the GCF funds are the ones specified in 
IFAD ’s Manual of Administrative, Financial and Accounting Procedures, which has been validated by the 
Government of Madagascar and IFAD. The project’s accounting will be done on approved  TOM2PRO software 
and will follow the rules and practices of other IFAD -funded projects in Madagascar, expanding the scope to 
include all reporting dimensions required by GCF to track expenditures. The project will disburse funds according 
to the plan of ac tivities defined in the AWP/B, which includes the disbursement and procurement plans.  
Flow of funds   
The GCF financing will be made available to Madagascar in the form of both grant and loan funds. This will be 
operationalized through:  
● a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA), between GCF and IFAD, ruling the contribution of GCF to IFAD for 
which funds will flow into a dedicated bank account held by IFAD;  
● a subsequent Subsidiary Agreement (SA), between IFAD and Madagascar (i.e. ‘’Financing Agreement’’ 
as per IFAD standard terminology) on which basis the proceeds of the GCF contribution (i) will be provided (on -
lent/on -granted) to Madagascar in the agreed de nomination currency (i.e. USD) and (ii) will flow from IFAD to the 
Borrower (Madagascar -MEF) into a Project Designated Account (DA) in USD opened at the Central Bank of 
Madagascar (CBM) . 
In the FAA, the ‘’GCF’s Financial Terms and Conditions of Grants and Concessional Loans’’ will apply to the GCF 
contribution (grant, loan) to IFAD. The same terms and conditions will be maintained in the SA with regards to 
the GCF funds on -lent/granted by IFAD to Madagascar. It is also relevant to mention that, in the SA, ‘’IFAD 
Lending Terms and Conditions’’ will apply to any IFAD co -financing (with own IFAD resources) to Madagascar.  
Disbursement and payment procedure


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 The administration of the external funds of a public institution, in Madagascar, is regulated by decrees  N°2015 -
1457 and N°2016 -1160 , which stipulate that all funds for projects managed by public institutions must be 
deposited in a designated account (DA) opened at CBM. MEF authorises  the opening of the Project DA, in foreign 
currency ( e.g., USD) at CBM. MEF (the borrower) approves the requests for disbursement of funds into the Project 
DA, which are prepared by the Project and Line Ministry (Lead Project Agency -LPA) on the basis of the supporting 
documentation defined in the Subsidiary Agree ment ( i.e., ‘’Financing Agreement’’ as per IFAD standard 
terminology). Afterwards, funds will be converted from the foreign currency into the national currency upon 
transfers from Project DA to operational accounts opened at commercial banks in Ariary (MGA), the nati onal 
currency. MEF controls the flow of funds to the operational accounts. The opening of operational accounts is 
authorised  by MEF on request of the Project/LPA. The replenishment of operational accounts will be done after 
justification of the utilisation  of a part of the previously allocated amount. The operational accounts will be used 
to make payments, for activity -related expenses, to third parties (Implementing Partners, Contractors, Service 
Providers) on the basis of signed agreements (MoU/Contracts) .  
Counterpart financing  
The Government of Madagascar will take measures to exempt the project’s expenses from taxes and duties, such 
as including annual budgetary provisions for exemptions on taxes and duties charged on products imported by 
the DEFIS+ project. The value -added tax  and import duties and taxes are subject to the rules on the execution of 
public expenditures. The office of the Treasury  of Madagascar will assume the taxes and duties vis -à-vis 
suppliers. The Government will also contribute its own internal resources to the account opened with the Treasury. 
Beneficiaries will also contribute in cash or in kind. The beneficiaries ’ contribution , whether in cash or in kind  will 
be fully tracked during implementation.   
Audit of accounts  
The internal audit will be carried out by MINAE units established for this purpose, which are: the CAPFIDA internal 
controller who reports to project coordinators; and this department’s Management and Internal Audit Control Unit, 
which reports to MINAE Gen eral Secretariat. Furthermore, the project’s accounts will be verified annually through 
external audits conducted by  independent and qualified auditing firms in accordance with IFA D Handbook for 
Financial Reporting and Auditing, and in compliance with the applicable GCF requirements ( i.e., expenditure 
eligibility, categorisation vis -à-vis GCF budget categories, etc.). A certified copy of the auditor’s report will be 
submitted to IFAD a few weeks before IFAD’s deadline for sending such a report to GCF.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Climate change and the effects of the El Niño/La Niña phenomena are increasing  the frequency and severity of 
extreme weather events such as droughts and floods  and will continue to be major impediments to sustainable 
development. Indeed, climate change and its effects aggravate the vulnerability of populations that are already 
affected by poverty , food and nutrition insecurity. The DEFIS+ activities are targeted at climate change adaptation 
with mitigation co -benefits . In the context of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities 
and its fair and ambitious NDC, the country has estimated the amount of the adaptation cost to be USD 28.713 
billion. Reiterating the very low responsibility in terms  of GHG emissions the NDC highlights, Madagascar spends 
a substantial part of its annual budget on social services and infrastructure in response to the adverse effects of 
climate change (impacts of floods, droughts and cyclones). The precarious economic s ituation of Madagascar 
entails that the implementation of the NDC is condition al on  the availability of external financial support, especially 
through the financial mechanisms established under the UNFCCC, hence,  this request for GCF resources is 
mainly in the form of a grant (74% while 26% will be a loan)63. The GCF resources will supplement the limited 
national resources, while also ensuring debt sustainability for Madagascar as a country that is highly vulnerable 
to the effects of climate change.  
Due to its history of recurrent political crises and economic stagnation, Madagascar is one of the poorest countries 
in the world with a highly narrow fiscal space for investments in key sectors, that will stimulate inclusive and broad -
based economic growth such as agriculture, social services and basic infrastructure. The degradation of 
ecosystems (land, water and biodiversity) and the narrow base of basic infrastructure have been accentuated by 
the recurrence of extreme events resulting from the effects of climate change. Madagascar ’s Country Strategic 
Opportunities Program (COSOP)64 jointly developed with IFAD highlights  the limited performance of the 
agricultural sector as one of the main causes of rural poverty. This poor performance is mainly due to exposure 
to climate change, low levels of public and private investment, low productivity of  production systems and the 
weak institutional capacities of sector actors. The average yields of most food crops are well below their potential. 
For example, the average annual yield for irrigated rice is estimated at 3.0 tons/ha against a potential of up to 5.0 
 
63 The Economic and Financial Analysis provides further details on the justification for grant and loan resources.   
64 The COSOP outlines IFAD’s engagement in a specified country and is jointly developed with the Government for a time period of  
approximately 5 -6 years.


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 or even 6.0 tons/ha; for maize, 0.9 tons/ha against a potential of 4.0 tons/ha; for beans, 0.8 ton/ha against 2.0 
tons/ha; and for cassava, 7 tons/ha against 30 tons/ha. The agriculture sector is deemed a risky business to 
invest in, due to the uncertainti es inherent to weather, yields, prices, government policies, global markets and 
other factors that can result in fluctuations in farming activities and related income generation. Such market failure 
is exacerbated by climate change and disincentives the pr ivate sector to invest in agriculture, therefore justifying 
the request for GCF financing. There are several barriers that contribute to the suboptimal allocation of goods 
and services in the areas targeted by DEFIS+. Farmers  have limited access to productivity enhancing 
technologies due to their remoteness. Without Farmers’ Organisations, farms located in the southern part of 
Madagascar generate a  limited marketable surplus. With climate change  and the associated extreme events, 
some production areas can remain inaccessible for several months following a flood.      
The positive results of IFA D’s long-standing investments in Madagascar make it clear that the development of 
inclusive agricultural value chains (from inputs, production, post -harvest and marketing) is a powerful vehicle for 
rural transformation and improved food and nutrition security . With the normalisation of the political and social 
situation in the country, DEFIS+ investments will contribute to restoring, reinforcing and securing the productive 
bases of rural households, by connecting them to production and market support services and building their 
resilience to climate change and food and nutrition insecurity. This will contribute significantly to Madagascar’s 
efforts to transform its economy sustainably and adapt to climate change. The objectives and priorities of DEFIS+ 
fit perf ectly within the framework of national policies aimed at transforming the agricultural sector from one that is 
predominantly subsistence -based with low productivity levels and unsustainable practices such as slash and burn 
farming to one that is more resil ient and sustainable,  and which contributes significantly to improving food and 
nutrition security.  
The GCF resources are requested mostly in the form of non -reimbursable grant given the country's situation and 
needs particularly the increasing debt situation and the target beneficiaries being vulnerable populations. The 
outstanding debt contracted or gu aranteed by the State (CGE) stood at 33.8% of GDP at the end of 2017 
compared with 26.0% at the end of 2013.  In Madagascar, a recent analysis conducted by the IMF has highlighted 
that the public debt could reach about 49.0% of GDP in 2025, higher than the 46.0% of GDP in 2020.65 It is thus 
recommended to maximise the use of non -reimbursable grants (Reports on the analysis of debt sustainability of 
Madagascar, Ministry of Finance and Budget Ministry of Economy and Planning June 2018). The Economic and 
Financial Analysis further emp hasises that without such a non -reimbursable grant from the GCF, project activities 
would not be financially viable. The  vulnerability of the target populations is exacerbated by  climate change  and 
the extremely low adaptive capacity at various levels makes it particularly difficult to use  non-grant financial 
instruments. The limited public funding available for the proposed DEFIS+ activities will not allow timely action 
and will result in further degradation of natural resources and increasing food and water insecurity among the 
rural popul ations of southern Madagascar. Attracting private capital for innovative financing is very challenging 
and would require a significant expectation of profit to mitigate the perceived risk, such high profitability would be 
incompatible with the target benef iciaries.  In 2019, the World Bank Doing Business ranked Madagascar the 161st 
country out of 190, and specifically 132nd in terms of access to credit.66 Therefore, without the participation of the 
GCF as a key investor to build the foundation, it would be almost impossible to raise further private funds for 
climate change -related  investment in Madagascar. Furthermore, the downside risk for smallholder farmers 
resulting from cost and sales pressures indicates the need for grant -based support as well as mechanisms to 
provide stable and affordable inputs.  
As elaborated in Table 4 above,  DEFIS+ aligns with the GCF Sector Guide on Agriculture and Food Security 
especially in regard to the investment pathway on Climate Resilien t Agriculture, which focuses on adaptation in 
agriculture and takes into account the mitigation co-benefits of reforestation and renewable energy technologies 
and climate -smart practices used for agriculture and value chains development. It is also aligned with the GCF 
Sector Guide on Ecosystems and Ecosystems services through the pathway on landscape -level protection, and 
restoration to maintain the ability to store and sequester carbon. DEFIS+ aligns with the Sector Guide on Water 
Security through the pathway on strengthening integrated water resources management and water management. 
DEFIS+ targets the most vulnerable areas and livelihoods to the impacts of increasing temperatures and 
increased rainfall variability. The adaptation interventions focus on the production of staple foods, cash crops and 
foods that have high nutritional value,  by making them more resilient to climate change impacts, especially by 
implementing activities with small scale farmers related to improved water management, irrigation and resilient 
agricultural practices and seeds coupled with landscape restoration, and  agro-climatic information systems.  
 
 
65 International Monetary Fund.  African Dept.  2021 Republic of Madagascar: Request for a 40 -month Arrangement Under the Extended 
Credit Facility —Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Republic of Madagascar.  
66 https://www.doingbusiness.org/en/rankings#


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Government institutions, local communities and agricultural development institutions will be involved in DEFIS+ 
implementation, which will ensure the sustainability of the investments from an institutional standpoint. In addition, 
DEFIS+ will feed into nat ional policy dialogues and strategies, particularly those pertaining to climate change, to 
ensure that the project’s components are integrated into and can inform the country’s legal and policy framework. 
This will further reinforce the synergies between D EFIS+ and the national programs implemented by MINAE and 
MEDD, as well as with the activities led by research organisations, such as FOFIFA.  
DEFIS+ will follow an integrated approach that uses a set of interconnected interventions to generate new 
opportunities for rural communities. This approach will create the enabling conditions for sustainable development 
to ensure that local producers bene fit from increased and long -lasting socio -economic returns as they improve 
their resilience to climate change, reduce vulnerability to climate shocks, food and nutrition insecurity. 
Partnerships between producers and market organisations, as well as the in clusion of smallholder farmers in the 
formal economy will generate social and economic benefits that last well beyond the project’s duration.  
In particular, the  DEFIS+ exit strategy will consider :  
● The establishment of simple and efficient water harvesting systems that require minimal technical skills 
and that can be easily managed and maintained by beneficiaries during and beyond the project’s lifetime. Training 
and awareness -building activities for  the beneficiaries on climate -resilient agricultural practices, including efficient 
water use and management, maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, and value addition to agricultural products. 
The rehabilitation and maintenance of the non -transferable infrastructure are partly financed by users of the hydro -
agricultural network, through their contributions (user fees). In addition, the Regions, annually include expenditure 
projections in their budgets as does the State, through the Fund for the Restoration and Maintenanc e of the 
Irrigations Infrastructure Networks (FRERHA).  
● Proposed DEFIS+ interventions are consistent with the development priorities of the Malagasy 
government. This is important, because it is this consistency that will ensure the institutionalisation of the project 
activities and their sustainability. At the level of the GR 4W development for example, DEFIS+ interventions will 
be linked to the World Bank -funded Madagascar Road Connectivity and the Madagascar Road Sector 
Sustainability projects in Malagasy regions, including Atsimo Atsinanana , which is in the DEFIS+ target  area. 
Thus, these two projects constitute an important baseline investment that DEFIS+ will leverage at various levels, 
including drawing lessons from and building on existing institutional arrangements for road improvements in rural 
Madagascar. DEFIS+ wi ll catalyse but also synergize with these projects in regions where they will overlap for 
enhanced socio -economic and environmental benefits.  
● A maintenance programme for roads, storage and packaging infrastructures, will be established by the 
communities and financed through user contributions/ service payments and Regions budgets. The climate -
resilient nature of the road design and construction will reduce maintenance costs and reinforce the investments’ 
long-term sustainability.  
● By supporting the MFIs, DEFIS+ will develop the partnership of proximity, leveraging the advantages of 
MFIs as local institutions with easier access, simplified procedures and project design and lower interest rates 
compared to other sources of local finan ce such as loan sharks. DEFIS+’s collaboration with MFIs will contribute 
to the development of the MFI sector and reinforce access to finance for agriculture.  
● Women’s access to land will be secured and guaranteed  long after the project ends. This will be done 
based on IFAD past experience and the context, namely depending on the existence or not of land offices and/or 
municipal development plans, the solutions could be, among others: the ex -ante land agreement bet ween the 
WUA  and the Municipality. DEFIS+ will facilitate access to land for women and young people, especially female 
heads of household, in the  new irrigated areas  to be constructed under DEFIS . For existing irrigated areas, 
DEFIS+ will make it a condition of access to funding that women and young people are included among the 
beneficiaries of the land. Awareness -raising and the mobilization of traditional authorities are necessary to 
overcome c ertain traditions that prevent access to land, especially for women heads of household.  
● An Operations and Maintenance Plan will be  included in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), with 
detailed information on the financial management of key infrastructure, including solar -powered facilities, water -
harvesting systems, and check dams that can guarantee the sustainability of the pro ject. The project will also 
target youth groups and associations to be engaged as entrepreneurs in the supply chain of the different 
technologies including the maintenance of equipment at the local level.   
● One of the critical elements for ensuring sustainability to underpin the exit strategy is capacity 
development. DEFIS+ has been designed with capacity -building interventions  partly for local technicians and 
farmers . In this regard, the project will train 2 000 trainers, actors and technicians  on construction standards that 
enhance road resilience to climate change; 2 500 farmers on the utilisation of new technologies (renewable 
energy and energy -efficient small -scale technologies, water efficient technology); and 45 000 farmers and their


---
*Page 50*
---

B 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 households on nutrition. DEFIS+ will also build capacities of the decentralised government. Developed capacities 
of different stakeholders are part of the exit strategy that will contribute to the project’s sustainability.  
 
Madagascar’s Law 90 -016 places the maintenance, management and control of hydro -agricultural networks in 
the hands of the beneficiaries constituted in WUAs. The Union maintains and protects the primary infrastructure 
common to the WUAs, including  the main canal, the sand trap, and above all the dams. WUAs, maintain the 
secondary infrastructure (secondary, tertiary canals, etc.) specific to one or more WUAs. The "dina" or social 
conventions, which apply to all members of the WUAs, are rules agreed upon  by all members to ensure the  proper 
functioning of the association. For each violation of the “dina”, the damage must be noted, followed by a fine 
which is drawn up and then applied after signature by both parties (the commission and the perpetrator). The exit 
strategy and the respon sibility for the management of DEFIS+ infrastructures are summarized in Table 6.  
Furthermore, in terms of exit strategy, DEFIS+ will support the integration of producers into markets and create 
strong long -lasting relationships of trust between producers and market operators. Two scenarios exist: an 
available product offer or building on an existing market. Depending on whether the products are available or 
build on an existing market, the result will be private actors engaged through aggregation such as cooperatives 
of private producers or the support of Farmer Organisations (FOs) thro ugh local microfinance.  
Table 6: Exit strategy for DEFIS+ infrastructure  
Exit strategy  
Infrastructure type  Operations and Maintenance  Long term f inancing for O+M  
Irrigation systems   Autonomous schemes:  
Structure operation:  Water User Associations 
/Farmer Organization  Autonomous schemes:  
User fees (100%)  
Partnership schemes (with strategic infrastructure):  
Water User Association/ Private or  Public 
Organization   Partnership schemes:  
User fees (Water User 
Association 50%)/Regional 
contribution (30%)/State 
contribution (20%)   
Storage facilities   Agricultural cooperative  Service charges (100%)  
Primary processing facilities 
(cleaning, drying, sorting)  Agricultural cooperative  Service charges (100%)  
Roads   Municipal Roads:  Municipality  Municipality expenditure 
(100%)  
Regional and agricultural/economic roads:  Regions  Regions ’ expenditure (100%)


---
*Page 51*
---

C 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
  
C. FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii)  Total amount  Currency  
53 861 million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  12 816   Max 0.00% 
interest rate; 
0.25% service fee; 
0.50% 
commitment fee  
(ii) Subordinated  
loans      
(iii) Equity      
(iv) Guarantees      
(v) Reimbursable 
grants      
(vi) Grants67 41 045    
(vii) Results -
based payments      
(b) Co -financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
96 986  million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrumen
t Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
IFAD Grant68 Grant  37 434 million USD 
($)     
IFAD Loan69 Senior 
Loans  59 553  million USD 
($)  10 years  
moratorium  
40 years  
repayment 
period  Fee 
commission 
of 0.75% per 
annum, with 
a 40-year 
repayment 
period and 
10 years 
moratorium
%  
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
150 847 million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements The DEFIS programme financing includes USD 33.7 million from the Government of 
Madagascar, USD 20 million from the OPEC Fund for International (OFID) and USD 14.3 
million from the programme beneficiaries. The Government contribution is mainly through 
 
67 Grants are non -reimbursable.  
68 The amount includes funds from the ongoing IFAD grant amount approved in 2017 as 50% of the approved USD 26.5 million will be  
available to disburse during the implementation of DEFIS+.  
69 The amount includes funds from the ongoing IFAD loan amount approved in 2017 as 50% of the approved USD 26.5 million will be 
available to disburse during the implementation of DEFIS+.


---
*Page 52*
---

C 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 and 
contributions 
(max. 250 words, 
approximately 
0.5 page)  tax exemptions and resources from its public investment programme. The beneficiaries 
will contribute in -kind through their labour and share of costs towards assets such as 
post-harvest and value -added equipment. The OFID funds will be used primarily for 
infrastructure development . 
GCF lending terms and conditions will apply to IFAD. In turn, IFAD is expected to apply 
the same terms to Madagascar, in the Subsidiary Agreement, with regard to GCF funds. 
More precisely,  the Loan Terms and Conditions are: max 0.00% interest rate; 0.25% 
service fee; 0.50% commitment fee.  
The service fee and commitment fee will cover the Fund’s administration and resource 
mobilization costs.  
IFAD has provided Annex 13 “Co -financing Commitment Letter” with detailed information 
on co -financiers in relation to the co -financing agreements. It is important to note that the 
beneficiary contributions are not included in the detailed budget table as they are 
considered as parallel co -financi ng. The same applies to the in -kind contributions. The 
detailed budget table only includes cash financing and co -financing. The tax exemption 
is under the DEFIS programme.  As per IFAD requirements, the cash counterpart 
contribution will be monitored and reported.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Part of the IFAD co -financing (approx. USD 30.513 million) has already been disbursed for preparatory 
activities such as the provision of advisory services to farmers, the purchase of improved inputs for the 
agricultural production seasons, and the conduct of feasibility studies, including environmental and social 
impact assessments, for some of the infrastructure to be developed. The funds already disbursed under the 
DEFIS programme have been deducted from th e overall budget.   
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
thousand       
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
thousan
d     
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
thousand       
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
1. 
Strengthened 
climate 
resilience of 
agricultural 
production 
systems  1.1 Improved 
water 
management 
for sustainable 
agriculture  31 070,594  24 
798,014  12 747,705  
(Loan)  
12 050,309 
(Grant)  6 
272,580  Loan  IFAD  
1.2 Enhanced 
agro-climatic 
information 
systems, new 
technologies 
and initiatives  75 570,774   19 452,
709 68,000 
(Loan)  
19 384,709 
(Grant)  56 118,0
65 Grant  
12 240,149 
(Grant)  
43 877,916 
(Loan)  IFAD  
2. Increased 
income 
generation 
through 
improved 
market 
accessibility   
2.1 Reinforced 
rural access 
roads  11 316,682    3 393,6
04    Grant  7 
923,079    Loan  IFAD  
2.2 Improved 
capacity to 
build and 
maintain rural 
infrastructure  948,976  948,976   Grant  0 N/A N/A


---
*Page 53*
---

C 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 3. Improved 
food and 
nutrition 
security  
 3.1 Knowledge 
on climate 
change and 
food security 
generated and 
shared  
 5 919,521    2 
279,409  Grant  3 
640,112    1 479,323  
(Loan)   
2 160,789 
(Grant)  IFAD  
Coordination 
and program 
management  Program 
coordination 
and 
management  26 020, 
896    2 
988,291   Grant  2 
032,605    Grant  IFAD  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  150 847, 
444 53 861,003 96 986,441 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Adapting smallholders and farmers to climate change requires not only building the resilience of production 
structures (irrigated perimeters and adjacent sub -watersheds, rural roads) to climate risks, but also 
strengthening the capacities of farmers and rural development actors to: (i) better analyse production systems, 
constraints and the changes they face; (ii) acquire new knowledg e and learn new farming practices to adapt 
their production systems to climate risks; and (iii) adopt social skills, such as good nutrition and gender 
practices, that can also help them strengthen their resilience to climate change and food and nutrition 
insecurity.  
DEFIS+ capacity building activities are summarised in Table 7a and will focus on: (i) collective management 
of watersheds and irrigated perimeters and their protection against erosion; (ii) efficient water management for 
irrigated perimeters and mechanical  and biological protection measures for watersheds; (iii) introduction of 
agroforestry techniques and climate -resilient species and varieties in dryland upland farming systems through 
the organisation of farmer field schools and exchange visits; (iv) new c onstruction norms linked to climate 
change; (v) training of rural development actors in the use of agrometeorological tools and climate change 
adaptation measures; (vi) household training on nutrition and gender; and (vii) training in DEFIS+ management. 
The cost of investment in capacity building is USD 14,565  million, which is approximately 27% of GCF financing 
(see details in Table 7a below).   
Table 7 A: Estimated costs of capacity -building  
Component  GCF  
Total 
amount 
'000USD  Capacity -building  
 '000 USD  % of 
project 
total  
C.1. Strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production 
systems  44,251  11,305  21% 
C.2. Increased income generation through improved market 
accessibility  4,343  949 2% 
C.3. Improved food and nutrition security   2,279 2,239  4% 
Coordination and program management  2,988 71 0% 
Total  53,861  14,565  27% 
 
There are also plans to organise technology transfer activities, including: (i) introduction of new water 
conservation technologies; (ii) production of seeds of stress -resilient species and varieties; (iii) introduction of


---
*Page 54*
---

C 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 new integrated pest management practices; (iv) green roads; and (v) renewable energy technologies. The total 
cost of the technology transfer activities is estimated at USD 9.1 million, or 17% of the GCF funding.  
For the operation and maintenance of hydro -agricultural infrastructure: at the regional level, a public institution, 
the Regional Hydro -agricultural Network Rehabilitation and Maintenance Fund (RHNRMF), is endowed with 
legal personality and administrative and financial autonomy. The headquarters of the fund is located in the 
capital of the region concerned. The role of each regional RHNRMF is to receive and manage funds intended 
for rehabilitation, technology transfer, maintenance,  and management of all str ategic works in the regional 
territory that are not transferable to other areas. The RHNRMF contributes to the repairs necessary in the event 
of damage caused by floods, cyclones or natural disasters to all the hydro -agricultural networks in each region.


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
  
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
DEFIS+ proposes a comprehensive approach to sustainably improving resilience to climate shocks and enhancing 
nutrition and food security for vulnerable households in the target areas. DEFIS+ will enhance the adaptive capacity 
of agricultural systems and vu lnerable rural communities to the adverse impacts of climate change so that farmers 
are better able to confront the increasing frequency and intensity of drought and changes in rainfall patterns that 
often result in floods. This requires modernizing the pr esent agricultural production systems, which are reliant on 
rainfall and whose infrastructures and practises are no longer suitable in cognisance of  climate change. DEFIS+ 
proposes to reduce smallholder farmers’ exposure to climate and economic shocks by climate -proofing irrigation 
infrastructures and rural roads to increase agricultural water availability, reduce the risk of market access disruptions  
caused by extreme climate events and promote and disseminate climate smart  agricultural practices. DEFIS+ will 
support 447,200  people,  of whom  50% are women.  
At the field level, the diffusion of water -saving technology such as the implementation of drip -irrigation systems and 
the SRI system allows for efficiency in the availability of water, reduces vulnerability to water shortages and increases 
productivity per hectare. This will increase the recoverable crop area that contributes to high levels of production. 
The support of DEFIS+ through the dissemination of drought and stress tolerant varieties and the adoption  of 
integrated pest management methods and other improved agronomic practices will contribute to further reducing 
production risk and sustainably increasing productivity. Through DEFIS+, the resilience of production systems will 
be strengthened by investing in ecosystem restoration,  including the promotion of an integrated landscape 
management approach (under the  watershed). This reduces the risk of erosion and will improve the sustained 
productivity of farms through the retention of fertile topsoils . Some activities such as the dissemination  of drip -
irrigation systems overwhelmingly benefit women who are the main producers of vegetable crops and will contribute 
to the nutritional improvement of households. Investments in  infrastructure reinforcement are aimed at the rapid 
evacuation of flood waters during extreme weather events and the reduction of risks associated with infrastructure 
degradation, thus ensuring sustainability and reducing maintenance  costs in the future. Finally, DEFIS+ will promote 
low-cost on - and off -farm renewable energy and energy -efficient technologies, such as improved cooking stoves and 
handmade briquettes, by using local materials, thus reducing deforestation and contributing  to carbon sequestration. 
Other technologies will also include solar pumps for irrigation, biogas production along with livestock systems, solar 
milling and dryers for product processing. These technologies will contribute to improving  efficiency and production, 
while also reducing women’s time burden and workload ( thereby  impacting their health, education, and nutrition 
status and indirectly those of their young children).  
By combining training on climate -smart agriculture with nutrition education and gender equality, DEFIS+ will 
contribute to improving the knowledge and practices of farming households to not only improve their agricultural 
performance and incomes, but also to link these positive outcomes with improved resilience to climate change, 
nutrition , gender equality and empowerment. By supporting the installation of automatic agrometeorological stations, 
the project will enhance the generation of climate data, which will feed into on -going initiatives that provide decision 
makers with updated climate information. Through awareness -raising sessions and formal training on the impacts of 
climate change and adaptation techniques, DEFIS+ will also directly contribute to greater awareness of climate 
threats and risk reduction processes. Furthermore, collaboration with MFIs may develop complem entarities between 
financial and non -financial services to agriculture, by defining the respect of technical aspects as a condition to 
access MFI funding. By promoting integrated financial services, MFIs will contribute to a positive potential impact on 
agriculture productivity and the sustainability of climate change adaptation gains.  
The adoption of the Green Roads for Water approach through capacity building of the technicians in various 
Government institutions will provide a pathway for scaling up the results of climate proofed road infrastructure into 
additional regions in Madagascar. The GR 4W approach for DEFIS+ will also contribute to enhancing aquifer 
productivity , which will have positive impacts on agriculture in the part of the country that faces climate change 
impacts on water availability and socio -economic activities.  
Through these interventions, DEFIS+ will directly improve the climate resilience of 447,201 individual beneficiaries 
and indirectly impact the lives of 3,543,719 beneficiaries in the six regions of the project. Improving their ability to 
sustainably combat the negative effects of climate change, produce greater yields and gain access to markets. This


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 results in greater income generation for rural communities, resulting in reduced dependence on the exploitation of 
natural resources in lean periods.  
DEFIS+ contributes effectively and efficiently to the Updated Strategic Plan (USP -2) for the GCF 2024 –2027 (Table 
7B). The USP -2 reflects a commitment to smart, transformative action in the face of the climate crisis. By addressing 
the complexities of climate change through enhanced adaptation, including mitigation, social equity, private sector 
engagement, and rigorous  evaluation, the GCF is poised to play a crucial role in catalysing global efforts to build a 
sustainable and resilient future.  The USP -2 builds upon the successes and lessons learned from its predecessor 
(USP -1), emphasizing a comprehensive and integrated approach to climate finance. At its core, the strategic plan 
sets some important key objectives aimed at accelerating climate action, fostering resilience and promoting 
sustainable development. In this context, DE FIS+ plays an important and crucial role in contributing to the USP -2 
strategic vision and collective determination in the pursuit of a climate -resilient world.  
Table 7b. Contribution of DEFIS+ to USP -2 
Strategic 
Priority  Description  DEFIS+ Contribution  
Country 
Programming  More than 100 developing countries directly 
supported to advance NDCs, NAPs or LTS  It supports the NDC,  NAP, NRDMP, 
SNCC/AEP, NPC, and NPAIII of Madagascar . 
Direct Access  Doubling the number of DAEs with approved 
GCF funding proposals through strengthened 
climate programming capacity and increasing 
the allocation of GCF resources through 
DAEs.  DEFIS+ does not directly work with DAEs as 
there is no DAE in the country so far. 
However, during its implementation should 
any DAEs be approved for Madagascar, 
relevant partnerships will be established.  
CIEWS  50 to 60 developing countries protected by 
new or improved early warning systems.  The project develops an early warning system 
that provide s information to help farmers 
determine their planting schedule, integration  
of phytosanitary surveillance, provide 
agricultural warnings, drought alerts, food,  
and nutrition surveillance.  Six automated 
agro-meteorological stations will be  installed 
and become operational . 
Food  190 to 280 million beneficiaries adopting low -
emission climate -resilient agricultural and 
fisheries  447 201 will directly benefit from climate -
resilient agricultural strategies  
Ecosystems  120 to 190 million hectares of terrestrial and 
marine areas conserved, restored or brought 
under sustainable management  DEFIS+ strengthened climate resilience by 
improving access to efficient water 
management systems, enhancing irrigated 
schemes, restoring sub -watersheds, 
landscapes, and reforestation.  
Total (no double -counting)  41 200 ha  
1.Sustainable management (sub -total) 70 Sustainable management of restored 15  000 
ha of irrigated schemes.  
2.Conserved/protected ( subtotal ) 8 100 ha of land improved on water infiltration 
with anti -erosion systems.  
3.Restored/natural regen/agroforestry etc 
(subtotal ) 18 100 ha of which terrestrial forest: 6  330 ha 
and terrestrial non -forest: 11  770 ha.  
 
70 Including the number of conservation and restored areas?


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 Infrastructure  45 to 60 developing countries develop  climate 
resilient infrastructure; including ecosystem -
based approaches  DEFIS+ contributes to develop climate 
resilient infrastructures such as the Green 
Roads for Water (GR4W) in Madagascar  
Clean Energy  20 to 30 developing countries supported  DEFIS+ promote the use of renewable energy 
and low-cost on - and off -farm modern 
technologies, such as improved cooking 
stoves, as well as solar pumps for irrigation, 
solar milling and dryers for food processing.  
Transport, 
buildings, 
industry  18 to 25 developing countries supported  DEFIS+  supports road re habilitation  (not 
construction) in remote rural areas of 
Madagascar . 
Locally led  
Adaptation  40-70 approved proposals for adaptation 
projects, including for locally led  adaptation 
action.  DEFIS+ supports  climate resilient agriculture 
development,  energy saving technology  and 
watershed management that will contribute to 
local adaptation plans in the target regions . 
Innovation and 
Market Creation  900 to 1500 local private sector early -stage  
ventures and MSMEs provided with broad -
based seed and early -stage capital for 
innovative climate solutions, business models 
and technologies  N/A 
Greening 
Finance  90 to 180 national and regional financial 
institutions supported to access GCF 
resources, and other green finance, 
particularly for MSMEs  N/A 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Several projects in the south of Madagascar will benefit from the DEFIS+ project because this project will contribute 
to transforming the climate vulnerable, and unsustainable agricultural sector into a climate -resilient, market -oriented 
with modern infras tructure, and profitable economic sector, which also significantly contributes to mitigating climate 
shocks and improving food and nutrition, security, gender equality and empowerment. The structural and capacity 
transformation will be achieved by addressi ng vulnerabilities to climate change and supporting all stakeholders to 
improve their resilience, efficiency and links to markets. The paradigm shift for a green and sustainable climate 
resilience society that DEFIS + supports entails:  
● Climate proofing basic production and market related infrastructure to improve their resilience. The integrated 
watershed and catchment management approach will scale up national experiences in bottom -up participatory 
watershed and catchment management with the aim of both protecting natural resources and increasing income. 
Community - driven sustainable land and water management plans and activities will be supported. The planning 
process, which includes social engineering for behavioural change and impleme ntation of the plans will also enable 
knowledge sharing and joint learning among peers in the WUAs and the FFS.  
● The partnerships mobilised for DEFIS+, the scale of productive investments planned for sustainable 
agricultural development and the focus on building local capacities constitute a major paradigm shift in regions in 
southern Madagascar renowned for humanita rian and emergency assistance. The focus on scaling up well -tested 
approaches and technologies building on innovative approaches and lessons learned from previous IFAD 
investments (including DEFIS and other IFAD projects in the country) is an important fea ture of the proposed 
interventions.  
● Access to stress tolerant (drought, heat, flooding, salinity, etc.) and nutritionally enhanced varieties and 
planting materials developed by research centres. The production, multiplication and dissemination at community 
level of these climate resilient te chnologies will be promoted as will the adoption of integrated pest management and 
other agroecological approaches. Supporting national research centres and the FFS will ensure the enabling 
environment for improved seeds, promotion and adoption by smallholders.


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 ● Greening road infrastructure will have an overall positive impact on agriculture, water availability and soil 
erosion associated with running surface water. Thus, maintenance and restoration of green roads will have a minimal 
environmental impact and large  benefits for civil society.  
● Development of agrometeorological information. Due to the dynamic nature of exposure and vulnerability, 
impact scenarios for crops, land use and agri -infrastructure will vary widely. The project will use the DSS platform to 
understand risk (using hazard ex posure and vulnerability), including gender -related considerations and applications 
such as Met Apps and others provided by the Regional Meteorological Directorate.  
At the national level, DEFIS+ as well as other projects supported by IFAD, will contribute to the implementation of 
the strategy laid out in the National Policy for Action on Climate Change and the NDC (2015) that aim to support the 
development of sustainable, integrated and resilient agriculture models and water resources management.  More 
specifically, the adaptation practices promoted by DEFIS+ respond to the UNFCCC Technology Needs Assessment 
(TNA) developed for Madagascar.71 The TNA identifies the following initiatives as having potential for paradigm 
shifting: optimization of water management and drip irrigation; adoption of landscape conservation techniques; 
technical and financial support for risk management; adoption of ad apted farming techniques and stress -tolerant 
varieties; rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure; and diffusion of drainage systems. Further assessments focus 
particularly on the promotion of smallholder agroforestry; and the development of resilient ri ce technology 
packages.72 DEFIS+ will also contribute to the regulatory framework for irrigation infrastructure through a focus on 
strengthening the capacities and standards of design offices and construction companies. The project is in line with 
the above -cited analyses, as it promotes the adoption of resilient agroforestry and landscape management systems, 
the adoption of  Systems of Rice Intensification (SRI), the adoption of drought - and stress -tolerant, and better adapted 
to climate change seeds and the reinforcement of irrigation networks as key strategies to improve the climate 
resilience of agricultural production systems.  
The project will shift agriculture in the country’s target areas from its current situation of high vulnerability toward an 
alternative paradigm wherein better information and climate smart  farming practices will significantly increase 
resilience to climate change. The reliance on state -of-the-art GIS tools will support strategic planning through the 
provision of more systematic data, which will act as a springboard for science -based decisio n-making processes. 
The project constitutes an important step in a longer -term process of transforming agriculture in Madagascar. The 
sheer magnitude of the required behavioural change, among a large and poor population highly dependent on 
agricultural out put, is an enormous task that the government cannot achieve on its own.  
This model can easily be applied to other geographic areas in Madagascar or other countries. The approach and the 
tools to be utilised constitute a "package" that could be easily replicated in other systems in the country. The 
successful implementation of this project will result in a new, replicable, long -term and sustainable funding model in 
other landscapes that could enhance climate resilience, improve conservation, reduce land degradation and boost 
economic development. Outside Madagascar, the proposed  model of a land use transition investment fund is well 
suited for the most vulnerable countries on the Africa continent, where unsustainable agriculture takes up an 
increasing share of available land, resulting in deforestation, land degradation and an agricultural sector not resilient 
to climate change. Thus, this model could be replicated (but not e xclusively) in other least developed countries in 
Africa that need large -scale climate investments in rural areas to finance the activities necessary to achie ve the 
objectives set in their NDCs and in their national adaptation programs.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
DEFIS+ will be implemented by the Government of Madagascar, particularly M INAE , the Ministry of Environment 
and MEF in close synergy with other rural and agricultural development investments intervening in the southern 
regions of Madagascar. Like other IFAD -funded projects, its interventions will re ly on using national systems at both 
the central and decentralised levels, and on strengthening the capacity of targeted poor smallholders and their local 
institutions such as Farmers’ Organisations, in order to better empower the rural poor, with a particular focus on 
women and youth. When looking at ensuring sustainable development, climate information represents an essential 
element for increasing the capacity of vulnerable households to adapt to climate variability.  
The DEFIS+ project includes important sustainable co -benefi ts: 
 
71https://unfccc.int/ttclear/misc_/StaticFiles/gnwoerk_static/TNA_key_doc/c5df277319904ab1ae1150e48ff7670f/57d71de082f9453ab8e8 a4
2241eb27cc.pdf  
72https://unfccc.int/ttclear/misc_/StaticFiles/gnwoerk_static/TNA_key_doc/eb3e65055e5240b6b609f62f8402e57f/a99addeebd3e4687aed5 d
aa27cb2123f.pdf


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 Environmental co -benefits. DEFIS+ will promote sustainable and climate -resilient agricultural practices, 
technologies and infrastructures that contribute to improving the efficient management and use of water resources 
in agriculture, enhancing soil quality and restoring degraded lands. Its integrated watershed management approach 
will help increase moisture content in the soil, optimize the use of water and expand the vegetative cover of degraded 
lands, while reducing thei r wind - and rainfall -induced erosion. It will also help reduce the siltation of water bodies, 
hydro -agricultural infrastructure and irrigation canals. This will, in turn, lead to greater biodiversity in the target areas 
and surrounding landscapes, thereby maintaining key eco systems services that are crucial for agricultural production, 
especially in the context of climate change.  
Practices that increase soil organic matter also help increase carbon sequestration, reduce GHG emissions and 
improve soil nutrient availability and water -holding capacity, which in turn strengthens the resilience of farming 
systems and increases productiv ity. Sustainable soil fertility management will allow the mitigation of climate change 
due to the improved  carbon sequestration capacity of soils rich in organic material. Agroforestry and silvopastoral 
systems can increase livestock productivity by reducing heat stress to animals. Thus, the application of good livestock 
and manure management practices results  in a reduction of methane emissions compared with the current BAU. In 
addition, trees increase carbon storage in soils and biomass. Watershed rehabilitation increases carbon stored in 
the land and the use of renewable energy technologies will reduce carbo n emissions. The process of manufacturing 
biogas through anaerobic digestion makes it possible to reduce the sources of methane production and to 
concentrate them in one place, in addition to the other advantages of valorisation  of agricultural by -products, but also 
to reduce the use of wood, which is also a source of household energy. Improved stoves will also reduce pressure 
on forest products.  
Social co -benefits including health impacts . Higher food security and nutrition will be among the key social co -
benefits that will arise. The proportion of targeted households with sufficient food intake is expected to increase from 
50 to 90%. In addition, 45,000 households will benefit from nutritional education, which will improve women’s and 
infants’ health. Better access to water, more effective watershed management and the use of off -farm technologies 
will reduce women’s time burden and workload. Women's  and youth’s employment opportunities  will increase, and 
women’s participation in the rural economy will be  further  formalised and recognized. By increasing and diversifying 
income sources, as well as improving food security, the project will also contribute to reducing migration flows to 
urban areas.  
Specific actions proposed for women and young people in vulnerable situations to facilitate their access to productive 
capital and to income -generating activities or jobs include: (i) inclusion of young people trained by FORMAPROD by 
reserving them plots w ithin the newly developed perimeters; (ii) positioning of young people and women as rural 
entrepreneurs involved in the service professions linked to development poles; (iii) prioritisation of young people and 
women in capacity building actions and access to financing for producers. Young people will be trained not only on 
production but also on processing, storage, marketing, sale/distribution of agricultural inputs, management of 
irrigated areas and advisory services  as well as maintenance of new technologies and equipment .  
Economic co -benefits . DEFIS+ will contribute to reduce poverty by supporting the diversification of agricultural 
production, building the climate resilience of production systems and infrastructures and creating market linkages, 
which will reduce transaction costs and boost th e local economy. The sustainable management of agricultural water 
within an integrated watershed approach, coupled with more climate and stress -tolerant  seeds, will sustainably 
increase agricultural productivity. In addition, the dissemination of climate resilient practices and technologies will 
enhance the adaptive capacity of agricultural systems and the income of smallholder  farmers  and their households . 
The activities planned, based on previous experiences, that contribute to the increase in productivity are efficient 
irrigation, optimal organic fertilizer use, improvement of agricultural practices through FFS, use of improved and 
certified seeds that are climate resilient.  
Owing to increased productivity and improved linkages to the  market, the income of the targeted smallholders will 
increase. At least 53,900 small -scale farmers are expected to adopt more resilient agricultural technologies. Based 
on conservative assumptions, the Economic I nternal Rate of Return (E-IRR) of DEFIS+ is predicted to be 24% and 
its Economic Net P resent Value (E-NPV)  is expected  to reach USD 255.5 million (see Annex 3, Economic and 
Financial Analysis).  
Mitigation co -benefits . The co -benefits of integrating a mitigation component into the DEFIS+ project are diverse 
and impactful. From environmental sustainability to operational efficiency, cost -effectiveness, stakeholder 
engagement, and social responsibility, climate change mitigation contributes to the holistic success and positive 
impact of this project. Co-benefits include the restoration of degraded and marginal areas and sustainable 
agroforestry practises that contribute to carbon sequestration and climate  change  mitigation. The Project also  
introduces innovative, low -cost, context -specific renewable energy and energy -efficient technologies for farming and 
processing (such as solar pumps and dryers) and domestic activities (such as improved cooking stoves to reduce 
the use of firewood), which  contribute to reducing GHG emissions. Thus, climate change mitigation co -benefit


---
*Page 60*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
   
 activities will contribute to NDC priorities, which include facilitating access to energy by strengthening existing 
systems and promoting renewable energy and green technolog ies. 
Gender -sensitive development impacts  DEFIS+ will implement a gender strategy to ensure women’s specific 
needs are considered  at all stages of implementation and will provide opportunities to improve their quality of life, 
reduce their vulnerability to climate change and increase their incomes. The activities proposed for women and youth 
will include training of farming households on gender issues  including the use of the Gender action Learning System 
(GALS)  and measures to increase their access to productive capital and income -generating activities, primarily 
access to land, with a view to positioning women as rural entrepreneurs and service providers in development hubs 
and facilitating  their access to capacity -building and financial services. The number of green jobs created with this 
project will target women, heading 30% of the selected households, in addition to w omen in male headed households, 
thus moving a step closer to narrowing the gender gap. The project will also involve minorities, vulnerable people 
and groups through the social inclusion strategy . 
The project is well placed to enable the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. The 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development,  adopted by all United Nations Member States in 2015, provides a shared blueprint for 
peace and prosperity for people and the planet, connecting all countries in a global partnership. Countries have 
recognised that ending poverty and other deprivations must  go hand -in-hand with strategies that improve health and 
education, reduce inequality and spur economic growth – all while tackling climate change and working to preserve 
oceans and forests. The DEFIS+ project contributes to SDG 13 (Climate Action), SDG 1  (No Poverty), SDG 2 (Zero 
Hunger), SDG 5 (Gender Equality), SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy) and SDG 15 (Life on Land).  
Social equity.  The overall strategy of DEFIS+ is to ensure social equity and cohesion among all members of civil 
society. Thus, this project follows an inclusive targeting strategy to reach vulnerable groups and poor households 
headed by women and youth, so that these t argeted rural populations, characterised by their vulnerability to the 
effects of climate change, will have equal opportunities to access factors of production (land, water, inputs, financing, 
etc.) in order to ensure fair and equitable results and enable sustainable impacts on living conditions.  
For gender equity, DEFIS+ will implement a gender strategy based on the consideration of inequalities related to 
sex, age and status. Such a strategy is based on the national policy, GCF updated gender policy and action plan, 
IFAD's action plan in this area and on the experiences and best practices developed by previous projects in 
Madagascar. The objectives of this strategy are to: (i) remove the constraints limiting the inclusion, active participation 
and empower ment of women and young people (men and wom en) in the different link ages of the climate change 
agenda and the agricultural sectors in order to create opportunities to improve their living conditions and coping with  
the changing climate; (ii) strengthen their productive capacities in order to increase the productivity and profitability 
of their economic activities by facilitating women's and youth access to resources and production factors (land, water, 
inputs, financing/credit, v ocational training, climate information, technologies, advisory support , etc. ); and (iii) 
promote women's leadership and their participation in decision -making bodies at the household level, in P roducer 
Organisations (WUA s, Cooperative etc)  in platforms/frameworks for consultation of the sectors and in local 
communities in general.       
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
With a GNI per capita of USD 480 in 2020, Madagascar belongs to the group of least developed countries (LDCs). 
After real GDP growth of 4.4% in 2019, the country went into a recession in 2020, with real GDP declining by  4%.73 
The combined impact of global trade disruptions and domestic containment measures is estimated to have resulted 
in a GDP contraction of 4.2% in 2020, similar to that observed during the devastating 2009 political crisis.74 Led by 
the industrial and service sectors, GDP growth increased between 2013 and 2017, from 2.3% to 4.2%, whereas 
between 2014 and 2017, the agricultural sector contracted an average of  0.8% per year. In a country where 
agriculture employs nearly 80% of the population, this indicates that the economic growth experienced in the past 
few years did not have a positive impact on the living conditions of the rural population. The limited perf ormance of 
the agricultural sector is the result of’ limited means of production, low productivity levels, insecurity in rural areas, 
overexploitation of natural resources, vulnerability to climate change (cyclones, drought and floods) and constraints 
on access to markets  particularly in the rural areas .  
Madagascar’s ranking on the Human Development Index is still very low 0.528 positioning it at 164th place (out of 
189). In 2018 it went from 0.512 to 0.519, it fell three positions on the global index during this period, from 158th to 
161st place (out of 188 countries). Social and geographic inequalities in the country are still very pronounced: more 
than 80% of the population lives below the poverty level, with USD 2 per day, and 80% of the population lives in rural 
zones, sometimes in very  remote areas with limited access to basic infrastructure. Food insecurity and malnutrition 
 
73 https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/southern -africa/madagascar/madagascar -economic -outlook  
74 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/madagascar/publication/madagascar -economic -update -covid -19-increases -poverty -a-new-reform -
momentum -is-needed -to-build -back -stronger


---
*Page 61*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
   
 exist in the country at high prevalence, affecting predominantly women of reproductive age and children, and creating 
huge socio -economic losses.  
The country is among the poorest in the world and poverty increased significantly as a result of the 2009 -2013 crisis. 
The poverty rate (at $1.9/day) is estimated to rise to 77.4% in 2020, up from 74.3% in 2019, corresponding to an 
increase of 1.38 million  people in one year.75 The incidence of extreme poverty (less than USD 1.25 per day) rose to 
78% in 2012. Poverty is clearly more severe in rural areas, where it affects 87.6% of the population, in comparison 
to 55.1% in urban areas. Extreme poverty is more pronounced in the so uth. The activities of DEFIS+ aim to restore 
and/or rehabilitate the soil and improve land use through a participatory approach with the local community. This 
approach will ensure that any potential land conflict is identified and resolved before any activ ities commence. For 
the rehabilitation of roads, a resettlement policy for beneficiaries who may be voluntarily displaced will have to be 
implemented before the works are initiated. Adherence to IFAD’s Social , Environment and Climate Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP) also follows the principles of Free Prior and Informed Consent that ensures existing inequalities 
are not augmented. A Grievance Redress Mechanism is also articulated for the project to manage any potential 
conflicts. In addition, DEFIS+ fully take s into account the needs of the recipient, which are in line with the national 
priorities. Furthermore, continuous engagement with the NDA has resumed, and DEFIS+ documents have been 
shared with the NDA. Further information is available in Annex 2a.  
Several studies have confirmed Madagascar’s high vulnerability to climate change (see Section B.1 and Annex 2b). 
The growing frequency and intensity of droughts coupled with increasing rainfall variability pose significant challenges 
to the agricultural se ctor. This results in very high exposure and vulnerability of the rural sectors in southern regions 
to climate -driven changes in rainfall patterns, rising temperatures and consequent declines in agricultural water 
availability. Such changes will adversely impact crops that are important in economic and food security terms such 
as rice, maize, among others. Furthermore, aridification in the southernmost regions will lead to greater wind erosion, 
while more frequent flash floods will exacerbate problems such as soil erosion, siltation of irrigation infrastructure, 
and damage to rural roads. Rising temperatures will also contribute to the proliferation of pests and diseases and put 
even more pressure on scarce water resources for irrigation purposes.  
The precarious economic situation of Madagascar entails that the implementation of the project’s activities is 
conditioned by the availability of external financial support, hence this request for GCF resources. The GCF resources 
will supplement the limite d national resources, while also ensuring the debt sustainability for Madagascar as a country 
that is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. In its 12th replenishment cycle (2022 -2024) IFAD has 
increased its targets in relation to climate change, meaning that at least 40% of its investments have to be invested 
in climate change adaptation or mitigation measures . Recognising the high demand and need for climate finance 
and a better integration of climate change adaptation  into project design  and implementation , IFAD support s countries 
is accessing  Global Climate Funds. In this context, the additional funds provided by the GCF will enable DEFIS+ to 
contribute to meeting such a target with a robust climate rationale, a sound climate risk analysis and a well -structured 
strategy to deal with the negati ve impacts of climate change in six target regions in Madagascar.  
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
DEFIS+ activities will support Madagascar’s national policy for climate change, environment and sustainable 
development and the national strategies, such as the sectoral program for agriculture, livestock and fisheries. DEFIS+ 
directly supports the National Policy for Action on Climate Change by str engthening climate change adaptation, while 
taking into account the country’s needs. It will also promote the integration of climate change into all levels of 
policymaking, as well as research, development and technology transfer in this field. Madagascar is also at the early 
stages of designing a GCF country program (GCF/UNEP Readiness grant). DEFIS+ investments are fully aligned 
with key priority sectors identified in Madagascar’s National Adaptation Plan of Action: infrastructure, water resource 
manageme nt, agriculture and livestock.  According to the National Adaptation Plan, DEFIS + activities are aligned 
and perfectly integrated with the following priorities: (a) Strategic priority for agriculture. Promote resilient agricultura l 
systems. This will primarily involve supporting rural populations (men and women, including people with disabilities) 
in setting up an agriculture that is resilient to climate change, also helping to strengthen the fight against food and 
nutritional insecurity, with a particular focus on the most vulnerable g roups and on agricultural activities differentiated 
between men and women. (b) Developing pilot initiatives for the application of Integrated Models of Resilient 
Agriculture . Madagascar has a wide range of agricultural systems and agroecological practices in place: sowing on 
permanent plant cover, intensive rice cultivation (SRI) and improved rice cultivation (SRA), random irrigation rice 
cultivation (RIA), integration of agri culture and livestock, agroforestry, combinations of agroecological techniques and 
systems, etc.  
 
75 Ibid


---
*Page 62*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
   
 Madagascar’s Nationally Determined Contributions aim to build national resilience to cyclones, floods and droughts 
and give priority to adaptation interventions by 2030, such as the widespread application of resilient agriculture 
models; sustainable and integrated water management, including the mobili sation of surface water resources for 
semi -arid zones and the upgrading of irrigation infrastructure to cope with the reduction in runoff during dry periods; 
reduce GHG emissions and increase carbon sequestration; improve rice farming systems (SRI/SREA) and  the 
implementation of ecosystem -based adaptation good practices. Blue or green infrastructure solutions that integrate 
and interact positively with the rural environment which they are part of must be considered: alternatives to charcoal, 
fossil fuel, wat er abstraction systems, etc. The design of these infrastructures must consider  durability and use of 
resilient materials. DEFIS+ will support measures listed in Madagascar’s Third National Communication, such as 
improved soil management, the development of production systems adapted to climate change and optimal use of 
water resourc es. DEFIS+ will also contribute to  the implementation of Madagascar’s Nationally Appropriate Mitigation 
Actions, focusing on the multiplication of fodder seed production and outreach in pastoral areas and intensification 
of improved seeds production. It will contribute to priority actions defined by Madagascar’s National Capacity Self -
Assessment, including the involvement of regional/local authorities in decision -making on climate change, an  
awareness program to address climate change, training on good practices and solutions identified in its Technology 
Need Assessment, such as strengthening integrated water resources management and the capacity of technical 
officers in charge of water infra structures.  
Since 1979, IFAD has provided USD 404.8 million in financing to a total of 16 projects in Madagascar. IFAD’s COSOP 
focuses on integrated management of natural resources and increasing vulnerable rural households’ resilience. The 
evaluation of the Madagascar country program for the period 2000 -2012 carried  out by the Independent Evaluation 
Office of IFAD indicates satisfactory performance in terms of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability and 
impact on rural poverty. Households receiving IFAD investments have experienced increased agricultural  production 
and productivity, and a marked increase in their cash income. DEFIS+ will scale up successful results from IFAD 
projects (AD2M, FORMAPROD, AROPA, DEFIS, and PROSPERER). The Implementing Agency  will be MINAE, with 
whom IFAD has been working for 40 years and which houses a permanent unit that oversees project implementation 
(CAPFIDA). During the program formulation process, there was continuous engagement with the National 
Designated Authority (N DA), which has endorsed DEFIS+ investments. The MEDD, which hosts the NDA, has 
confirmed that it is on board to support DEFIS+ and optimise synergies with other initiatives that it oversees.  
DEFIS+ has been informed by rounds of discussions and consultations with regional and national stakeholders and 
related formulation missions, all led by the Madagascar government. The consultations included specific meetings 
with representatives from the M inistry of Women's Affaires and focus group discussions with women. In addition to 
MINAE and MEDD, several rounds of consultation were conducted with stakeholders such as MEF, FOFIFA, the 
National Chamber of Agriculture, Federation of the Chamber of Commer ce and Industry, Ministry of Water and 
Energy, the Agriculture Development Fund, General Directorate for Meteorology (DGM), regional authorities, private 
sector entities, family farming communities, civil society and NGOs, WFP, FAO, UNDP, GIZ, CI, OFID and  World 
Bank, and farmers as evidenced by the list of stakeholders meetings held in Annex 7. Furthermore, the engagement 
of Farmers' Organisations in the implementation of the existing project defines an inclusive stakeholder approach as 
FOs are representat ives of the target group.  
During the studies for the rehabilitation of irrigated areas and roads, community consultations must always be carried 
out following the current legislation in Madagascar. For any activity and according to local traditions, meetings with 
local authorities and representatives of local institutions/organizations (in the form of participatory rural appraisals) 
should always be led by service providers in a participatory and inclusive manner. The stakeholders’ consultations 
on the CSA practices are no exception  to this approach. Stakeholders are consulted on the current practices for 
adapting to climate change in their agricultural practices. The traditional knowledge is then built on with the scientific 
projections of climate change and potential solutions are then discussed with communities. Climate change 
adaptation measures can then be prioritised as a result of the discussions with communities. The discussions are 
facilitated by technicians such as extension officers or community leaders.  
These sub -regional consultations also facilitate the development of a strong sense of local ownership over the project 
outcomes. They also occur throughout implementation as part of the M&E strategy in order to evaluate the program's 
progress toward reaching the expected results.  It is important to mention that an MRV analysis was conducted for 
both MINAE and MEDD and it has shown that the Ministries have the necessary skills and capacities to fully ensure 
the lead in the technical implementation and monitoring of DEFIS+ activitie s, outputs and outcomes. Furthermore, 
both MINEA and MEDD have managed large grants from international donors, and in the case of MEDD, it has 
extensive experience successfully managing funds from the GCF. Finally, IFAD has been working in Madagascar 
with the GoM, MINAE, and MEDD for 20+ years, and the partnerships and high professional standards have been 
nurtured .


---
*Page 63*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
   
 D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The overall approach adopted by DEFIS+ is designed to increase efficiency and effectiveness by focusing on the set 
of structural investments associated with the introduction of improved technologies and climate resilient  practices as 
well as the  capacity building of local institutions that will leverage growth in targeted agricultural areas. The integrated 
approach and integration of science and engineering for the in -depth modelling and understanding of agricultural risk 
will inform the structur al investment through the studies that will be undertaken. Furthermore, to move from low -yield 
subsistence farming to market -oriented agriculture, the project's theory of change is based on improving the 
productivity and adaptive capacity of production sys tems to climate change and beneficiaries’ access to markets 
under favourable conditions. Lastly, as the theory of change requires significant investments in basic infrastructure, 
priority will be given to the development of irrigation infrastructure and re habilitation of roads to reduce the risks and 
costs of accessing the nearest markets.  
The main expected benefits for people in the DEFIS+ project area are: (i) create climate resilient rural communities; 
(ii) diversification of income sources of the target populations, especially young people and women and green jobs 
creation in the project  area; (iii) reduced transportation costs through rural road rehabilitation, water storage 
infrastructure and market access; (iv) increased revenues for the rural poor people; (v) improved food security, diet 
quality, diversification and nutrition; and, above all, (vi) greater awareness of and protection from the climate change 
impacts negatively affecting the livelihoods of the rural population.  
DEFIS+ will offer several interrelated direct socio -economic benefits to 447,20 0 households in its area of intervention 
who have access to improved climate smart  technologies , farming practices and infrastructures.  The total farm areas 
to be cultivated with climate efficient technologies and practices is estimated at 16,000 hectares and 8,100 hectares 
of land in sub-watersheds will be treated to reduce their vulnerability to soil -erosion processes. The promotion of 
resilient agroforestry systems and landscape management in rain -fed upland farming areas will concern 10,000 
hectares. At least 150 water tanks/reserv oirs will be installed  and 540 km of feeder roads will be rehabilitated while 
strengthening their climate resilience.  
The procurement of technologies will be done competitively as outlined in Annex 10 (Procurement Plan) led by the 
PMU and MINAE and overseen by IFAD through the no objections that will be provided to the bidding documents 
and draft contracts. The goods to b e procured through national competitive bidding will be divided into lots and 
published in various media to encourage local suppliers including at the regional level to participate. The technologies 
will be distributed to the most vulnerable households in order to catalyse demand from other community members. 
Uptake by other farmers will be encouraged through FFS and demonstrations in the fields of the most vulnerable 
community members. Local entrepreneurs and enterprises will be encouraged to supply the te chnologies and 
strengthen the supply chain where this is weak. The cost structure will be grant based to the most vulnerable 
households while for the rest of the community members they will purchase the technologies. For technologies such 
as the solar ener gy, youth groups and associations will be engaged and trained in the operation and maintenance of 
the equipment as an income generating activity and support to their communities. Women and youth groups will also 
be trained in the manufacture of fuel effici ent cookstoves using local materials. The groups can then sell the cook 
stoves among community members for income generation.  
With the promotion of efficient irrigation systems, watershed management, and improved farming practices and 
varieties and planting materials that are stress tolerant  (rice, maize, cassava, sorghum, groundnut, small ruminants, 
pulses, etc.), DEFIS+ contributes to the implementation of Madagascar's international climate commitments. It also 
aims to empower and strengthen the institutional capacities of smallholder farme rs and their organisations who will 
be better equipped to undertake collective actions, such as managing and maintaining common infrastructures, or 
provide services to their members, and will benefit from the reduction in transaction and transportation cos ts derived 
from the rehabilitation of rural roads opening up remote villages. DEFIS+ with its innovative climate -oriented 
approach will benefit directly and indirectly 3,990,920  beneficiaries  (1,995,460 females and 1,995,460  males).  
The Economic Internal Rate of Return (E -IRR) of DEFIS+ is estimated at 24% with a Net Present Value (E -NPV) of 
USD 255.5 million (Table 8). These results indicate that based on an opportunity cost of capital of 8.5%, DEFIS+ will 
generate a satisfactory E -IRR and is more than justified on economic grounds . Further, details of relevant indicators 
are shown in Section E.  
Table 8: Economic Internal Rate of Return (E -IRR) and Net Present Value (NPV)  
Sensitivity 
Analysis  Base 
case  Costs Increase  Benefits Increase  Decrease of Benefits  Delay of Benefits  
+10%  +20%  +50%  +10%  +20%  -10% -20% - 30% 1 year  2 years


---
*Page 64*
---

D 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 IRR (%)  24% 23% 22% 18% 26% 27% 23% 21% 19% 21% 19% 
NPV (USD 
000) 255 5 26 245 483 235 440  209 006   291 1 21  326 7 17  219 9 31    184 3 35 148 7 40  221 565  189 5 26


---
*Page 65*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
  
  
  
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme contributes as a 
whole, including in respect of any co -financing.   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☐Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the parad igm shift described in section D.2 above by applying three 
assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe th e current state (baseline) and the potential scenario (target) and 
rate the current state (baseline) by using the three -point -scale  rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme will contribute to that  shift/ 
transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer  to section B.2(a) (theory of change).         
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will contribute 
(Description)  Description  Rating  
Scale  Malagasy agriculture faces significant 
challenges, primarily marked by subsistence 
farming exhibiting low productivity per hectare. 
This is closely linked to the limited accessibility 
of services for producers, as well as poor soil 
fertility. The agricultu ral sector faces issues 
such as rural insecurity, the overexploitation of 
natural resources, and heightened 
susceptibility to natural disasters like cyclones, 
droughts, and floods. Furthermore, the 
remoteness of the project regions, coupled with 
deteriorat ing infrastructure, hampers Medium  DEFIS+ will scale up successful results from IFAD projects 
(AD2M, FORMAPROD, AROPA, DEFIS, and PROSPERER 
and transform the climate vulnerable, and unsustainable 
subsistence (mostly slash -and-burn) rainfed agricultural 
sector to a climate -resilient, market -oriented and profitable 
economic sector. The scale of IFAD productive investments 
for sustainable agricultural development and the focus on 
building local capacities constitute a major paradigm shift in 
southern Madagascar renowned for humanitarian and 
emergency assistance. Thus, the project will scale up well -
tested approaches and technologies building on innovative ● Rural development policies and strategies 
are formulated, implemented, and monitored at 
both national and regional levels.  
● The negative climate change impact on 
agriculture, farmers, and production is mitigated by 
an efficient and effective agrometeorological 
system, resilient seed varieties and climate resilient 
infrastructures  
● Institutional and organisational capacities 
are strengthened in terms of sector coordination 
and monitoring of strategies for promoting priority 
climate and agricultural sectors and the delivery of 
services to farmers.


---
*Page 66*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
  
  
 vulnerability to climate change, making it 
difficult for farmers to engage with agricultural 
markets and secure rural finance. The 
cumulative impact of these factors not only 
jeopardizes the livelihoods of those involved in 
agriculture but also contributes  to the overall 
climate vulnerability of the Malagasy 
population. Addressing these challenges is 
crucial not only for the well -being of local 
farmers but also for the resilience and 
sustainability against the negative impact of 
climate in Madagascar.  
The DEFIS+ project capitalises on past positive 
lessons from the DEFIS program and scales up 
experiences tried and tested by other IFAD 
projects and programs to transform agriculture 
into a more productive, sustainable, and 
market -oriented sector ; promotion of climate -
smart agriculture, mobilization of surface water 
resources promotion of intensive or improved 
rice-growing systems (SRI/SRA), upgrading of 
irrigation infrastructure to cope with reduced 
runoff in dry periods: to connect them (i) to 
support ser vices for production and markets, 
irrigation and water control infrastructure; (ii) to 
agricultural advice; and (iii) to technical 
itineraries and improved technologies adapted 
to climate change.  approaches and lessons learnt from previous IFAD 
investments.  
 ● Contractual relations between agricultural 
market players are strengthened.  
● The project will contribute to this 
agricultural transformation by enhancing conditions 
that support climate, environmental and social 
goals ( e.g., improving climate resilience, land 
health and production through the adoption of 
sustainable practices promoted by training and 
facilitated by access to financial products).  
 
Replicability  Agriculture in Madagascar is not presently 
resilient to climate change.  
Existing and pipeline programmes/projects on 
agriculture and rural development address 
Climate Change.  High The DEFIS+ project activities are applied by IFAD to other 
geographic areas in Madagascar and in other countries. The 
project results in a new, replicable, long -term and 
sustainable funding model in other landscapes that 
enhances climate resilience, improv es conservation, 
reduces land degradation and boosts economic 
development. Outside Madagascar, the proposed model of 
a land use transition investment fund is well suited for the ● A long -term financing model is in place 
which enhances climate resilience and boosts 
economic development.  
● A land use transition investment fund is 
established.


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
  
  
 Many good practices on climate change 
resilient and replicable agricultural techniques 
are already in place and replicable across 
DEFIS+ zones and respond to the country's 
national adaptation plan and agricultural sector 
strategies.  most vulnerable countries, where unsustainable agriculture 
takes up an increasing share of available land, resulting in 
deforestation, land degradation and an agricultural sector 
not resilient to climate change. The Investment Fund is 
replicated in other l east developed countries in Africa that 
need large -scale climate investments in rural areas to 
finance the activities necessary to achieve the objectives set 
in their NDCs and in their national adaptation programs.  
Sustainability  The existence of numerous strategic framework 
documents conducive to the implementation of 
actions to combat climate change.  Existence of 
a national action plan to combat climate change 
and a national strategy for the agricultural 
sector to combat climate change, but a low 
percentage of funds allocated to the agricultural 
sector.  
Little effective application of existing regulatory 
texts.  
Infrastructure management structures exist but 
are not dynamic and functional.  
Absence or weakness of technical agricultural 
advisory services.  
Limited use of technological innovations. Weak 
access to appropriate adaptation technologies 
and practices.  
Weak capacity to predict the impact of climate 
change in the project area.  
Weak organisation capacities  of farmers and 
poor connection to production and market 
support services.  Medium  Government institutions continue to maintain and build 
climate smart  infrastructure. Local communities adopt 
climate smart  practices and manage land and water 
resources sustainably. Farmers have continued access to 
markets and continuously increase their agricultural 
production. Agricultural development institutions take 
ownership of activities and ensure the sustainability o f the 
investments from an institutional standpoint. DEFIS+ feeds 
into national policy dialogues and strategies, particularly 
those pertaining to climate change, to ensure that the 
project’s components a re integrated into and can inform the 
country’s legal and policy framework. Partnerships between 
producers and market organisations, as well as the inclusion 
of smallholder farmers in the formal economy will generate 
social and economic benefits that last well beyond the 
project’s duration.  Innovative climate prediction tools can 
reduce the impact of climate change and improve human 
well-being.  ● The establishment of simple and efficient 
water harvesting systems that require minimal 
technical skills and that can be easily managed and 
maintained      by beneficiaries beyond the project’s 
lifetime.  
● Beneficiaries adopt climate smart  
practices & efficient water use management.  
● A maintenance programme for roads, 
storage and packaging infrastructures is 
established by the communities and financed 
through user contributions/ service payments and 
Regions budgets.  
● Rural communities have access to better 
climate change predictions and, consequently, can 
adapt better to the negative impact of climate 
change.  
● Community members are trained in 
operation and maintenance of small -scale  
infrastructure.  
● Climate smart  infrastructure and 
agricultural practices are integrated into the 
country’s legal and policy framework.  
● Strengthened sustainable business 
relationships between farmers’ organisations and 
market operators.  
● Households have diversified their sources 
of income.  
● Small -scale renewable and efficient 
energy options, such as biogas production units 
and solar dryers’  technologies and improved 
cooking stoves (as alternative to firewood and


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
 charcoal) are adopted and continue to be built 
using local materials and local expertise.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as applicable 
for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are u nable to measure any given project/programme outcomes, 
project /programme -specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).   
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final76 
Total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries  Core 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic Reports  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89  440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 
(Female: 1 771 
859; 1 771 860)  As outlined in Annex 18, direct 
beneficiaries are those 
receiving direct interventions 
from the GCF funded project. 
The 447,20 1 beneficiaries will 
be benefitting from the following 
interventions: i.) The 
development of efficient water 
management systems; ii.) 
Regular access to reliable -
climate data; iii.) The diffusion 
and adoption of resilient 
agricultural inputs, new 
technologie s and management 
practices; iv.) Improved climate 
resilience of basic rural 
infrastructure; v.) Training and 
capacity building services; vi.) 
Knowledge management on the 
adaptation of food production 
 
76 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG e mission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum n umber of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
  
  
 systems to climate change and 
on carbon sequestration. 
Methodology: The project -level 
M&E Specialist will provide a 
registry for each DEFIS+ region 
to be filled in. The information 
will be consolidated and used to 
assess the level of achievement 
of the tar gets.  
These registers will be 
supplemented by surveys 
conducted every 2 years.  
ARA1 Most vulnerable people 
and communities  Core 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89  440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 
(Female: 1 771 
859; Male: 1 771 
860) Stable political and macro -
economic environment  
ARA2 Health, well -being, food 
and water security  Core 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; 
External data will be 
collected from 
Governmental reports, 
surveys from research 
institutions, UN reports 
(FAO, UNICEF), etc.  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89 440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 
(Female: 1 771 
859; Male: 1 771 
860) Agro -forestry and watershed 
management activities are 
effectively implemented  
ARA3 Infrastructure and built 
environment  Core 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89  440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 Farmers assisted with heavy 
rehabilitation works


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
  
  
 744; Female: 
708 744)  (Female: 1 771 
859; Male: 1 771 
860) 
ARA 4: Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  Core 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; Annual 
Progress Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89  440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744) Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 
(Female: 1 771 
859; Male: 1 771 
860) Adoption of climate resilience 
technologies  
 
ARA1 Most vulnerable people 
and communities  
 Supplementary 2.1: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting improved and/or 
new climate -resilient livelihood options  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89  440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 
(Female: 1 771 
859; Male: 1 771 
860) As outlined in annex 18, this 
includes the number of farmers 
trained in climate -resilient 
agricultural production 
technologies and practices and 
indicating that their knowledge 
of climate adaptive practices 
has increased (ARA1)  
  
Methodology: The project -level 
M&E Specialist will provide a 
registry for each DEFIS+ region 
to be filled in. The information 
will be consolidated and used to 
assess the level of achievement 
of the targets.  
These registers will be 
supplemented by surveys 
conducted every 2 years.


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
  
  
 ARA2 Health, well -being, food 
and water security  
 
 Supplementary 2.3: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with more climate -
resilient water security  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports ; UN 
water reports  0 Direct: 107 328 
(Male: 53 664; 
Female: 53 
664) 
Indirect: 850 
493 (Male; 425 
246 Female: 
425 247)  Direct: 268  321 
(Male: 134 160; 
Female: 134 
161) 
Indirect: 2 126 
231 (Male: 
1 063 116; 
Female: 1  063 
115) As outlined in annex 18, tis 
refers to the number of farmers 
using renewable energy and 
energy efficient and water 
efficient technologies (ARA3) 
leading to improved and more 
reliable (year -round and year -to 
year) access to safe, sufficient 
and affordable w ater to meet 
basic needs for drinking, 
sanitation and hygiene.  
Assumption: Water units owned 
by communities not HHs  
Methodology: The project -level 
M&E Specialist will provide a 
registry for each DEFIS+ region 
to be filled in. The information 
will be consolidated and used to 
assess the level of achievement 
of the targets.  
These registers will be 
supplemented by surveys 
conducted every 2 years.  
ARA2 Health, well-being, food 
and water security  Supplementary 2.2: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with improved food 
security  Mid- term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89  440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 
(Female: 1 771 
859; Male: 1 771 
860) As outlined in annex 18, this 
includes the number of farmers 
trained in climate -resilient 
agricultural production 
technologies and practices and 
indicating that their knowledge 
of climate adaptive practices 
has increased (ARA1)


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
  
  
 Assumption: Adoption of 
climate resilience technologies   
Methodology: The project -level 
M&E Specialist will provide a 
registry for each DEFIS+ region 
to be filled in. The information 
will be consolidated and used to 
assess the level of achievement 
of the targets. These registers 
will be supplemented by 
surveys c onducted every 2 
years.  
 
ARA3 Infrastructure and built 
environment  
 Core 3: Value of physical assets made 
more resilient to the effects of climate 
change and/or more able to reduce 
GHG emissions  Annual Progress Reports; 
District Development and 
Economic reports  0 USD 10  215 
196 
8 500 ha of 
irrigated 
perimeter  
300 km of 
roads 
rehabilitated  USD  18  573 
066 
15 000 ha of 
irrigated 
perimeters  
540 km of roads 
rehabilitated  Assumption: Farmers assisted 
with heavy rehabilitation works . 
Trainers, actors and 
professionals will be trained on 
new standards (ARA3).  
Methodology: The project -level 
M&E Specialist will provide a 
registry for each DEFIS+ region 
to be filled in. The information 
will be consolidated and used to 
assess the level of achievement 
of the targets.  
These registers will be 
supplemented by surveys 
conducted every 2 years  
ARA 4: Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  Core 4: Hectares of natural resource 
areas brought under improved low 
emission and/or climate -resilient 
management practices  Mid-term and Final 
Evaluation Reports; GIS 0 50% of restored 
ecosystems  100% of 
restored 
ecosystems  Adoption of climate change 
adaptation activities with 
mitigation co -benefits and


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
  
  
 restoration of 1,500 ha of forest 
ecosystems.  
ARA 4: Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  4.1 Hectares of terrestrial forest, 
terrestrial non -forest, freshwater and 
coastal -marine areas brought under 
restoration and/or improved ecosystems  
(unit: hectares)        Annual Progress 
Reports; Mid - term and 
Final Evaluation Reports  0 6,000 ha  
Terrestrial 
forest: 2,100 ha  
Terrestrial non -
forest: 3,900 ha  18,100 ha  
Terrestrial 
forest: 6,330 ha  
Terrestrial non -
forest: 11,770 
ha Planned agro -forestry and 
watershed management 
activities  are effectively 
implemented.  
Annex 18 also includes 
information on the number of 
farmers practicing agroforestry 
and adaptive practices (ARA4)  
Methodology: Information 
available in project 
implementation and supervision 
reports. These reports can be 
complemented with surveys 
and GIS mapping.


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
  
  
  
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and pr oject/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenar io and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to comple te this section.  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  Low-performing 
subsistence farming 
systems. Malagasy farmers 
are particularly vulnerable 
to any shocks affecting the 
agricultural system owing 
to their high livelihood 
dependence on the 
agriculture sector, high 
occurrence of climate 
related disasters, limi ted 
climate resilience 
investments and capacity, 
and lack of access to 
formal safety nets.  low Malagasy farmers are 
enabled & supported in the 
adoption of more efficient 
and sustainable agricultural 
practices ( e.g., new 
technologies and access to 
financial products to afford 
them) allowing them to 
increase their climate 
resilience, production and 
incomes.  ● Capacity building & 
trainings  
● Adoption of smart  
practices  
● Increased financial 
access  
● Increased access and 
use of climate information  
● Improved land and 
water management  
● Climate resilient  
infrastructure  Multiple sub -national areas 
within a country  
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformatio
n at the sectoral, local, or 
national level  Farmers sell very little 
produce due to i.) low 
production levels; ii.) low 
access to markets due to 
poor roads and iii.) low 
bargaining power & 
informal relations with 
market players.   low Malagasy farmers are able 
to produce enough to meet 
their own consumption 
needs and to sell produce 
in markets. Farmers have 
access to these markets 
and the ability to assure a 
fair price.   ● Increased access to 
markets  
● Increased access to 
market information  
● Contractual relations 
between agricultural 
market players are 
strengthened.  Multiple sub -national areas 
within a country


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
This section should list out project/programme -specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1 -E.4). 
List down tailored indicators to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the  freedom to decide 
against which outcomes they would like to set project/programme specific indicators. If any co -benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are 
encouraged to add and monitor co -benefit indicators under the “ Project/program me co -benefit indicators ” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numb ering for outputs under 
this section should correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1:  
Strengthened climate 
resilience of 
agricultural production 
systems  Average yields of 
agricultural production  Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports  0 15% 30% Adoption and implication of 
beneficiaries;  
No major changes in the 
country’s Agricultural Policy  
Output 1.1. Improved 
water management for 
sustainable agriculture  Area of land with 
improved water 
management systems  Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports; Basin 
Management Regulations  7096 ha of land is 
irrigated in the 
intervention area 
by other projects 
and programmes  8 500 ha  15 000 ha  Adoption and implication of 
communes;  
No major changes in the 
country's Agricultural policy  
Protected areas 
through the 
implementation of anti -
erosion measures, 
protection of 
watersheds and 
reforestation  Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports; Basin 
Management Regulations  0 5 000 ha  8 100 ha  Adaptation by farmers and 
implication of commune 
and region;  
Development plans at 
different levels put in place, 
equipped with the means 
to implement them, and 
benefiting from guaranteed 
land security  
 Number of farmers 
engaged in the 
effective management 
of connects sub –
watersheds and Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports  0 Direct: 107 328 
(Male: 53 664; 
Female: 53 
664) Direct: 268 321 
(Male: 134 160; 
Female: 134 
161) Engagement of farmers 
and incentives to adopt 
improved water 
management techniques


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
 irrigated perimeters 
and adopting improved 
water management 
techniques  Indirect: 850 
493 (Male; 425 
246; Female: 
425 247)  Indirect: 2  126 
231 (Male: 
1 063 116; 
Female: 1 063 
115) 
Output 1.2: Enhanced 
agro-climatic information 
systems, new 
technologies and 
initiatives  Number of farmers 
with access to agro -
climate data  Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports; field 
surveys  0 Direct: 71 552 
(Male: 35 776; 
Female: 35 
776) 
Indirect: 566 
995 (Male: 283 
498; Female: 
283 497)  Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89 440; 
Female: 89 
441) 
Indirect: 1 417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Engagement of DGM, 
SRM and DRAEP  
Areas covered by 
climate smart 
agricultural and 
agroforestry systems  Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic Reports  0 6 000 ha 10 000 ha  Adoption by farmers of 
climate smart agricultural 
and agroforestry systems  
Number of farmers 
reporting the adoption 
of new/improved 
technologies, practices 
or inputs  Monitoring and supervision 
reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports; Field 
surveys  0 Direct: 107 328 
(Male: 53 664; 
Female: 53 
664) 
Indirect: 
850 493 (Male: 
425 246; 
Female: 
425 247) Direct: 268 321 
(Male: 134 160; 
Female: 134 
161) 
Indirect: 
2 126 231 
(Male: 
1 063 116; 
Female: 
1 063 115) Interests/incentives of the 
actors is maintained  
Number of farmers 
using renewable 
energy and energy 
efficient and water 
efficient technologies  Monitoring and supervision 
reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports; Field 
surveys  0 Direct: 107 328 
(Male: 53 664; 
Female: 53 
664) 
Indirect: 
850 493 (Male: 
425 246; 
Female: 
425 247) Direct: 268 321 
(Male: 134 160; 
Female: 134 
161) 
Indirect: 
2 126 231 
(Male: 
1 063 116; Interests/incentives of the 
actors is maintained


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 Female: 
1 063 115) 
Outcome 2: Increased 
income generation 
through improved 
market accessibility  Average annual farm 
income per household  Monitoring and supervision 
reports;  
Household survey  838 100 
ariary/190.447 
USD  4 000 000 
ariary/909.09 
USD  4 500 000 
ariary/1 022.72  Increase in the number of 
productions placed on the 
market and development of 
long-term relationships 
with market operators  
Exchange rate: 1 USD = 
4 400 ariary  
Output 2.1. Reinforced 
rural access roads  Kilometres of unpaved 
rural access roads in 
good condition all year  Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; District 
Development and 
Economic reports  0 300 km (USD 
27 million)  540km (USD 
48.6 million)  Adoption and implication of 
communes  
% of ground water  
recharge at specific 
sites along the 
greened road  Monitoring and recording 
of hydrological data  0-1% (average)77 Increase in 
ground water 
recharge by at 
least 2.5% at 
specific sites  Increase in 
ground water 
recharge by 5% 
at specific 
sites78 Farm ponds and c heck 
dams are constructed, and 
community support 
ensures their sustainability 
and care  
Output 2.2. Improved 
capacity to build and 
maintain rural 
infrastructure  Number of trainers, 
actors and 
professionals trained 
on new standards and 
whose maintenance 
capacity has improved 
as a result   Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; Field Surveys; 
Training Reports; Follow 
up tests on trainings  0 Direct: 71 552 
(Male: 35 776; 
Female: 35 
776) 
Indirect:  850 
493 (Male: 425 
246; 
Female:425 
247) Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89 440; 
Female: 89 
441) 
Indirect: 1 417 
488 (Male708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Adoption and implication of 
the actors;  
The control and validation 
bodies remain operational  
Outcome 3: Improved 
food and nutrition 
security   Households receiving 
targeted support to 
improve their nutrition  Monitoring and Supervision 
Reports; Field Surveys; 
Training Reports;  0  100 000  270 000 Adoption of good nutrition 
practices  
 
77The amount of ground water recharge is influenced by various factors which include topography, land use, land cover, among ot hers.  
78This estimation is based on the globally estimated average annual recharge rates for semi -arid and arid regions (see Hoori Ajami, Groundwater Recharge in Encyclopedia of Geology  (Second 
Edition), 2021)


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 Output 3.1 Knowledge 
on climate change and 
food security generated 
and shared  Number of studies 
carried out; Number of 
knowledge products  
produced; Number of 
awareness events; 
Number of exchange 
visits  Capitalization reports; 
Baseline study; Mid -term 
study  0 8 studies  
10 thematic 
knowledge 
products  
5 awareness 
events  
15 exchange 
visits  20 studies  
20 thematic 
knowledge 
products  
10 awareness 
events  
30 exchange 
visits  Expertise is available at 
the different levels  
Number of farmers 
trained in climate -
resilient agricultural 
production 
technologies and 
practices and 
indicating that their 
knowledge of climate 
adaptive practices has 
increased  Monitoring Reports and 
Surveys; District 
Development and 
Economic reports; Follow 
up tests on trainings  0 Direct: 178 881 
(Male: 89  440; 
Female: 
89 441) 
Indirect: 1  417 
488 (Male: 708 
744; Female: 
708 744)  Direct: 447  201 
(Male: 223  601 
Female: 
223 600) 
Indirect: 3 
543 719 
(Female: 1 771 
859; 1 771 860)  Expertise is available at 
different levels  
Project/programme co -
benefit indicators        
Improved health  Percentage of women 
of reproductive age in 
the targeted areas 
reporting a minimum 
dietary diversity 
(measured with the 
MDD -W indicator: 
Minimum -Dietary 
Diversity -Women)  DEFIS baseline, mid -term 
and end -line survey  7,1% of women 
have attained the 
MDD in the project 
area 50% 70% Adoption of climate -
resilient practices, 
improved incomes and 
adoption of good nutrition 
practices. No major events 
affects food availability.  
Improved WASH  
 Number of people 
reporting improved 
access to basic 
sanitation   Government reports, UN 
agency reports (UNICEF, 
UNWATER, etc),  10% of the 
population have 
access to basic 
sanitation.  Linked to 
beneficiaries of 
Output 1.1.  
  
Direct: 107 328 
(Male: 53 664; Linked to 
beneficiaries of 
Output 1.1  
  
Direct: 268 321 
(Male: 134 160; Improved water 
management lowers risks 
of water borne diseases 
and population is also 
facilitated in adopting 
improved sanitation 
practices


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 Female: 53 
664) 
Indirect: 850 
493 (Male; 425 
246; Female: 
425 247)  Female: 134 
161) 
Indirect: 2  126 
231 (Male: 
1 063 116; 
Female: 1  063 
115) 
 
 
 
Improved climate 
change mitigation  
 
 
 
 GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  EX-ACT analysis  0  - 836 334.5 
tCO2 -eq 
(considering 
implementation 
and 
capitalization 
phases as in 
EX-ACT)  
 
- 250 899 tCO2 -
eq (considering 
annual 
averages over 3 
years)  - 1 672  669 
tCO2 -eq 
(considering 
implementation 
and 
capitalization 
phase as in EX -
ACT)  
- 501 798  tCO2 -
eq (considering 
annual average 
over 6 years)  Co-benefit indicator related 
to GHG reductions/low 
emissions development 
pathways and sustainable 
development  
Adoption of climate change 
adaptation practices with 
mitigation co -benefits, 
improved carbon sink via 
reforestation, and 
restoration of 1.500 ha of 
forest ecosystems  
 
The EX -ACT methodology 
V.9 will be the employed. 
Methodology: tCO2eq 
flows are calculated from 
land use changes (e.g., 
afforestation), cropland, 
grassland and livestock, 
forest management, inputs, 
and investments.  
The EX -ACT tool 
calculates total t CO2eq 
avoided or sequestered 
over the total lifespan of 
the project. Please refer to 
Annex 17 for further 
details.  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
 All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation 
timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please 
number sub -activities as shown below to associate to the related activity.  
 
Activities  
 Description  
 Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1. Protection of irrigation schemes 
against climate change impacts  
 Protection of irrigated schemes from the 
destructive impacts of violent rain and climate 
impacts  Improve drainage networks, 
irrigation channels, de -silting 
systems, water retention works, 
etc. 15 000 ha of irrigated 
schemes strengthened and 
improved  
Activity 1.1.2. Sustainable sub -watersheds 
(adjacent to irrigated schemes) management and 
restoration of landscape  Biological and mechanical protection of sub -
watersheds, soil management, water infiltration 
management  
Planting fast grown trees and  species resilient to 
climate change  Plant rows of herbaceous plants or 
shrubs along curves; build 
benches, terraces and mechanisms 
to prevent gullies from forming  
Establishment of nurseries and 
production plants  
Implementation of reforestation 
activities  8 100 ha of land improved 
on water infiltration with 
anti-erosion systems of 
which 5 500 ha of 
landscape restored and 
reforested  
900 technicians are trained  
Activity 1.1.3. Strengthening capacities of Water 
Users Associations to manage water and apply 
sustainable water management practices  Training on climate change adaptation, water 
resource preservation and management plans  
Organization of exchange visits between Water 
Users Association (WUA)  Information on and identification of 
leaders; organization of visits; 
facilitation of the evaluation of the 
visits’ results  1 400 WUA members 
exchanging and learning 
good practises  
Activity 1.1.4. Construction of climate smart water 
tanks for drip -irrigation and for small livestock  Build a surface water storage system to irrigate 
the terraces and reduce runoff  Identification of sites and user; 
technical feasibility study and 
construction. Training for farmers  150 water tanks in use  
Activity 1.2.1.  Installation of automated agro -
meteorological stations and development of flood 
and drought monitoring and forecasting system  Acquisition and installation of automated agro -
meteorological stations  Partnership with DGM;  
choice and acquisition of stations in 
collaboration with DGM; installation 
of the stations; training for 
technicians  6 automated agro -
meteorological stations are 
operational  
Activity 1.2.2. Capacity building of decentralised 
government (SRM & DRAEP)  Support for processing and distribution of agro -
meteorological data  Partnership with SRM and DRAEP; 
elaboration of work plans; support 
for the execution of work plans, 24 DRAEP and SRM 
teams trained and involved 
in processing and


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
 especially data distribution; 
monitoring of the quality of the data 
distribution system  disseminating agro 
meteorological data  
178 880 farmers use agro 
meteorological information 
in the implementation of 
the cultural campaign  
Activity 1. 2.3 Promotion and dissemination of 
meteorological and climate smart agriculture 
practices  Area restored with the adoption of intelligent 
agriculture  Farmers practicing  Climate Smart 
Agriculture Practices  Adoption of intelligent 
agricultural on 10 000 ha  
New methods of integrated pest management 
disseminated  Training farmers on modern pest 
management control in the FFS  At least 3 new methods of 
integrated pest 
management techniques 
adapted to the context of 
FFS 
Quantity of additional seeds produced by the 
CPSA per year (tons)  Support the Agnarafaly Seed 
Production Center (CPSA) and 
Kianjavato Center in the 
multiplication and promotion of 
certified or quality declared seeds.  Several tons per year of 
certified or quality declared 
seeds  
Numbers of farmers benefiting from improved 
climate -resilient species and varieties of seeds  Training farmers on Climate Smart 
Agriculture Practices and resistant 
seed varieties  Annex 18 includes the 
number of people adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood 
options  
Number of REEPS built  Climate smart water tanks installed 
and made available for livestock, 
crops, and farmers. Two models:  
conventional water storage tanks 
(gravity water tanks) and buried 
sand -filled water tanks  150 units of climate smart 
water tanks are installed  
Area with resilient fodder production  Training to improve the quality and 
quantity of fodder. Production of 
high-quality resilient fodder for the 
livestock  1 500 ha of land will be 
improved to produce 
resilient fodder  
Activity 1.2.4. Promotion and dissemination of 
sustainable home technologies and social 
initiatives  Number of farmers using renewable energy and 
energy efficient and water efficient technologies  Identification of farmers benefiting 
from green renewable technology  2 500 farmers trained on 
the utilisation of new 
technologies


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 Activity 2.1.1. Reinforcement of unpaved rural 
access roads to reduce climate change impacts 
and water collection along these roadways for 
agricultural use  KM of roads repaired (repairs to critical sections 
of rural access roadways, drainage, pavement; 
construction of underground water recharge 
structures)  Identification of roads in need of 
repair and the works that need to 
be done; completion of road work; 
support to communes for the 
establishment of a maintenance 
program  540 km of roads are 
repaired or improved to 
make them more resilient 
to climate change  
Activity 2.1.2.  Training on construction standards 
related to climate change  Number of technicians trained on construction 
standards related to climate change  Information on and identification of 
individuals to train; organisation of 
training sessions; monitoring of the 
appropriation of knowledge  178 880 regional and local 
technicians trained on 
construction standards 
related to climate change  
Activity 3.1.1 Training rural development actors on 
climate change and food production systems for 
enhanced nutrition  Number of rural actors trained on climate change 
impacts and measures (training on climate 
change; training on nutrition and gender; farmer 
field schools (FFS) on climate change)  Building awareness, information, 
training sessions; monitoring of the 
appropriation of knowledge; 
monitoring of their use  
Development/update of training 
manuals, organisation of training 
sessions through FFS and 
community based SBCC activities  
Selection and awareness -building 
of trainees; organisation of farmer 
field schools; support for trained 
producers  447 200 trained rural 
actors  
45 000 producers trained 
on improved management 
practices of which 50% are 
women and 30% are youth  
 
Activity 3.1.2.  Exchange visits on climate resilient 
food systems   Number of people involved in exchange visits 
and indicating that their knowledge of climate 
adaptive practices has increased  Identification of best practices, 
organising exchange visits, 
promoting peer mentoring  360 participants in 
exchange visits  
 
Activity 3.1.3. Capitalization of best practices and 
knowledge on food and nutrition security measures  Number of best practices products  Identification of best practices and 
successful approaches, carrying 
studies and publishing knowledge 
products  20 studies carried and 
knowledge products 
produced  
Degradation baseline 
enriched


---
*Page 83*
---

F 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
   
  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The monitoring, reporting and evaluation (M&E) system of DEFIS+ will focus on the results and outcomes identified 
in the logical framework and AWP/Bs. It follows the procedures clearly set out in the IFAD Monitoring Manual (third 
edition). This system is a lso used to assess the work of implementing partners in order to guarantee regular, 
systematic implementation of harmonised tools for data collection and management (databases, GIS) and reporting, 
as well as for knowledge management to evaluate knowledge c apital and identify good practices.  
 
A participatory M&E process will be used to ensure the establishment of a good understanding of stakeholders’ 
expectations and a common approach since the beginning. This will facilitate the appropriation and adoption of the 
information and results of the analysis generated by the system. This approach seeks to engage all stakeholders in: 
establishing a deeper, common comprehension of the objectives, strategies and appropriate information needs; 
organising collective moments of critical reflection to adjust  intervention strategies where needed; and using 
monitoring data as tools to support management and decision -making.  
 
DEFIS+ M&E unit is led by an M&E officer, with the support of a specialist in charge of monitoring climate change 
adaptation that will be recruited, a national assistant and M&E officers based in the inter -regional coordination units. 
The M&E officer on cl imate change adaptation and mitigation, to be hired with GCF funds, will be fully responsible for 
all M&E and knowledge management activities financed by the project.  
 
The M&E system will be used for: continuous, systematic internal monitoring of the implementation of planned 
activities and progress on different levels of outcomes, assessed on a biannual and annual basis; periodic internal 
evaluations specific thematic e valuations undertaken to respond to identified needs; and periodic external 
evaluations. The latter includes baseline surveys carried out at the beginning of the project and impact assessments 
at the project end to determine the benefits generated by the p roject activities.  
 
The quantification of adaptation beneficiaries (direct) is based on two conditions. The first condition is that the 
individuals receive direct interventions from the GCF funded project. The 447,200 beneficiaries will benefit from the 
following intervention s: i.) The development of efficient water management systems; ii.) Regular access to reliable -
climate data; iii.) The diffusion and adoption of resilient agricultural inputs, new technologies, and management 
practices; iv.) Improved climate resilience of b asic rural infrastructure; v.) Training and capacity building services; vi.) 
Knowledge management on the adaptation of food production systems to climate change and on carbon 
sequestration.  
 
The second condition is that these beneficiaries receive measurable adaptation benefits. All of these interventions 
aim to increase the beneficiaries’ adaptive capacity, which is a combination of assets and abilities that can be used 
to “prepare for and un dertake actions to reduce adverse impacts, moderate harm, or exploit beneficial opportunities” 
(IPCC, 2012). The above interventions will directly lead to measurable adaptation benefits, including increased 
resilience to climate change, increased food and water security, and improved livelihoods. The ToC describes the 
way in which the interventions will lead to these benefits. Food security, for example, is enhanced through improved 
agricultural production, while improved water security will be achieved thr ough better water management practices.  
The quantification of adaptation beneficiaries (indirect) will be a combination of primary and secondary data collection 
and extrapolation. Primary data collection will consist of surveys, and secondary data collection will consist of 
reviewing and triangu lating national census data and information gathered from government counterparts and other 
agencies in the project area. It is envisaged that the following beneficiaries will be considered indirect beneficiaries of 
adaptation interventions. Details are in cluded in Annex 11 (page 1 -3 and tables).  
 
Twice a year, the Government (MINAE, MEF, MEDD, and NDA) and IFAD will organise supervision missions with the 
goal of assessing progress on activities and the level of funds disbursement, the observance of administrative and 
financial procedures and the ab ility of the project activities to contribute to the achievement of the project’s objectives.  
DEFIS+ will publish on a biannual and annual basis a progress report that presents an overview of the activities 
carried out and their cost, the products and results obtained and the level of progress achieved on the objectives


---
*Page 84*
---

F 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
   
  
 
F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
The DEFIS+ risk is assessed as part of project design for IFAD funded projects within the parameters of IFAD’s risk 
framework. It takes into consideration the country environment, PEFA reports, lessons learned from other projects 
implemented by the EE and diagnostics from other International Financial Institutions. Risk assessments are updated 
on a continuing basis throughout project life,  based on performance and audit findings.  
 
Introducing and adopting a paradigm shift towards sustainable and climate -resilient farming practices is a major 
challenge for both rural development actors and smallholders . The main risks that DEFIS+ will face during 
implementation are linked to: (i) the limited number and capacity of public and private service providers in remote rural 
areas; (ii) smallholder farmers’ lack of knowledge and resources to invest in more effic ient and more climate -resilient 
agricultural production systems; and (iii) producer s’ low level of organisation and integration into more lucrative value 
chains, which prevents them from obtaining higher prices for their agricultural products.  
 
Climate change risks, which have been increasing in recent years, raise the risk of poor harvests or crop failures and, 
as a result, of problems of food security and the erosion of rural households’ productive assets. The pro ject’s main risk 
factors and mitigation measures are presented in detail below. Overall, considering  the mitigation measures proposed 
below, the level of impact of the risks and the probability of their occurrence will be medium to low.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  defined in the AWP/Bs as well as the expected outputs and outcomes. These reports will be distributed to the line 
ministry, NSC members, the NDA and IFAD. DEFIS+ will promote knowledge and learning in all investment areas, 
including the design and developm ent of resilient agricultural infrastructures and production systems and efficient 
water management techniques. The overall approach to knowledge and learning relies on learning -based approaches 
such as farmer field schools, exchange visits, communities of  practice, learning routes, contributions to thematic 
networks, e -Library, training, and capacity support and on already proven knowledge management methods and 
tools. The goal is to generate a detailed repertoire of good practices in the area of climate c hange adaptation.  
 
DEFIS+ Outcome 3 is specifically designed to identify paths to knowledge development and build on partnerships 
between public and private entities to generate and disseminate further learning. The DEFIS+ M&E officer will be in 
charge of supporting these kn owledge management activities in close collaboration with the local IFAD M&E officer. 
Approaches to identifying and disseminating lessons learned will include the use of various tools, including websites, 
case studies, policy briefs, training sessions, kno wledge sharing events and workshops, radios, etc.  
 
DEFIS+ will create sustainable enabling conditions for both climate change adaptation and rural economy 
transformation by building the capacity of local actors and regional authorities to plan infrastructure (e.g., rural roads 
and water management infrastr uctures) and natural resource use in line with expected climate change impacts. 
Furthermore, through Outcome 3, DEFIS+ will support an enhanced policy dialogue and the development of evidence -
based policies. The GCF investments will lift the structural bar riers to resilient agriculture related to infrastructures, 
production systems and/or capacity, which will further contribute to create an enabling environment. Assistance to 
key rural stakeholders such as chambers of commerce, farmer associations and marke t organisations will also help 
lift institutional barriers and create an environment that is more conducive to a productive and climate resilient sector 
and economy. Annex 11 includes a full description of the Monitoring and Evaluation Plans.  Annex 11 incl udes a full 
description of the Monitoring and Evaluation Plans.


---
*Page 85*
---

F 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
   
 There are few public and private service providers in remote rural areas and the ones that do exist have limited 
capacity to intervene and few qualified staff members. These weaknesses may reduce the quality of support for 
producers and their appropriation  of the proposed climate change adaptation measures.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Carefully defined personnel requirements will be broadly publicized to ensure that the most qualified individuals are 
able to apply. Service providers will be selected based on their skills , expertise  and geographical presence . Partnership 
agreements and service contracts will be results -based and renewable based on performance. The staff of inter -
regional coordination units and the national office will support and monitor service providers regularly. DEFIS+ will also 
propose t raining for personnel responsible for giving support to rural producers.  The FFS approach, which promotes 
peer to peer learning and the capacity building of local technicians and extension services will also  ensure more local 
level expertise is available.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Smallholder farmers lack the training and resources needed to adequately manage the resources of their natural 
surroundings. Their level of organisation is insufficient to enable them to increase their productivity levels and seize 
market opportunities. The few farmers’ organisations that exist are often not very professional, act only lo cally and do 
not have the capacity to expand their range of activities, connect to services networks or integrate into more developed 
value chains.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Meetings and information sessions will be held with rural communities on the support that the program proposes to 
offer. The goal is to clearly explain the kinds of support offered, the expected results, the selection process and the 
eligibility conditions  for beneficiaries. The meetings will serve to clarify doubts, discuss the expectations and 
commitments of the different parties involved and build trust among group members and in the program. Mechanisms 
to strengthen communication and ensure transparent decision -making will follow IFAD guidelines. The program will 
support the organisation of the groups, training for their members and their access to resources to be used to develop 
services for their members. Small -scale seed producer organisations will be  called on to play an important role in the 
dissemination of climate -resilient varieties and species. The organisational and technical training sessions offered in 
the field and exchange visits shall help producers to improve their knowledge and capacity t o analyse the constraints 
they face and to manage farming activities.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Tensions and conflicts over access to developed land, particularly the plots along the irrigated perimeters, may arise 
among people/farmers/herders and more vulnerable households.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Meetings and information sessions will be held in advance, before investments are made. These meetings shall serve 
to eliminate all ambiguities and discuss potential problems or conflicts that could hinder or even block progress on 
development activities o r the future use of developed plots of land. A preliminary study on the land tenure situation of 
the different plots will be carried out. Communities will be associated to the planning and management of the works 
based on participatory maps. In the plannin g phase of the works, coordination and management committees will be 
formed and officially registered as user associations. Traditional and administrative authorities and commune officials


---
*Page 86*
---

F 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
   
 will be fully involved in the planning and monitoring of the implementation of the investments since the beginning of the 
project.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Climate risks are severe, particularly in the DEFIS+ area of intervention, which is highly exposed to prolonged droughts 
and violent rains. The risks of sand accumulating in water retention or distribution works are high. Cyclones often have 
devastating impacts on infrastructures and crops.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The irrigated perimeters will be designed and built in accordance with the NIHYCRI and systems to protect areas from 
floods and erosion coming from the sub -watersheds will be strengthened. Infrastructures will be built in compliance 
with standards for prot ection against cyclones to limit damages. Training and support for WUAs will improve the 
management of water resources and irrigation networks and therefore, the performance of irrigated perimeters. Anti -
erosion works and improvements to vegetation cover w ill allow farmers to preserve and improve the productivity 
potential of their fields. Strengthening community management capacities is fundamental to ensure the adequate use 
and preservation of watershed resources.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
It is often very difficult for beneficiaries, the communes or state services to ensure the upkeep and good maintenance 
of rural infrastructures.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
DEFIS+ will adopt an approach for the appropriation of the works by beneficiary WUAs that begins in the planning, 
monitoring and participation in the works and continues until the official handover of the works. At that point, a definitive  
transfer agreeme nt will be signed, which defines the responsibilities of the different stakeholders after the program has 
ended. In training activities for WUAs, the management and maintenance of the irrigation systems will be important 
issues to address. Finally, MINAE t echnical departments and commune officials will be closely linked to the 
rehabilitation  and monitoring of rural infrastructures.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Health  Low Low 
Description  
The WHO does not  consider COVID -19 a pandemic disease anymore, however, the risk of new strains exists and it is 
real. 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
In case a  new pandemic disease outbreak is declared by the WHO and the Government, DEFIS+ will put in place all 
necessary measures to mitigate the risk of spreading the disease.


---
*Page 87*
---

G 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
   
  
G. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) are IFAD’s main instrument for enhancing 
the sustainability of its projects and programs and include a risk assessment process that recognizes the heterogeneity 
of responses that exist giv en the wide range of circumstances in different countries and communities. SECAP are 
geared towards evaluating the risk and exposure of IFAD interventions to avoid, minimize and mitigate potential 
negative social and environmental impacts. SECAP also focuses  on climate change to assist project/program 
managers in assessing the potential damages that it will cause to IFAD investments and in connecting adaptation to 
risk management and poverty reduction.  
The SECAP describes  how to better mainstream environmental, social and climate change considerations into DEFIS+ 
project cycles and demonstrate IFAD’s commitment to go beyond the “do no harm” principle and to maximize 
development gains. SECAP seeks to ensure that IFAD’s poli cies, strategies and investments are designed to leave no 
one behind and achieve  sustainable development for  all, especially the poorest and most vulnerable to climate change. 
SECAP provides (i) an overview of the main environmental, natural resource management and social issues in the 
intervention areas, namely any significant impacts (positive and negative) an d social concerns likely to be associated 
with the project investments and services and (ii) the specific adaptation measures, envisaged on the basis of the risk 
analysis associated to the investments planned. The main risks identified (and corresponding m itigation measures) for 
DEFIS+ are: (i) adverse impacts of rehabilitation/construction work (hence, the application of national environmental 
and social impact assessment legislation); (ii) inefficient water use in rehabilitated areas (hence, capacity -building, 
coordination activities for WUAs, di ssemination  of water efficient agronomic practices such as SRI and its variants); (iii) 
erosion (hence, dissemination of anti -erosion techniques such as planting rows of shrubs and trees, strip cropping, 
shelterbelts; integrating cover crops, shrubs, soil improvers o r fodder crops into crop rotations); and (iv) limited access 
to project benefits for the most vulnerable farmers (hence, preliminary land tenure survey and proactive support to 
facilitate farmers access to DEFIS+ benefits). All activities identified in the  Environment and Social Management Plan 
(Annex 6)  are included in DEFIS+, according to the nature of the  activities and their  respective budgets . 
DEFIS+ project is categorized by IFAD as category B, as it might result in adverse environmental and/or social impacts 
on human populations or environmentally significant areas, although the impacts are less adverse than those for 
category A, site -specific  and can be readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. 
Category B projects require an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  to be developed, which is the 
case for DEFIS+ . The SECAP also foresees the application of a national Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
legislation (MECIE decrees 99 -954 and 04 -167) for infrastructures -related works. IFAD’s categorization of the project 
is in line with GCF environmental and s ocial risk category B, which includes activities with potential limited adverse 
environmental and/or social risks or impacts that are few, generally site -specific, largely reversible and readily 
addressed through mitigation measures.  
In addition to SECAP procedures, DEFIS+ is fully compl iant with the national regulations on environmental and social 
safeguards of the National Office of Environment (ONE). ONE is the Authority mandated to screen all investments and 
irrigation works, including rural road rehabilitation, in order to identify the specific regulatory requirements for each one 
of them, depending on their environmental, social and climate impacts. The Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment will be validated by ONE, while the ESMP, will be validated by the MINAE. Over the years, the MINAE 
and its dedi cated Environment, Climate and Emergency Response Unit (SECRU) have developed extensive expertise 
on national and international environmental and social norms, particularly with regard to: assessing environmental and 
social strategies; monitoring environme ntal and social management frameworks; carrying out environmental impact 
studies; and supporting environmental engagement programs.  
The DEFIS+ Environmental and safeguards  officer will be the person in charge of ESMP implementation and 
monitoring. As already mentioned above, the PCU will ensure ESMP compliance with IFAD’s SECAP and GCF’s 
Environmental and Social Policy  during project implementation.  The climate change operations manager, and the 
Climate Change and Environment Officer in each inter regional coordination committee, will also be responsible for 
ESMPs implementation and monitoring throughout the project’s duration. For the protection of t he banks at the level of 
the hydro -agricultural infrastructures, vetiver, phragmites and herbaceous varieties will be used. Madagascar has 
developed Directives for reforestation, therefore the species and varieties adopted will depend on the pedoclimatic 
conditions of the areas and perennial trees as well as fruit trees, which are accepted by the beneficiary populations. 
The infrastructure activities will be screened for environmental and social risks based on the GCF Environment and


---
*Page 88*
---

G 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
   
 Social Policy, SECAP and ONE regulations. Thereafter, site specific ESMPs will guide the risk management by the 
contractors and beneficiaries.  
A description of the program -level grievance redress mechanism is provided in Annex 7, together with a summary of 
the multi -stakeholder consultations carried out to present and gather feedback on the DEFIS+’s ESMP. The stakeholder 
engagement plan, also in Annex 7, provides indications on how DEFIS+ will engage with stakeholders throughout 
project implementation. Finally, Annex 7 presents disclosure -related information in line with both IFAD and GCF policies 
on this matter.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The targeting and social inclusion strategy  is based on the selection of intervention regions with high poverty levels 
and where soil degradation and the impacts of climate change hit the population’s productive capital the most. 
Furthermore, DEFIS+ intervention strategy excludes commercial farms a nd only targets individuals, especially those 
with a food deficit (type 3).  The targeting strategy was further informed by numerous visits and interviews with the 
communities and actors in rural areas.  
Gender considerations will be mainstreamed throughout DEFIS+’ activities. As detailed in the Gender Assessment and 
Action Plan (Annex 8), operational measures have been identified to guarantee that, while executing all programme 
activities, special care is system atically taken to ensure that women and youth from the most vulnerable beneficiaries 
effectively engage. Direct targeting will be carried out in beneficiary communities that have been identified to ensure 
that type 3 food deficit  households , women and youth are taken into account and have the opportunity to access the 
resources and initiatives mobilised by DEFIS+. Eligibility criteria – based, for example, on age, gender, vulnerability 
level, education level, and socioeconomic status – will be defined with the beneficiary communities through a 
participatory and consensus -based process. DEFIS+’ gender strategy,  is based on the need to address inequalities 
related to sex, age and status in the implementation of the project activities. Its objective is to: (i) eliminate the 
constraints that limit the inclusion, active participation and empowerment of women and you th (male  and female ) in the 
different links of agricultural chains; (ii) create opportunities to improve their living conditions; (iii) strengthen their 
productive capacities and the resilience of their economic activities to climate change; and (iv) promote the leadership 
of women and their participation in decision -making groups  and processes . 
The specific DEFIS+ actions proposed for women and youth in vulnerable situations have the goal of facilitating their 
access to productive capital through employment or their involvement in income -generating activities. These actions 
include: (i) integrati ng women and youth into agriculture by reserving plots of land for them in the newly developed  
perimeters; (ii) positioning youth and women as rural entrepreneurs in the services field in areas linked to the poles of 
development; (iii) giving women and youth priority in capacity -building activities and access to funding; (iv) promoting  
pro-youth and pro -women participation in green jobs.  
As in the case of the targeting strategy, the responsibility for executing the gender strategy  lies with the entire project 
coordination team, as well as the different regional partners and institutions in charge of project implementation. These 
actors will receive training on gender issues and on DEFIS+ strategies and tools for implementing, monito ring and 
evaluating the gender approach and ensuring the achievement of its objectives. With the support of the technical project 
manager, the entire team in charge of implementing DEFIS+ will ensure the integration of a gender dimension in the 
implementat ion of the activities. DEFIS+ will support the operationalization of gender strategy in relation to specific 
climate resilient activities with the aim of strengthening  the empowerment of women and young people.  
The monitoring and evaluation system will integrate the gender strategy into its operationalization. In the measure of 
products, effects and impacts, the monitoring and evaluation indicators will be disaggregated according to gender and 
age (men, women and young people). DEFIS+ will conduct specific studies on the impact of the pr oject on gender 
throughout its implementation (at the start, mid -term and end). The report will include the results of specific activities 
carried out by DEFIS+ as well as the results of actions carried out in synergy with IFAD projects in the country in r elation 
to gender. Information on the results of specific activities carried out by DEFIS + will be provided by its monitoring and 
evaluation system.  
The PCU will monitor gender mainstreaming, in particular focusing on: (i) how gender issues are taken into account in 
the project; (ii) the appropriateness of the gender strategy in consideration of the context and sociocultural reality of 
the intervention  zones; (iii) the disaggregation of M&E indicators by sex and age. This thorough exercise will enhance 
the narrowing of the gender gap in the target regions, paving the way for a scaling up of the approach at the national 
level.


---
*Page 89*
---

G 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
   
 G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
MEF will represent the Government of Madagascar in accordance with Decree 2019 -093 establishing the Ministry 
attributions and its general organization. MEF supervises the planning, coordination and monitoring -evaluation of the 
country's medium - and long -term develo pment programmes at all levels and the coordination of cooperation at the 
national level. The Ministry also manages, monitors and assesses external funds and contributes to the harmonisation 
of cooperation with donors.  
MINAE will be the Implementing Agency  for the project and will provide technical oversight for DEFIS+. The NSC will  
provide overall guidance and validate AWP/Bs and evaluate progress made on activities and project results and their 
alignment with rural sector strategies. Regional guidance  will be provided by the RSMCs , who will also monitor the 
regional progress of implementation . The relevant departments of the RSMCs are represented in the NSC and have 
real decision -making power with regard to the mobilisation of resources, compliance with planning and implementation 
of action plans.  
Within MINAE, the PCU’s main function is to execute the overall programming and budgeting and to take the lead in 
overall project implementation, which will include working with service providers, government ministries and 
departments, individual project particip ants and farmers’ organisations in the target areas. Specifically, the PCU will 
assume responsibility for the timely preparation of the AWP/Bs and Procurement Plans to be submitted for review and 
approval (and subsequently to IFAD for its “no -objection”). The PCU will lead in the implementation of the project’s 
three components and will work closely with MINAE, MEDD and other implementing partners, to ensure that project 
outcome s are  achieve d.  
IFAD’s operational model ensures continuous implementation support and supervision of project activities by providing 
MINAE and, more specifically, the PCU with the required technical and expert guidance for effective implementation of 
project activities and adaptative management , should any issues arise throughout the project’s lifecycle. IFAD’’s No 
Objection will be required for the approval of AWP/Bs, which will be screened to ensure project activities build towards 
successful project completion in an effective and efficient ma nner. In compliance with IFADs Handbook on Financial 
Reporting  and Auditing, adequate financial management arrangements (staff, budget, funds flow, internal control, 
audits) will be secured for efficiently managing GCF funds, including regular Interim Financial Reporting and liquidity 
forecast. At least  yearly, external audits of the  project’s account will be conducted, as will supervision missions for 
monitoring and evaluation. This will be done in collaboration with staff from MEDD/NDA. Finally, IFAD with support 
from MINAE and the PCU will lead a mid -term review to ensure alignment with defined targets or propose corrective 
measures, and elaborate completion reports and impact assessments. Specific requirements for implementation 
support and supervision missions are fully developed in the Program Implementation Manual (PIM), which will be 
amended to integrate GCF implementatio n requirements.  
As per clause 14 of the Accreditation Master Agreement between IFAD and GCF, the procurement of goods and 
services for funded activities, whether by the Accredited Entity itself, the Executing Entity or a third party, shall be done 
in accordance with the rules, policies and procedures of the Accredited Entity to the extent and scope of its 
accreditation.  
In accordance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines, each procurement plan will include IFAD's proposed contracts, 
procurement methods and related review procedures. During the design phase, IFAD undertook an assessment of the 
national procurement regulations t o ensure their compatibility with IFAD Guidelines. It was agreed that national 
regulations can be adopted for this program as defined in Law 2016 -055 on the Public Procurement Code of 25 January 
2017, except for the international competitive procurement, w hich follows the rules defined in the IFAD Procurement 
Guidelines. The Procurement Plan (Annex 10) includes the details of the procurement to be undertaken under DEFIS+.  
Specific applicable points will be clearly identified in the MPCs and the Procedural Manual. In accordance with 
paragraph 3 of Module F5 of the Loan Disbursement Handbook, International Competitive Bidding (ICB) will be the 
mandatory procurement method for  the following contracts:  
- Goods: contracts over USD 200,000;  
- Work: contracts over USD 1,000,000;  
- Consulting services: contracts of over USD 100,000 for firms and contracts of over USD 40,000 for individuals.  
In accordance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines, the Fund will carry out a prior review of the above if the contracts 
are equivalent to or above the specified amounts.


---
*Page 90*
---

G 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
   
 DEFIS+ will receive a variety of internal audits to ensure high procurement performance: periodic internal control by 
the CAPFIDA; internal audit by the Unit of Internal Audit of MINAE; annual joint supervision mission (IFAD and 
Government); and posterior review by the National Public Procurement Commission from the MEF.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the follow ing two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
● full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the accredited 
entity’s disclosure policy,  and 
● redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.


---
*Page 91*
---

H 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
   
  
H. ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2a  Feasibility study - Climate Change Analysis  
☒ Annex 2b  Feasibility study  - Climate Modelling and Vulnerability Analysis  
☒ Annex 2c  Feasibility study - Infrastructure Analysis  
☒ Annex 2d  Feasibility study - Value Chain Analysis  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☐ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity


---
*Page 92*
---

H 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
   
 ☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)79 
☐ Annex X  Other references  
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
79 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.


---
*Page 93*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 94*
---

 
Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Increase Resilience to Climate Change of Smallholders Receiving 
the Services of the Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains 
Programme  
Existence of subproject (s) 
to be identified after GCF 
Board approval  [Yes] 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  International Fund for Agriculture Development  (IFAD)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project or 
target country or 
location (s) of programme  Madagascar - Amoron’i Mania, Haute Matsiatra, Vatovavy, 
Fitovinany, Atsimo -Atsinanana, and Ihorombe regions  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, February 2 , 2024  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and French  
Explanation on language  French is an official language of Madagascar  
Link to disclosure  English:  
[https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/44264690/esmf -
madagascar -2000001492_e.pdf/7e7754da -f9c0 -2ae7 -ff4a-
2bd0e834cab5?t=1706862960873 ] 
 
French:  
[https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/44264690/esmf -
madagascar -2000001492_f.pdf/22766d89 -15d6 -2b1e -2ce4 -
487f7d26f6f7?t=1706862966004 ] 
Other link(s)  [The links are accessible from the SECAP documents page at 
https://www.ifad.org/en/secap -disclosed -documents  
(https://www.ifad.org/fr/secap -disclosed -documents )__] 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B  
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social  
Management Framework”.]  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, February 2 , 2024  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  French is an official language of Madagascar  
Link to disclosure  English:  
[https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/44264690/esmf -
madagascar -2000001492_e.pdf/7e7754da -f9c0 -2ae7 -ff4a-
2bd0e834cab5?t=1706862960873 ] 
 
French:


---
*Page 95*
---

[https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/44264690/esmf -
madagascar -2000001492_f.pdf/22766d89 -15d6 -2b1e -2ce4 -
487f7d26f6f7?t=1706862966004 ] 
Other link(s)  [The links are accessible from the SECAP documents page at 
https://www.ifad.org/en/secap -disclosed -documents  
(https://www.ifad.org/fr/secap -disclosed -documents )_] 
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B  
project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social  
Management Framework ”.] 
Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS ) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement Policy 
Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , Indigenous Peoples Planning  
Framework  (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, February 2 , 2024  
Place  Amoron’i Mania  Regional Directorate of Agriculture and 
Livestock, Tamponivinany,  Ambositra 306  
 
Haute Matsiatra  Regional Directorate of Agriculture and 
Livestock, Matsiatra Ambony, Tanambao,  301 ; Rural 
Engineering Office Kianjasoa Fianarantsoa 341  
Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains Programme Office  
 
Vatovavy  and Fitovinan y Regional Directorate of Agriculture 
and Livestock Offices ex ODASE Tanakidy Manakara 316 . 
 
Office DEFIS: Batiment TTMR Tanakidy, Manakara 316  
 
Atsimo -Atsinanana  Regional Directorate of Agriculture and 
Livestock Fenoarivo Avaratra Farafangana ,  
 
Ihorombe Regional Administrative Offices   
Bâtiment Regional Directorate of Agriculture and Livestock 
Ihorombe -Ankilibe , Ihosy, 313  
 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered


---
*Page 96*
---

Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, March 4, 2024  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 97 
 
 
Secretariat assessment for FP 227  
Proposal name:  Increase Resilience to Climate Change of Smallholders Receiving 
the Services of the Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains Programme  
(DEFIS+)  
Accredited  entity:  International  Fund  for Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  
Country:  Madagascar  
Project/programme  size:  Medium  
I. Overall  assessment  of the Secretariat  
1. The funding  proposal  is presented  to the Board  for consideration  with  the following 
remarks:  
 
Strengths  Points  of caution  
This project seeks to alleviate the detrimental 
impacts of climate change by deploying 
sustainable adaptation measures. Leveraging 
valuable insights acquired from pr evious  
projects funded by the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the 
ongoing pro -poor agricultural investment 
initiative, Inclusive Agriculture 
Transformation Program me (DEFIS +), 
supported by IFAD, the OPEC Fund for 
International Development, and other 
contributors, the project aims to optimize 
positive experiences to augment its impact 
and ensure investments are resilient to 
climate challenges. The new G CF project , 
known as DEFIS+,  specifically  builds upon the 
existing program.  The project targets 
vulnerable communities in one of regions of 
the world that is most affected by climate  
change.  Throughout the project, it is imperative to 
execute a sustainability strategy. This strategy 
should  encompass a funding blueprint for 
replication, as well as a comprehensive plan to 
incorporate operational and maintenance 
considerations into GCF investments. 
Additionally, it is crucial to investigate 
potential replication opportunities  within 
Africa and Madagascar.  
This project will help to strengthen the 
resilience of the agricultural production system 
and vulnerable marginal communities to the 
impact s of climate change  in drought -affected 
areas by improv ing water management and 
strengthening the resilience of roads by 
applying the concept of “green roads ” for 
water -harvesting  and nature -based solutions .  
IFAD will conduct technical assessments and 
feasibility studies to guide the detailed designs


---
*Page 98*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 98 
 
 
of climate -resilient infrastructure, such as  
irrigation systems, roads, water management 
schemes, and activities within the agricultural 
value chain.  
2. The Board  may  wish  to consider  approving  this funding  proposal  with  the terms  and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed conditions and 
recommendations”.  
II. Summary  of the Secretariat’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. Madagascar has been ranked the fifth most vulnerable country to climate change in the 
world, and the Notre Dame Global  Adaptation Initiative  index, which ranks the climate 
adaptation performance of 181 countries, has classified Madagascar as one of the countries least 
adapted to cope with climate events (rank ing 172  out of 181 countries1). Madagascar belongs to 
the group of least developed countries, with more than 80  per cent  of the population liv ing 
below the poverty level (USD  2 per day ) and 80  per cent  of the population liv ing in rural zones, 
most of them in very remote areas with limited access to basic infrastructure. The poverty rate 
was 74.3  per cent of the population in 2019, corresponding to an increase of 1.38 million people 
in just one year (2020) , and it is expected  to continue to rise . Madagascar experienced 
unprecedented extreme  and consecutive droughts from 2017 to 2022, affecting crop 
production, food and nutrition security across the country.  The south -west and the extreme 
south are characteri zed by semi -desert environments with erratic and low rainfall of less than 
800 mm per year. A decrease in average annual precipitation of up to 8  per cent  is projected by 
2050. No significant change is expected in terms of average annual rainfall accumulation ; 
however, it is predicted that there will be an increase in the amplitude of inter -annual rainfall 
variability , as well as frequen cy of extre me events. This is particularly true in the project area, 
which is formed of six regions ,  in the south of the country. The great variability of rainfall in the 
project area leads to either droughts or situations where the water balance is very much in 
surplus owing to floods and heavy rains. Temperature s in southern Madagascar are estimated 
to increase by between 1.2 and 2.1  °C by 2050. Under the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change representative concentration pathway  (RCP ) 4.5 scenario, the number of days subject to 
extreme heat events is projected to increase from 32.4 to 54.7  by 2050 , posing extreme ly high 
risks to human lives. 
4. The main climate -related changes include (i) a decrease in the amount of annual 
precipitation, with more marked and/or more frequent periods of drought; (ii) a delay in the 
arrival of the rains, which requires adaptation  in terms of the agricultural calendar; (iii) 
increase d intensity of extreme climatic phenomena (cyclones, droughts, floods, storms and 
strong winds); and (iv) a very high temporal and spatial variability in rainfall, which is 
unpredictable. Additionally, smallholder  farm s are frequently exp osed to  outbreaks  of pest s and 
disease which cause significant crop and income losses. Since 2010, the areas most affected by 
drought events are in the project area, particularly the Atsimo -Atsinanana, Vatovavy and 
Fitovinany regions.  
 
1 https://gain.nd.edu/our -work/country -index/rankings/  Accessed on 26 September 2023 .


---
*Page 99*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 99 
 
 
5. The greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions in Madagascar come predominantly from the land -
based sectors , namely  agriculture, forestry and land -use change , which together represent 80.5  
per cent  of Madagascar’s national emissions. The emissions are mainly from livestock (enteric 
fermentation and manure) and agriculture (methane from rice cultivation, poor soil 
management, deforestation for agricultural purposes and fertili zer application).  
6. The proposed project, Increase Resilience to Climate Change of  Smallholders Receiving 
the Services of the Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains Programme  (known as DEFIS+) , will help 
to reduc e the negative impact of climate change by applying adaptation measures. It will  build 
on positive lessons learned from previous  International Fund for Agricultural Development  
(IFAD ) projects and from the ongoing pro -poor agricultural investment programme, the 
Inclusive Agriculture Transformation Programme ( DEFIS ), funde d by IFAD and the O PEC  Fund 
for International Development and other donors.  
7. The project will also allow capitalization of the potential of agroforestry, reforestation 
and renewable energy practices  to provide mitigation co -benefits . 
2.2 Component -by-component  analysis  
8. The project will be implemented around the following three complementary outcomes , 
which have  been  strategically conceived to contribute to climate change adaptation , with 
mitigation co -benefits:  
(a) Outcome 1: Strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production systems 
and the enhancement and maintenance of ecosystem services by improving access to 
efficient water management systems for sustainable agriculture, which includes 
enhancing the resilience of 15,000 ha irrigat ion schemes and 8,100 ha subwatersheds  
through mechanical protection and ecosystem -based approaches to restore 5,500 ha 
landscape. In addition, it includes reforestation of degraded and marginal areas and 
sustainable agroforestry  practices; improving access to regular and appropriate agro -
climate data and disaster risk reduction using agro -climatic information systems; 
improving the climate resilience of food production systems for 45,000 small family 
farms through the promotion o f climate -resilient farming technologies and practices and 
integrated pest management techniques; and introducing innovative, low -cost, context -
specific renewable energy and energy -efficient technologies for farming and processing 
(such as solar pumps and dryers) and domestic activities (such as improved cookstoves 
to reduce the use of firewood) , which contribute to reduc ing GHG emissions. The 
economic and financial analysis highlights the climate and environmental benefits 
envisaged by the project ; 
(b) Outcome 2: Increased income generation through improved market accessibility . 
This outcome revolves around promoting “green  roads ” (i.e. climate -resilient rural 
tertiary roads) , supporting the climate resilience of rural infrastructure used for access 
to markets and utilizing  the water -harvesting potential of roads. This includes (i) 
investing in reinforc ement  works , including well -designed cross -drainage systems on 
540 km rural roads to protect the roads from damage due to climate hazards, such as 
floods and heavy rainfall , and to harvest water for drought resilience by efficiently 
managing the water around the roads; (ii) training 2,000 trainers, construction workers 
and professionals on construction and maintenance standards, which will be more 
sustainable than the business -as-usual scenario  in the long  term owing to the reliance 
on local green technolog ies; (iii) i mproving climate resilience by introducing water 
harvesting options for increased water availability for farming, soil moisture


---
*Page 100*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 100 
 
 
improvement and aquifer recharge; and (iv) adopting well -designed climate resilience 
cross -drainage systems to keep the roads functional all year round and not , as at 
present,  being open only during the dry season ( eight to nine  months a year) and closed 
during the rainy season ; and 
(c) Outcome 3: Improved food and nutrition security through managing knowledge o f 
food production systems. Local skills and knowledge will be leveraged , for instance, 
through the development of construction operation manuals , in order to scale up 
innovation. This outcome is inherently linked to outcomes 1 and 2, as it benefits from 
the introduction of climate -smart practices and from increased income generation, both  
of which  result in enhanced food and nutrition security and mitigate the negative impact 
of extreme climate events. Outcome 3 will also promote non -timber forest products and 
neglected and underutili zed climate -tolerant food species as a strategy for adapt ing to 
climate change, reduc ing GHG emissions, reduc ing environmental degradation and 
improv ing agricultural diversification, livelihoods and food security.  
III. Assessment  of performance  against  investment  criteria  
3.1 Impact  potential                                                            Scale:  Medium  to high  
9. DEFIS+ proposes a comprehensive approach to sustainably improving resilience to 
climate shocks and enhancing nutrition and food security for vulnerable households in the 
target areas. DEFIS+ will enhance the capacity of agricultural systems and vulnerable rural 
communities to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change so that farmers are better able 
to confront the increasing frequency and intensity of drought s and changes in rainfall patterns 
that often result in floods. This requires bringing  up to da te current agricultural production 
systems that are dependent on rainfall and whose practices and infrastructures are no longer 
appropriate in the context of climate change. DEFIS+ proposes to reduce smallholder farmers’ 
exposure to climate and economic shoc ks by “climate  proofing ” irrigation infrastructure and 
rural roads to increase agricultural water availability, reduce the risk of market access 
disruptions caused by extreme climate events and promote and disseminate climate -smart  
agricultural practices . DEFIS+ will benefit  447,20 1 people , 50 per cent of wh om are women.  
10. At the field level, introducing  water -saving technolog ies such as the implementation of 
drip -irrigation systems and the system of rice intensification , will improve the availability of 
water, reduce vulnerability to water shortages and increase productivity per hectare. This will 
increase the  area of  recoverable crops with a view to increasing  levels of production. The 
support provided by DEFIS+ , through the dissemination of drought - and stress -tolerant crop 
varieties and the adoption of integrated pest management methods and other improved 
agronomic practices , will contribute to further reducing production risk and sustainably 
increasing productivity. Th e resilience of pr oduction systems will be strengthened by investing 
in ecosystem restoration , including the promotion of an integrated watershed and catchment 
management approach. This reduces the risk of erosion and will improve the sustained 
productivity of farms through the retention of fertile topsoils.  DEFIS+ will also promote low -cost 
on- and off -farm renewable energy and energy -efficient technologies, such as improved energy -
efficient cookstoves and handmade briquettes , which will contribute towards  reducing forest 
degradation . Other technologies to be promoted include solar pumps for irrigation, biogas 
production along with livestock systems,  and solar milling and dryers for product processing. 
These technologies will contribute to improv ing efficiency and production  and lowering GHG 
emissions . They will also contribut e to reducing women’s workload  and time burden (i.e. the


---
*Page 101*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 101 
 
 
amount of time spent on unpaid domestic work such as fetching water) , with  a positive  impact  
on the health, education  and nutrition status of women and, indirectly , their young children.   
11. Through these interventions, it is estimated that the project  will directly improve the 
climate resilience of 447,20 1 individual beneficiaries and indirectly impact the lives of 
3,543,719  beneficiaries in the six regions targeted by DEFIS+ , improving their ability to 
sustainably combat the negative effects of climate change while also helping them to produce 
greater yields and gain access to markets. This results in greater income generation for rural 
communities and reduced dependence on the exploitation o f natural resources in lean p eriods. 
With the associated ecosystem regeneration activities implemented under the project , this will 
establish  a positive feedback loop that will result in a greater impact on ecosystem restoration , 
while additional increases  in biomass  will have an associated reduction in GHG emissions and 
an increase in the carbon storage capacity of the targeted ecosystems.   
3.2 Paradigm  shift  potential                                                                     Scale:  High 
12. The project constitutes an important step in a longer -term process of transforming 
agriculture in Madagascar. The required behavioural changes among a large and poor 
population highly dependent on agricultural output constitute an enormous task that the 
Government cannot achieve on its own. Several  existing projects in the south of Madagascar will 
benefit from the DEFIS+ project through its contribut ion to transforming the climate -vulnerable 
and unsustainable agricultur e sector into a green and sustainable climate -resilient, market -
oriented  and profitable economic sector  with a modern infrastructure , which also significantly 
contributes to mitigating climate shocks and improving food and nutrition, security, gender 
equality and empowerment. The structural and capacity transformation will be achieved by 
addressing vulnerabilities to climate change and  supporting all stakeholders in improv ing their 
resilience, efficiency and links to markets. The paradigm shift of DEFIS+  includes  the following : 
(a) Climate proofing the production - and market -related infrastructure to improve its 
resilience. The integrated watershed and catchment management approach will scale up 
national experience s in bottom -up participatory watershed and catchment management 
with the dual aims of protecting natural resources and increasing income. Community -
driven sustainable land and water management plans and activities will be supported. 
The planning process, which includes social engineering for behavioural change and 
implementa tion of the plans , will also facilitate knowledge -sharing and joint learning 
among peers in the water users association s and the farmer field schools ; 
(b) The partnerships mobili zed for DEFIS+, the scale of productive investments planned for 
sustainable agricultural development and the focus on building local capacities , together 
constitute a major paradigm shift in regions of southern Madagascar  where  
humanitarian and emergency assistance  is needed . The focus on scaling up well -tested 
approaches and technologies , building on innovative approaches and lessons learned 
from previous IFAD investments (including DEFIS and other IFAD projects in the 
country) , is an important feature of the proposed interventions ; 
(c) Access to stress -tolerant ( regarding drought, heat, flooding, salinity, etc.) and 
nutritionally enhanced varieties and planting materials developed by research centres. 
The production, multiplication and dissemination at the community level of these 
climate -resilient technologies will be promoted , as will the  adoption of integrated pest 
management and other agroecological approaches. Supporting national research centres 
and the  farmer field schools  will create an  enabling environment for improved seeds 
prom otion and adoption by the smallholders ;


---
*Page 102*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 102 
 
 
(d) Greening the road infrastructure will have an overall positive impact on agriculture, 
water availability and soil erosion associated with running surface water , while  having a 
minimal environmental impact and delivering large benefits for civil society ; and 
(e) The project will use a decision support system  to understand risk ( e.g. using hazard 
exposure and vulnerability  to assess the dynamic nature of impact scenarios for crops, 
land use and agri -infrastructure ), including gender -related considerations and 
applications such as Météo Madagascar2and others provided by the Regional 
Meteorological Directorate.  
13. The project will shift agriculture in the country’s target areas from its current situation 
of high vulnerability toward s an alternative paradigm where by better information and climate -
smart farming practices will significantly increase resilience to climate change. The use of state -
of-the-art geographic  information system tools will support strategic planning through 
systematic data -collection and management , which will act as a springboard for science -based 
decision -making processes.  
14. The approach and the tools to be utili zed constitute a package that could be easily 
replicated in other systems and geographic areas in Madagascar or o ther countr ies. The 
successful implementation of this project will result in a new, replicable, long -term and 
sustainable funding model that could enhance climate resilience,  improve conservation, reduce 
land degradation and boost economic development. Outside Madagascar, the proposed model of 
a land -use transition investment fund is suit able  for the most vulnerable African countries, 
where unsustainable agriculture takes up an increasing share of available land and result s in 
deforestation, land degradation and an agric ultur e sector that is not resilient to climate change. 
Thus, this model could be replicated in (but not limited to ) other least developed countries in 
Africa that need large -scale climate investments in rural areas in order to finance the activities 
necessary to achieve the objectives set in their nationally deter mined contributions  and in their 
national adaptation program mes. 
3.3 Sustainable  development  potential                                             Scale:  High  
15. The project  will be implemented by the Government of Madagascar, particularly the 
Ministry of Agriculture  and Livestock (MINAE)  and the Ministry of Economy and Finan ce (MEF ) 
in close synergy with other rural and agricultural development investment  project s operating in 
the southern regions of Madagascar. Similar to other IFAD -funded projects, the interventions 
will rest on using national systems at both the central and the decentrali zed level, and on 
strengthening the capacity of targeted poor smallholders and their l ocal institutions , such as 
farmers’ organi zations, in order to better empower the rural poor, with a particular focus on 
women and youth. When looking at ensuring sustainable development, climate information 
represents an essential element for increasing the capacity of vulnerable households to ada pt to 
climate variability.  
16. The sustainable development benefits include the following:  
(a) Environmental co -benefits.  DEFIS+ will promote sustainable and climate -resilient 
agricultural practices, technologies and infrastructures that contribute to improving the 
efficient management and use of water resources in agriculture, enhancing soil quality 
and restoring degraded l ands. Its integrated watershed management approach will help  
 
2 Available at , https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=mg.dgm.gizgp&hl=en&gl=US&pli=1 .


---
*Page 103*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 103 
 
 
to increase moisture content in the soil, optimize the use of water and expand the 
vegetative cover of degraded lands, while reducing their wind - and rainfall -induced 
erosion ; 
(b) Social co -benefits , including health impacts.  Improved food security and nutrition 
will be among the key social co -benefits that will arise. The proportion of targeted 
households with sufficient food intake is expected to increase from 50 to 90  per cent  by 
the end of the project . In addition, 170,000 households will benefit from nutritional 
education, which will improve the health of women and infants. Better access to water, 
more effective watershed management and the use of off -farm technologies will redu ce 
women’s workload  and time burden . Employment and employability of women and 
youth will increase, and women’s participation in the rural economy will be formali zed 
and recognized ; 
(c) Economic co -benefits.  DEFIS+ will contribute to reduc ing poverty by supporting the 
diversification of agricultural production, building the climate resilience of production 
systems and infrastructures and creating market linkages, which will reduce transaction 
costs and boost the local economy. The sustainable management of agricultural water 
within an integrated watershed approach, coupled with more climate - and stress -
resilient seeds, will sustainably increase agricultural productivity ; 
(d) Gender -sensitive development impact.  DEFIS+ will implement a gender strategy to 
ensure that women’s specific needs are taken into account at all stages and will provide 
opportunities to improve their quality of life, reduce their vulnerability to climate 
change and increase their incomes. The activities proposed for women and youth will 
include t raining farming households on gender issues, and measures to increase their 
access to productive capital and income -generating activities (primarily access to land ), 
with a view to positioning women as rural entrepreneurs and service providers in 
development hubs and facilitat ing their access to capacity -building and financial 
services. The number of green jobs created through this project will have a target 
women headed households.  The project will also involve minorities, vulnerable people 
and people of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or other identi ties; and  
(e) Social equity.  The overall strategy of DEFIS+ is to ensure social equity and cohesion 
among all members of civil society. Thus, this project follows an inclusive targeting 
strategy to reach vulnerable groups and poor households headed by women and youth, 
so that these t argeted rural populations, characteri zed by their vulnerability to the 
effects of climate change, will have equal opportunities to access factors of production 
(land, water, inputs, financing, etc.) in order to ensure fair and equitable resul ts and 
enable sustainable impacts on living conditions.  
3.4 Needs  of the recipient                                                                Scale:  High  
17. Madagascar is among the poorest  countries  in the world . Poverty in Madagascar  has 
increased significantly  over the past decade . The poverty rate was estimated to rise to 77.4  per 
cent  of the population in 2020, up from 74.3  per cent in 2019, corresponding to an increase  in 
the population  of 1.38 million in one year. . Poverty is clearly more severe in rural areas, where 
it affects 87.6  per cent of the population, in comparison with 55.1  per cent  in urban areas. 
Extreme poverty is more pronounced in the south. The activities of DEFIS+ aim to restor e 
and/or rehabilitate the soil and improve land use through a participatory approach with the 
local community. This approach will ensure that any potential land conflict is identified and 
resolved before any activities commence. For the rehabilitation of r oads, in the exceptional


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 104 
 
 
circumstances of beneficiaries who may be voluntarily displaced , the project will have a 
resettlement policy to be implemented before the works are initiated. Adherence to the IFAD 
Social , Environment al and Climate Assessment Procedures follows the principles of free, prior 
and informed consent and ensures that existing inequalities are not exacerbated . A grievance 
redress mechanism is also articulated for the project to manage any potential conflicts. In 
addition, DEFIS+ fully takes into account the needs of the recipient, which are in line with the 
national priorities.  
3.5 Country  ownership                                                        Scale:  Medium to high 
18. This project is set to provide substantial support to the national policies concerning 
climate change, environmental conservation and sustainable development, along with aligning 
with national strategies (e.g.  the Sectoral Program for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries ) in a 
direct manner, and to reinforce the National Policy for Action on Climate Change by enhancing 
climate change adaptation efforts, while taking the country ’s unique requirements into 
consideration. Additionally, it will actively facilitate the integration of climate change 
considerations into all tiers of policymaking, as well as within research, development and 
technology transfer in this particular domain.  
19. Madagascar is in the early stages of conceptualizing a GCF country program me using a 
GCF/U nited Nations Environment Programme  readiness grant. Notably, DEFIS+ investments 
harmonize completely with the critical priority sectors outlined in Madagascar ’s national 
adaptation programme of action , namely infrastructure, water resource management, 
agriculture and livestock. These investments will play a direct role in advancing Madagascar ’s 
nationally determined contribution, which primarily seek s to bolster the c ountry ’s resilience 
against cyclones, floods and droughts. The project places significant emphasis on adaptation 
interventions by 2030, encompassing initiatives such as  the widespread adoption of robust 
agricultural models and sustainable and integrated water management (including the utilization 
of surface water resources in semi -arid zones) and the enhancement of the irrigation 
infrastructure to cope with diminished run -off during dry periods.  
20. Furthermore, the project aims to decrease GHG  emissions and enhance carbon 
sequestration, while also focusing on enhancing rice farming systems (specifically “system of 
rice intensification ” (SRI) techniques) and executing ecosystem -based practices for adaptation . 
These solutions encompass , among other things,  alternatives to traditional charcoal use, fossil 
fuels and water abstraction systems.  
21. The national designated authority  of Madagascar , the Ministry of Environment, Ecology  
and Forests , also fully support s the project and has already issued a no-objection letter for this 
project.   
3.6 Efficiency  and effectiveness                                     Scale:  Medium  to high  
22. The overall approach adopted by DEFIS+ is designed to increase efficiency and 
effectiveness by focusing on the set of structural investments associated with the introduction 
of improved technologies and climate -resilient  practices as well as capacity -building of local 
institutions that will leverage growth in targeted agricultural areas. Th is approach , where  
science and engineering are integrated  into in-depth modelling and understanding of 
agricultural risk , will inform the structural investment s through the studies that will be 
undertaken. Furthermore, in order to move from low -yield subsistence farming to market -


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 105 
 
 
oriented agriculture, the project ’s theory of change is based on improving the productivity and 
adaptive capacity of production systems to climate change and beneficiaries’ access to markets 
under favourable conditions. In this regard , the theory of change requires significant 
investments in basic infrastructure, so priority will be given to the developm ent of irrigation 
infrastructure and rehabilitation of roads to reduce the risks and costs of accessing the nearest 
markets.  
23. The main benefits  expected  for people in the DEFIS+ project area are (i) creat ion of 
climate -resilient rural communities; (ii) diversification of income sources for the target 
populations, especially young people and women, and creation of green jobs in the project area; 
(iii) reduced transportation costs through rural road rehabilitation, water storage infrastructure 
and market access; (iv) increased revenues for poor people; (v) improved food security, diet 
quality and diversification and nutrition; and, above all (vi) greater awareness of and protection 
from the climate change impacts negatively affecting the livelihoods of the rural population.  
24. IFAD conducted an  economic and financial analysis, with ten proposed interventions 
being modelled and appraised.  
25. The analysis found that aggregate incremental results of the ten interventions combined 
is a financial net present value (NPV) of USD 31.07 million (over 20 years at 8.5  per cent  
financial discount rate) whereas the financial internal rate of return (IRR) and the modified IRR 
are 19 and 9  per cent , respectively. The se incremental aggregate results point towards the 
financial viability of the proposed interventions because the incremental financial NPV is 
positive and the incremental financial IRR remains above the chosen financial discount rate of 
8.5 per  cent. ,  
26. The aggregate economic incremental results are also promising , with the aggregate 
incremental economic NPV estimated at USD 255.57 (over 20 years at 6  per cent discount rate) 
and the economic IRR and modified IRR at 24 and 11  per cent, respectively. Further detailed 
estimates on a per -model basis are presented in the t able below.  
27. The sensitivity analysis results suggest that the obtained economic NPV  and economic 
IRR remain robust and relatively insensitive to cost increase and benefit decrease. 
Consequently, it is expected that the proposed interventions will provide measurable benefits to 
the entire economy of Madagascar, improving the well -being of the environment and intended 
beneficiaries.  
Detailed results of the economic and financial analysis per individual model  
 Total 
investment  
(USD)  Revenues 
generated 
(USD)  Value of 
externalities 
(USD)  NPV  IRR  Benefit to cost ratio  Payback period 
(years)  Debt 
service 
coverage 
ratio  (Economic)  (Financial)  (Eco -
nomic)  (Financial)  (Eco -
nomic)  (Financial)  (Economic)  (Financial)  
IT1 4 880 000  488 919 105  15 042 600  40 859 197  24 250 903  40 33 1.2 1.17  4.95  5.44  8.90  
IT2 6 201 000  727 772 089  28 610 033  69 979 425  38 564 851  47 36 1.2 1.18  5.55  5.19  8.88  
IT3 872 500  137 472 857  4 303 171  11 921 717  6 263 986  44 33 1.2 1.15  4.92  5.90  1.21  
IT4 4 283 615  630 517 226  1 271 376  50 901 433  25 179 757  40 29 1.2 1.14  4.97  5.96  8.52  
IT5 3 460 551  27 232 269  106 962  1 157 864  138 251  11 9 1.2 1.15  6.93  11.33  9.54  
IT6 5 821 596  1 274 774 600  10 844 972  106 522 557  56 344 122  44 33 1.2 1.15  4.63  5.36  7.94  
IT7 1 377 500  53 587 041  12 361 981  8 577 576  Not calculated  64 Not calculated  1.5 Not calculated  5.24  Not calculated  Not calculated  
IT8 80 000  3 768 330  483 918  442 702  Not calculated  46 Not calculated  1.3 Not calculated  4.95  Not calculated  Not calculated  
IT9 1 080 000  123 782 634  123 406 720  63 466 963  Not calculated  – Not calculated  50.2  Not calculated  2.13  Not calculated  Not calculated  
IT10  1 607 800  23 752 840  7 503 067  4 542 077  Not calculated  40 Not calculated  1.6 Not calculated  6.32  Not calculated  Not calculated  
IV. Assessment  of consistency  with  GCF  safeguards  and  policies


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 106 
 
 
4.1 Environmental  and social  safeguards  
28. Project background . The project aims to strengthen the resilience of agricultural 
production systems and vulnerable communities to the impacts of climate change while 
contributing to emission reduction in six regions in Madagascar through  the dissemination of 
climate -friendly agricultural and livestock management practices , the rehabilitation of road and 
irrigation infrastructure and watersheds , and the introduction of energy -efficient technologies 
while strengthening climate information systems and capacities of institutions through the 
adoption of best practices and knowledge on climate change adaptation . The environmental and 
social co -benefits include the improvement of agricultural water resources , enhanced soil 
quality and restored degraded lands. The project is also expected to increase soil moisture 
content and expand vegetative cover , reducing soil erosion and siltation of water bodies such as 
hydro -agricultural and irr igation canal infrastructure. It is envisaged that the project will 
increase biodiversity in the target areas and surrounding landscapes and maintain the 
important ecological services that it will provide. The social co -benefits include improved health 
and nutrition as a result of better access to water and increased and diversified income sources.  
29. Environmental and social risk category and safeguard instruments . The accredited 
entity (AE) , IFAD , has assigned a category B environmental and social risk rating to the project , 
given that it will have limited adverse environmental and social risks and/or impacts that are 
site-specific and can be readily mitigated. The Secretariat agrees with the risk categorization 
and it is within the level for which the AE is accredited. The AE has prepared an environmental 
and social management framework (ESMF) for the project that describe s the potential 
environmental and/or social risks/impacts of the project and the measures to address them. 
The ESMF also outline s how different subproject activities would be screened for environmental 
and social risk s/impacts during project implementation , which mitigation measures would be 
applied based on the risk level , and whether site -specific assessments and management plans 
would be required for these subactivities.  
30. Compliance with GCF environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards . The 
environmental and social risks and/or impacts of the project and the proposed mitigation 
measures  are described below . 
31. ESS 1 : Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts . The ESMF describe s the baseline conditions for the targeted areas where project 
activities will take place to meet the project objective of increasing the resilience of rural 
communities to the impacts of climate change. The ESMF describe s all subproject activities in 
detail and list s the potential direct and indirect impacts of each of the activities. It also propose s 
generic , standardized mitigation measures to avoid , minimize  and mitigate such impacts. Most 
of the risks and impacts will be moderate  in scale and can be readily managed and mitigated 
through the appropriate procedures and plans described in the ESMF. Site -specific , tailored and 
more detailed mitigation measures will be developed for subproject activities with a moderate 
risk , which will require site -specific assessment and plans for these activities to be prepared 
during implementation. The ESMF also include s a monitoring protocol and a budget for its 
implementati on. 
32. ESS 2 : Labour and working conditions . The ESMF cover s the impacts on labour and 
working conditions. It include s discussions on the typology of the workers who will be hired 
under the project and the key labour risks and impacts for these workers , including working 
conditions and terms of employment. Occupational health and safety concerns will be managed 
by equipping workers with personal protective equipment adapted to the types of work in 
which they are engaged. Staff will also be trained and educated on the risks and dangers o f 
construction sites. Given th at the project will use solar photovoltaic systems  in its activities , the


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 107 
 
 
AE will ensure that there will be no use of forced labour/child labour in the primary supply 
chain of such systems . Labour and working conditions will be aligned to  the AE’s Social , 
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures , which set out labour management 
principles and the grievance mechanism. Contract documents will also include clauses on labour 
conditions , including zero tolerance of sexual exploitation , abuse and harassment ( SEAH ), and 
the bidding documents for the solar photovoltaic component will  include clauses that ensure  
that  goods are procured from ethical sources.  
33. ESS 3 : Resource efficiency and pollution prevention . The ESMF identifie s the 
activities that generate emissions to air and discharges to water , including possible 
contamination of land and generation of associated wastes , hazardous materials and pesticides , 
as well as activities expected to utilize natural resources , including water and energy. 
Atmospheric pollution , dust emissions and noise pollution from traffic (e.g. construction 
machinery and vehicles ) are expected. Soil compaction and increased risk of erosion due to 
clearing of vegetation for the construction facility , as well as soil pollution by infiltration or 
leaching of pollutants (e.g. fuel storage) , may occur. Alteration of the quality of water resources 
through wastewater discharges from the construction site , sedimentation in irrigation canals 
and pollution of water bodies through  the use of agricultural inputs may occur. To mitigate 
these , several measures are planned, such as effluent treatment prior to discharge , proper 
storage of fuels and carrying out of proper maintenance of equipment and machiner y. 
Implement ation of a site waste management plan is also envisaged. Screening on resource 
efficiency and pollution prevention to assess these risks and impacts in a site -specific manner 
will be conducted  during implementation  and site -specific management plans will be prepared 
that are tailored for subproject activities.  
34. ESS 4 : Community health , safety and security . The ESMF describe s the activities that 
will generate risks and impacts to the health and safety of communities. These are mainly 
associated with construction activities , which include risk of accidents to local populations 
associated with the use of vehicles and construction machiner y, disturbance due to dust 
emissions , and nuisance noise and disruption of rural activities. The measures contemplated 
include carrying out regular maintenance of equipment , vehicles and machiner y, ensuring that 
base camps and project activities are situated far from the villages and work is done during the 
daytime only , and conduct ing appropriate information and awareness campaigns for local 
populations on the duration of the activities to be carried out in the area. Existing social conflicts 
regard ing use of agricultural land , water use and infrastructure maintenance activities between 
water user associations are expected to be reduced by implementing the activities of the project 
(e.g. outcome  1), which encompass improvements to agricultural lan d and food production and 
water resource management systems through participatory consultation , better procedures and 
regulations , an established maintenance plan and enhanced institutional capacities (such as 
adoption of a conflict prevention and resolution mechanism).  
35. ESS 5 : Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement . The project will avoid or 
minimize any resettlement or economic displacement that could have a negative impact on the 
populations concerned. The AE has also assessed the project as having  a low probability of 
resettlement and economic displacement. However , should people lose their land and means of 
livelihood , compensation will be provided. Eligibility criteria , monetary , crop , land replacement 
and compensation scales , and an institutional arrangement for implementation of an action plan 
will be drawn up. There  will also be a mechanism for consultation with and participation of 
beneficiaries in the planning , information dissemination , execution and monitoring , follow -up 
and implementat ion of the compensation and mitigation plan (i.e. abbreviated resettlement 
action plan) , which could be prepared and implemented in accordance with the provisions of 
the AE’s Social , Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures .


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 108 
 
 
36. ESS 6 : Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources.  The project’s construction and rehabilitation activities could result in loss of 
vegetation and disturbance of wildlife through  the destruction of natural habitats , and pose a 
risk of possible encroachment on sensitive areas. The large -scale distribution of certain 
varieties of seeds can also lead to a reduction in floristic biodiversity. Further more , there is a 
risk of proliferation of invasive plants in the watershed protection -related activities  of the 
project . To mitigate these , the project intends to prioritize the use of indigenous species , comply 
with forestry legislation and limit disturbance to the areas that are required for the 
implementation of the subprojects  (such as avoiding infringing on protected natural sites and 
critical habitats or areas with significant biodiversity). The project activities will also involve 
conduct ing preliminary studies to analyse each variety to be introduced to anticipate their 
responses in the field based on the type of environmental/pedoclimatic condition , and 
conduct ing quarantine checks and follow national guidelines in the introduction of new 
germplasm. Reforestation of different species to promote biodiversity will also be imp lemented. 
The project will not support activities  that are  prohibited by host  country legislation or 
international conventions relating to the protection of biodiversity resources , cultural heritage 
or other legally protected areas.  
37. Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples . The AE confirms that 
there are no Indigenous Peoples in the areas targeted by the project ; however , it notes that good 
practices , including recognizing cultural heritage and identi ty as assets , obtaining free , prior  and 
informed consent , strengthening community -driven development , promoting equitable access 
to lands , territories and resources and valuing Indigenous knowledge , will be developed 
through the project. Stakeholder consultations have also echoed the need for valori zing 
traditional knowledge , a recommendation in line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and on 
which the AE can consult with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group , as part of its role 
and function.  
38. ESS 8 : Cultural heritage . Although adverse impacts are not expected on physical 
cultural heritage , given that the project will only renovate existing roads and irrigation 
structures and work with farmers/local governments to support climate -resilient agricultural 
practices , the construction works on such infrastructure may potentially affect culturally 
relevant sites through accidental encounters. In such cases , the project will implement  the 
“chance find ” procedures contained in the ESMF and comply with th e national ordinance on 
protection and conservation of national heritage.  
39. Implementation arrangements.  The ESMF outline s the basic responsibilities for 
implementing arrangements and divide s responsibility between the project management unit at 
MINAE , the ESS team in the project management unit , and that of the contractors /implementing 
parties . It specifie s the implementation and monitoring of mitigation measures for the potential 
impacts of the project , including the frequency of monitoring of performance indicators. The ESS 
team will be responsible for monitoring the environment al and social aspects of the project 
during its implementation. Staff training and capacity -building of its project partners on 
environmental and social issues , as well as the verification of compliance of the project with 
environmental and social performance indicators , will be implemented and monitored.  
40. Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism . Public consultations 
have been held with stakeholders in the target regions , including administrative authorities , 
various local partners and representatives of the beneficiaries and local communities to be 
affected by the project. The stakeholder engagement plan provided a description of how 
stakeholder engagement will take place during the subproject planning , implementation 
monitoring and evaluation phases. The stakeholder engagement plan  also describe s how project 
information will be disclosed by the AE and  the Government of Madagascar through  MEF and


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 109 
 
 
MINAE, the project’s executing entity  (EE), during the preparation and implementation phases , 
using differentiated mechanisms to reach different stakeholders.  
41. The project proposal also describe s two grievance redress mechanisms : the institutional 
grievance  redress  mechanism of the AE  and the project -level grievance  redress  mechanism. 
Both have various channels  through which  grievances may be submitted and general processes 
for managing grievances. At the AE level , grievances on non -compliance with environmental and 
social policies can be submitted by email or post and will be managed by the IFAD  Regional 
Division. Complainants not satisfied with the response can appeal to the Vice -President  of IFAD . 
At the project  level , grievances may be submitted by email or in person and will be handled by 
the project management unit.  In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy , the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any stage , including before a 
claim has been made.  
42. SEAH . The revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM -
2021/18 requires safeguarding from SEAH in GCF -financed activities. The ESMF of the DEFIS+ 
project outlines SEAH risks areas and proposes mitigation measures , linking the address ing of 
SEAH with the gender -based violence ( GBV ) risks identified in the gender assessment and its 
gender activity  plan . In order to address SEAH , the project will , among other things , strengthen 
awareness of GBV and SEAH issues among staff and project be neficiaries; develop an 
information/awareness protocol on SEAH; strengthen GBV/SEAH operational procedures for 
projects , including a code of conduct for public works contractors; conduct various information 
and awareness -raising activities for direct and indirect project beneficiaries; and ensure that 
contractor contracts and collaboration agreements have relevant SEAH clauses. The AE has also 
proposed changes to the SEAH grievance redress mechanism in alignment with the GBV code of 
conduct , and various rep orting platforms , namely  online or by telephone or mail , and in -person 
reporting. The Secretariat  recommend s that the AE ensure that in the event that SEAH occurs , 
the reporting and SEAH complaints handling is survivor centred and as gender responsive as 
possible. Overall , the SEAH safeguarding measures presented by the AE are in alignment with 
GCF SEAH provisions .  
4.2 Gender  policy  
43. The AE has provided  a gender  assessment  and gender  action  plan , there by compl ying  
with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
44. The gender assessment describes the existing enabling environment that provides the 
space to address gender inequality and work towards the increased empowerment of women. 
The constitution of Madagascar enshrines equal rights between women and men; subsequent 
amendments to legal and regulatory systems were made to ensure that equality takes root in 
society. Further more , Madagascar has signed and ratified the Convention on the Eliminat ion of 
All Forms of  Discrimination Against Women and other international t reati es and many of its 
national laws and existing national polic ies and legislation support the equality of women. 
Madagascar has developed a National Policy for the Promotion of Women , which  aims at 
addressing gender inequality in incomes and economy , education and training gaps , rights to 
health , reproductive rights and decision -making powers of women while also improving 
institutional mechanisms. Despite the intent and span of effort , in practice ensuring equality has 
been and remains  a challenge. Land -related issues , particularly ownership and inheritance , pose 
a challenge for women , while access to productive resources and assets is equally challenging 
for women because of inherent restrictive norms and practices.


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 110 
 
 
45. The challenge to translate policies and legal intent into practice has resulted in women 
in Madagascar facing an added burden with respect to the  impacts of climate change. The 
gender assessment , which was undertaken with stakeholder consultations and a desk review , 
describes the inequality felt by women. Regarding land and factors of production , women do not 
have th e right to own and make decision s on land ; neither are they allowed in most cases to 
inherit it. If they need to have access to land , it is only available  in the form of renting or if they 
are part of a women’s group. Access to land in such a manner does not give women the right to 
decide on long -term investments , even to plan t trees. Female -headed households might own 
land but is generally marginal , , less productive  land. Limited  access to inputs such as seeds , 
finance , fertilizers and irrigation infrastructure and low levels of skills restrict s women’s ability 
to meet their daily needs  or mitigate against these  limitations  as well as the compounded effects 
of climate change induced realities. These  challenges affect women’s ability to generate 
lucrative activities and revenue/incomes. This does not , however , mean that women do not 
contribute to the agricultur al economy; they do , but do so within the confines of the realities 
expressed above. The situation of women is similar regarding the use of forest and other  natural 
resources , upon which they depend a great deal for making traditional medicine and fulfilling 
other needs.  Men use forest  resources  in the same way , including for cooking and timber for 
construction. The impacts of overuse and misuse affect  all. Decision s on the use of these 
resources are made  by men , with  a limited role for women in the decision -making structures. 
The burden on women is exacerbated by climate change in that it contributes to an increased 
workload , food insecurity , longer  fuelwood and water collection times , with more  time needed 
by women to fulfil their roles. In addition,  the assessment indicates that violence against women 
is a challenge in the project area , and notes  the importan ce of keep ing this in mind during the 
course of project implementation to ensur e that project interventions do not allow  the 
perpetuation of GBV within the programming area and possibly  beyond . 
46. The AE has provided a gender action plan that is targeted at addressing the gender 
issues identified in the gender assessment. The gender action plan contains a set of activities 
with corresponding targets and indicators. The AE has also provided a budget to ensure the 
effective implementation of the actions identified and a timeline within which each of the 
activities will be undertaken.  
47. With a view to building on existing capabilities of women and providing support to 
address identified gaps the project will target the following four areas of vulnerability for 
women (including female -headed household and youth ): (i) limited inclusion and participation 
of women; (ii) limited empowerment of women and youth in the agricultural value chain; (iii) 
limited opportunities to improve their conditions within the community; and (iv) limited 
capacity -building and development opportunities rendering women less resilient and affecting 
their role and decision -making power. The gender issues identified will be addressed through 
various project components , such as in the reconstruction of irrigation schemes  which will have 
benefits t o women in terms of food diversification , bringing sufficient quantities of good -quality 
water closer to their homes (after consultative processes); engagement in water user 
associations; and addressing unde rlying social norms using community -led discussions to equal 
access and opportunities for women and girls. Community -led discussion s, besides being 
expected to improve gender relations , are expected to be a platform that will encourage 
awareness -raising and adoption of good climate cha nge practices. The project will also provide 
opportunities for women to develop leadership skill s to ensure that they are able to engage and 
have a say in decisions that affect their life and livelihoods , such as in water user associations. 
To ensure women’s participation and inclusion in the various activities , opportunities will be 
taken to organize women -only events , to institute quota systems  and to provide targeted 
training for women in , for example , functional literacy and leadership skills. Furthermore , there 
will be ample opportunit ies for women to engage in and benefit from the activities of t he project 
which focus on sustainable watershed management and restoration of the landscape , including


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 111 
 
 
in increasing their representation at the leadership and decision -making level. The project will 
work to ensure that women and youth get access to and benefit from tailored knowledge (based 
on information on needs and preference in accessing) , productive capital , climate insurance , 
green jobs (in the reconstruction and maintenance works through mandatory recruitment 
procedures with equal pay for equal work , while also encouraging women -owned construction 
enterprises  coming into the workstream ) and engagemen t in income -generating activities. 
Access to land , which is a major barrier to women , will be addressed through allocation and 
quota systems for women and youth. This will be one of the lessons to be learned and one of the 
main tasks of DEFIS+ , which  will facilitate access to land for women and youth through the 
development of new irrigated areas ; while for existing areas , the project will set out the 
inclusion of women and youth as a condition for access to funding. At the same time , the project 
will invest in awareness -raising and mobilization of traditional authorities , to address and 
overcome certain practices that prevent access to land , especially for women heads of 
household.  
48. The project’s national steering committee  (NSC)  will include the Ministry  of Social 
Protection and Gender and will have a gender expert to monitor the day -to-day implementation , 
monitoring and evaluation of the project , while the project management unit  and the project 
monitoring and evaluation  systems will be charged with ensuring the monitoring of the 
implementation of the gender action plan.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall  project  assessment  (medium  risk)  
49. This funding proposal is a  100  per cent adaptation project to strengthen  the climate 
resilience of the agricultural production system and vulnerable communities in Madagascar. 
The project will implement land -based activities related to agroforestry , reforestation and 
renewable energy practices , which will be measured as co -benefits . 
50. GCF is considering a loan of USD 12.8 million and grant of USD 41.0 million together 
with co -financing of USD 127.5  million in loan and grant from IFAD. The c o-financing ratio is 
1:2.4 and accounts for 70 per cent of total financin g. 
4.3.2.  Accredited  entity/executing  entity  capability  to execute  the current  project  
(medium risk)  
51. IFAD is an international AE with over 40 years of development work in global 
agriculture and food security. To date , IFAD has provided over USD 23 billion in grants and low  
interest rate loan s. The Government of Madagascar , through MEF and MINAE , is the project EE 
and the funding agreement will be implemented through both  MEF and MINAE. MEF will 
manage , control and evaluate external funds while MINAE will enter into contracts for  the 
procurement of services for project activities. IFAD has an extensive hist ory of working with 
MINAE in implementing projects and program mes. 
4.3.3.  Project -specific  execution  risks  (medium  risk)  
52. The funding proposal will expose GCF to several country -related risk issues in 
Madagascar and its low sovereign rating of B – (Standard & Poor’s ). Madagascar ’s rating is due in


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 112 
 
 
part to the government's large budget deficit , low-income  level s and the low level of economic 
development. The country ha d a reported gross domestic product per capita of USD 453 in 
2022. Madagascar also reported a sharp economic contraction following the onset of the 
coronavirus disease pandemic in 2020. Flooding , drought and other climate change induced 
natural disaster s have also negatively affected the country's economy. However , Madagascar 
enjoys strong relations with multilateral institutions that provide concessional and grant 
funding support , includ ing support for infra structure projects to address energy and transport 
development and donations for food insecurity. In addition , an International Monetary Fund  
extended credit facility should continue to help to boost economic growth by increasing 
investment and social spending as well as provide policy support to strengthen governance and 
anti -corruption efforts.  
4.3.4.  Project viability and concessionality  
53. The proposed project will build on the IFAD existing agricultural investment 
programme , DEFIS , which was approved in 2017 and funded by IFAD , the OPEC Fund for 
International Development and other donors. To strengthen the climate resilience of small 
farmers , the project will , among other activities , strengthen irrigation infrastructure to increase 
water availability , build the resilience of tertiary rural roads to reduce market access disruption , 
and allow access to basic services during periods of excessiv e rainfall . The requested 
participation from GCF will represent approximately 30 per cent of total programme size in a 
partly loan - and grant -funded project. The level of concessionality is reasonable given the co-
financing of 70 per cent  from IFAD. It is also noted that the larger proportion of grant financing 
compared with loans in GCF funding is justified in view of  Madagascar ’s weak sovereign rating. 
The country has been heavily reliant on support from multilateral institutions , and it will be 
appropriate for GCF  to align its participation to the borrower ’s credit condition.  
4.3.5.  GCF  portfolio  concentration  risk  (low  risk)  
54. In the case  of approval , the impact  of this proposal  on the GCF  portfolio  concentration  in 
terms of result s area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Compliance risk ( medium  risk ) 
55. This program me will mainly address the agricultur e sector.  In doing so , there is likely to 
be significant expenditure at the subnational or local level and among a wide variety of 
beneficiaries. While the expenditure that wil l benefit individuals in terms of technical and other 
assistance do es not appear to be unusually large , there will still need to be monitoring and 
assurances that beneficiaries receiving  such assistance , particularly in terms of financial 
benefits , are duly qualified and entitled  to rec eive such benefits.  The AE will need to exercise its 
policies and procedures  to ensure that benefits receive d or used in the project are not used for 
illicit purposes such as money  laundering , terrorist financing or other illicit purposes. The AE 
has such policies and procedures in place and will need to ensure that its implementing  
partners also apply those policies and procedures during the course of  the project. However , in 
reviewing the proposal , it does not appear that the activities will constitute an unusually  high 
risk and that , in view  of the commitments  of the AE , the compliance risk is determined to be 
medium . 
4.3.7.  Recommendation


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 113 
 
 
56. It is recommended  that  the Board  consider  the above  factors  in its decision.  
 
Summary  risk  assessment  Rationale  
Overall  project Medium  See 4.3.1  
Accredited  entity/executing  entity capability  Medium  See 4.3.2  
Project-specific  execution  Medium  See. 4.3.4  
GCF  portfolio  concentration  Low  See 4.3.5  
Compliance  Medium  Compliance risk rating is based on 
relatively  low risk of over money 
laundering/terrorist financing  risks and 
capacity and commitment of AE to 
monitor and enforce policies and 
procedures in project implementation. 
See4.3.6 for further details.  
4.4 Fiduciary  
57. The AE for the project is IFAD and , as such , the IFAD operational model ensures 
continuous implementation support and supervision of project activities. The IFAD  Manual of 
Administrative , Financial and Accounting Procedures , which has been validated by the 
Government of Madagascar and IFAD , will be complied with. The EE for the project is the 
Government of Madagascar through MEF and MINAE.  
58. As AE , IFAD will enter into a funded activity agreement with GCF on the contribution of 
the GCF loan and grant proceeds to IFAD , for which funds will flow into a dedicated bank 
account held by IFAD , while in parallel a subsequent subsidiary agreement between IFAD and 
the Government of Madagascar will outline the basis on which GCF proceeds (i) will be provided 
(on-lent/on -granted) to Madagascar in the agreed currency (i.e. U nited States dollars ) and (ii) 
will flow from IFAD to the borrower (MEF) into a project designated account in U nited States 
dollars opened at the Central Bank of Madagascar .  
59. As for the EE , a legally binding financing agreement ( subsidiary agreement) will detail 
the specific roles and responsibilities of the relevant government ministries , MEF and MINAE , 
with regard to  the implementation of the project. The subsidiary agreement will establish the 
terms for the financing and implementation of outcomes , outputs and activities , and include the 
relevant obligations of the E E in respect of the implementation of the overall funded activity , 
including compliance with the eligibility criteria and the project implementation manual. The E E 
through MINAE will select the beneficiaries of all activities of the project and procure service 
providers for specific project activities in accordance with the eligibility criteria and the project 
implementation manua l. The E E through MINAE will enter into contracts for procured services 
with the selected service providers.  
60. The project will have a n NSC to oversee the activities of DEFIS+ at the national level. The 
NSC will meet twice a year and its main role is to validate DEFIS+ annual workplans and budget; 
evaluate progress made on project activities , their results and their alignment with strategies 
for rural areas ; and manage project -related grievances that cannot be resolved at the regional 
level. Complementing the NSC , the project will have a project coordination unit to coordinate 
and manage DEFIS+ resources and activit ies in accordance with the financing agreement , 
project manuals on operations , financial management and administration procedures , 
monitoring and evaluation , and annual workplans and budget s, under the supervision of 
regional steering and monitoring committees , the NSC and IFAD. The project coordination unit


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 114 
 
 
will be responsible for (i) manag ing the project’s human , financial and physical resources; (ii) 
prepar ing annual workplans and budget s and project procurement plans; (iii) coordinat ing the 
implementation of the activities; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of the project’s activities and 
results; (v) coordinati ng and monitoring of the work/activities of partners and service 
providers; (vii) reporting and submitting activity and financial reports to MEF , MINAE and IFAD 
on a regular basis (minimum of twice a year in the case of IFAD so as  to fulfil its semi -annual 
reporting obligation vis -à-vis GCF); (viii) liaising regularly with regional government authorities 
and decentrali zed services and other actors in the DEFIS+ intervention zones;  and (ix) ensuring 
compliance with IFAD safeguards (i.e. environmental and social management plan , gender 
action plan) during project implementation activities. Planning and coordination of activities at 
the regional level will be provided by two interregional coordination units located in 
Fianarantsoa for the Ihorombe , Haute Matsiatra and Amoron ’i Mania regions; and Manakara for 
the Vatovavy , Fitovinany and Atsimo -Atsinanana regions.  
61. Joint supervision of the project will be provided by the Government of Madagascar 
(Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock ( MINAE ), Ministry of Economic and Finance ( MEF ), 
National Designated Authority (MEDD  NDA) and ONE) and IFAD . Supervision missions will be 
carried out twice a year and their main goals will be to (i) assess progress on the 
implementation of each DEFIS+ component; (ii) evaluate progress on the expected outcomes 
and outputs for each project component in comparison with what had been established in the 
concept note or other project documents; (iii) assess the quality of targeting and gender 
equality; (iv) analyse the different fiduciary aspects of the project (funding allocations , payment 
and disbursement commitments , conformity of expenditures with annual workplans and 
budget s and concept note , accounting records) and review outcomes of the external audits 
conducted in accordance with the IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing  for 
IFAD -Financed Projects . A mid -term review will be held to evaluate the actions taken in relation 
to the project’s objectives , analyse the effectiveness and approp riateness of the methodologies 
used , verify the level of disbursement of resources and determine the need to reallocate 
available resources.  
62. A no-objection letter from IFAD will be required for the approval of annual workplans 
and budgets , which will be screened to ensure that project activities build towards successful 
project completion in an effective and efficient manner. GCF funds will flow into a dedicated 
bank account held by IFAD that will be opened for DEFIS+ resources. This GCF account will hold 
GCF proceeds in trust and will be U nited States dollars  denominated and interest bearing. On -
lent loans will be in the same currency of disbursement and repaid in such currency , which will 
be United States dollars .  
63. The project’s accounts will be verified annually through external audits conducted by 
independent and qualified auditing firms in accordance with the IFAD Handbook for Financial 
Reporting and Auditing  for IFAD -Financed Projects  and in compliance with the applicable GCF 
requirements (i.e. expenditure eligibility , categori zation vis -à-vis GCF budget categories , etc.). A 
certified copy of the auditor’s report will be submitted to IFAD a few weeks before its deadline 
for sending such a report to GCF . 
64. It is recommended that condition s relating to the provision of a capacity assessment of 
the EE  in form and substance that is satisfactory to the Secretariat be reflected in the term sheet 
and funded activity agreement  as a placeholder.  
4.5 Results  monitoring  and reporting


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 115 
 
 
65. As a  100  per cent  adaptation  initiative , the project is expected to benefit 447,201  direct 
beneficiaries and 3,543,719 indirect beneficiaries. The proposal included a methodology and 
assumptions for defining both direct and indirect beneficiaries.   
66. The theory of change diagram went through a few rounds of revision and now 
adequately captures different levels of expected changes. Adaptation outcomes are shown to 
clearly represent outcomes. The theory of change  diagram identifies the co-benefits that  can be 
achieved and captures the causal relationships between outcomes and co -benefits. The barriers 
and risks that may hinder the achievement of these changes are identified and linked to 
pertinent activities , which will tackle them accordingly.  
67. The logical framework has been well designed in accordance with the GCF Integrated 
Results Management Framework . The paradigm shift potential is expected to be achieved with 
the potential target scenarios. Appropriate Integrated Results Management Framework  core 
and supplementary indicators have been selected for monitor ing and report ing the project 
results in respective GCF result s areas and , for each indicator , baseline and targets (mid -term 
and final) have been set with different means of verification. H owever , some indicators could  
have better methodologies to measure their impacts (e.g. food security indictor) and units of 
measurement need to be consistent among baseline , mid -term and final targets.  
68. At the GCF outcome level of enabling environment , two GCF core indicators are 
identified: technology deployment and dissemination , and market development. Given the low 
level of the baseline for each indicator , the project is expected to build a comprehensive 
enabling environment in Madagascar.  
69. The theory of change clearly shows the logical pathways for generating results via 
project activities , and how those contribute to the outcomes and impacts of the pro ject. Relevant  
assumptions  have  been  also  made  and an explanation  of the ways  in which  barriers are 
addressed has been provided.  
70. The logical framework was designed in accordance with the GCF results management 
framework /performance measurement framework  and the programme  theory  of change.  The 
logical  framework  has selected  relevant impact , outcome and output indicators aligned with the 
result s areas to which the pro ject is contributing , as well as the pro ject’s specific activities.  
71. The implementation  table  is contained  in annex  5 and the monitoring and evaluation  
plan  in annex  11 to the funding proposal.  
4.6 Legal  assessment  
72. The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 24 
September 2018 (the “ AMA ”), and it became effective on 9 November 2018. The Accredited 
Entity’s five -year accreditation term lapsed on 8 November 2023 but was extended by Decision 
B.37/18, paragraph (q) until the earlier of three years from the date of lapse of the five -year 
accr editation term or the date on which a revised accreditation framework is adopted by the 
Board. The Board approved the re -accreditation of the Accredited Entity pursuant to Decision 
B.37/18, and negotiation of the Amended and Restated Accreditation Master Agreement is 
ongoing.  
73. The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 116 
 
 
74. The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Madagascar, a country in 
which GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other 
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need 
to be further assessed. The GCF provided an updated draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities to the Government of the Republic of Madagascar on 13 May 2019.  
75. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is n ot provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
76. To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:   
(a) Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, 
confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final internal approv als needed by 
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed project;  
(b) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and  
(c) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 117 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP227  
Proposal name:  Increase Resilience to Climate Change of Smallholders Receiving 
the Services of the Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains 
Programme  (DEFIS+)  
Accredited  entity:  International  Fund  for Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  
Country:  Madagascar  
Project/programme  size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1. This is the second submission of the funding proposal on “Increase Resilience to Climate 
Change of Smallholders Receiving the Services of Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains 
Programme ” (known as DEFIS+), submitted to the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) 
under the standard proposal approval process. The accredited entity (AE) is the International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). The executing entity (EE) is the Republic of 
Madag ascar through its Ministry of Economy and Finance and its Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock.  
2. Madagascar is one of  the world’s  least developed countries  (LDCs), with 81 per cent of 
the population below the poverty line. In 2021, the Multidimensional Poverty Index (developed 
by the United Nations Development Programme ) estimated that 68.4 per  cent of the population 
of Madagascar  is multidimensionally poor, and an additional 15.4 per  cent was classified as 
vulnerable to multidimensional poverty.1 Although in 2021 the share of the per capita global 
greenhouse gas emissions of Madagascar was only 0.01 per  cent,2 the country is highly 
vulnerable to climate change, with an Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative  index  score  of 
35.3 (ranked 172 out of 185).3 These figures clearly illustrate the high level of urgency of 
reducing the vulnerability of Madagascar to climate change.  
3. The funding proposal states that the proposed project, DEFIS+ , has the ambition of 
reducing the negative impact of climate change by applying sustainable and nature -based 
adaptation measures with mitigation co -benefits. The funding proposal is structured around 
three outcomes: (i) strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production systems ; (ii) 
increased income generation through improved market accessibility; and (iii) improved food 
and nutrition security.  
4. The funding proposal focuses on adaptation to climate change, with mitigation as a co -
benefit. The project covers six regions in the south -central and south -eastern  areas of 
Madagascar , and expects to reach 447,20 1 direct  and 3,543,719 indirect  beneficiaries (1.6  per 
cent and 12.7 per  cent  of the total population , respectively ). The funding proposal states that the 
project will  contribut e to all four GCF adaptation result s areas  as follow s: enhanced resilience of 
most vulnerable people and communities (30 per cent) ; health and well -being , and food and 
 
1 The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) value is the share of the population that is multidimensionally poor 
adjusted by the intensity of the deprivations. See https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country -
Profiles/MPI/MDG.pdf . 
2 See https://www.worldometers.info/co2 -emissions/co2 -emissions -by-country/  or 
https://ourworldindata.org/co2/country/madagascar . 
3 See https://gain -new.crc.nd.edu/ranking .


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 118 
 
 
water security (25 per cent) ; infrastructure and built environment (20 per cent) ; and 
ecosystems and ecosystem services (25 per cent).  
5. IFAD requests USD 53,861,003  from GCF in the form of a  grant of USD 41,045,298  (74 
per cent ) and  a loan of USD 12,815,705  (26 per cent ). In the funding proposal IFAD states that it 
will provide  co-financing of USD 96,986,441  for a total project budget of USD 150,847,444 . 
6. During the assessment t he iTAP considered all funding proposal documents as 
submitted on 1 5 December 202 3, the written  answers to the iTAP as received on 10 January 
2024 and further clarifications during the online meeting on 11 January 2024 . 
II. Impact potential                                    Scale: High  
2.1 Adaptation potential  
7. The funding proposal sets out clearly the climate hazards (current and future) in the two 
covered areas of Madagascar and explains  the exposure of  farming communities to these 
hazards, including socioeconomic aspects of climate risk. Based on the understanding of these 
climate risks the funding proposal introduces corresponding adaptation measures  and means to 
monitor and evaluate progress over time. The rational e, consistency  and justification of the 
adaptation measures was improved following the recommend ations made by the iTAP for the 
first submission of this funding proposal.  
8. Further detail s about how the revised funding proposal fulfil s the principles for 
demonstrating adaptation impact according to decision B.33/12 is provided below.  
9. The six regions included in DEFIS+ can be grouped in to two climatic zones: Vatovavy, 
Fitovinany and Atsimo -Atsinanana ( south -east zone) and Amoron’i Mania, Haute Matsiatra and 
Ihorombe ( central zone).  
10. The south -east zone, which is also commonly referred to as “Great South East”, is located 
in the climatic zone of the eastern slope of Madagascar, where the annual rainfall ranges from 
1,500 to 2,500 mm. The climate is characterized by a hot rainy season  (southern summer ), with  
high rainfall distributed unevenly between November and April, and a cooler dry season from 
May to October (southern  winter ).  
11. In the central zone, the Amoron’i Mania region and the Haute Matsiatra region ( central 
highlands) benefit from a tropical climate of altitude in the highlands, while the Ihorombe 
region is a transition zone between the semi -arid climate of the south -east  zone and the tropical 
climate of altitude characteristic of the highlands.  
12. Using secondary information, the proposal shows an increment in temperature of 
around 1 °C in  the period 1970 - 2020  and an upward trend in related extreme events. Projected 
temperature increases in the project area are estimated to be between +1.2 and +2.1 °C by 2050. 
In the near future under the mid -warming scenario (Representative Concentration Pathway 
(RCP) 4.5) the multi -model mean temperature is projected to increase from 0.5 °C to 0.7°C (high 
confidence) in the dry season. By mid -century, the average temperature could increase from 1.1 
°C (HC) to 1.4 °C (high confidence) in the dry season and from 1.2 °C (high confidence) to 1.4 °C 
(high confidence) in the rainy season. Furthermore, the number of extreme heat events is likely 
to continue increas ing. 
13. With regard to rain patterns, the funding proposal shows that even if there are no major 
changes in average annual precipitation, rainfall has changed significantly across regions and 
within regions, and an increase in the amplitude of inter -annual rainfall variability is predicted , 
which increases the probability of  extreme events such as floods  (annex 2a).


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 119 
 
 
14. Madagascar experienced famine in 2016 and again  in 2021, following an unprecedented 
period of  drought. This extended period of drought, in addition to non-climatic variables  
(especially the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic  in 2020)  led to a dramatic fall in 
productivity in the agricultural sector that affected food security severely.  
15. The funding proposal further documents increases in both the frequency and intensity 
of cyclones affecting the project regions on the south -east coast. According to the proposal, the 
intensity of cyclones is projected to increase along with the risk of associated floods. The 
combination of  poor land management practices and the loss of the protective function of the 
forest due to deforestation means that the local population on the east ern coast is increasingly 
vulnerable to cyclones.  
16. Small -scale farmers are exposed to increasing climate hazards, which directly  reduce  
farm productivity , thus reducing the main source of farmers’ income. This situation is 
exacerbated by the damages that extreme events have caused to an already poorly developed 
and badly managed road network. This reduces access to markets for small -scale farmers. As 
the target population is already vulnerable owing to high poverty levels and food and nutrition 
insecurity , the negative impacts of increasing climate variability will increase climate risks in 
future.  
17. This FP proposes a systemic response to the increasing climate risk around three 
components , involving a combination of grants to government with GCF funds, and loans to 
government with blended GCF and IFAD funds, some of which will be on -lent to microfinance 
institutions and from there to farmer organizations and  cooperatives.  The three components are 
described  as follows:  
(a) Component 1: strengthening climate resilience of agricultural production systems 
through improved water management for sustainable agriculture (better irrigation 
systems and strengthening the capacity of Water User Associations  -WUAs -) and 
enhanced agro -climatic information systems, including better information systems, the 
dissemination of climate -smart agriculture practices and the promotion of sustainable 
home technologies (e.g. solar pumps for irrigation or efficient stoves) ; 
(b) Component 2: improv ing the road network in order to secure  market access through the 
introduction of practices related to the Green Roads for Water approach (GR4W)4 This 
component includes both the improvement of local competences for designing, building 
and maintenance of roads and the rehabilitation or improvement of 540 km of roads 
during the project implementation , to increase  resilience to ex treme events and to 
promote water infiltration in support of agriculture ; and  
(c) Component 3: improv ing food and nutrition by providing training on food production, 
nutrition and climate change that will be reinforced by exchange visits. Lessons from 
this component will be captured  and shared as best practices and for knowledge 
transfer on food, nutrition and climate change.  
18. Following the recommendations from iTAP, this second submission includes a 
framework for selecting adaptation measures (annex 23). This framework uses the following 
selection criteria: technical feasibility, cost –benefit ratio, response to climate risk, accessibility 
for smallholders, flexibility (i.e. avoids lock -in), mitigation co -benefits, transformative potential 
and complementarity with  IFAD themes. The annex further documents the scoring process of a 
long list of adaptation options , which clarifies th e process and substantiates the selection of the 
adaptation measures included in the funding proposal.  
 
4 Following the guidance for GW4R provided in the World Bank document Green Roads for Water: Guidelines for Road 
Infrastructure in Support of Water Management and Climate Resilience , available at 
https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents -reports  .


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 120 
 
 
19. Regarding the third principle for demonstrati ng adaptation potential,  the iTAP considers 
that t he adaptation response proposed in this funding proposal is aligned with the priorities and 
policies from Madagascar ( see section 1.5 country ownership , below ).  
20. With regard to the link to the national monitoring and evaluation  system for adaptation 
at the national level, IFAD clarified that visits by government ministries and a gencies (e.g. the 
National Designated Authority - NDA) will provide opportunities for information exchange and 
data collection. During these visits, data will be collected on project activities, achievements, 
challenges and adaptation outcomes. This will include quanti tative indicators (e.g. number of 
farmers with access to agro -climatic data) and qualitative insights (e.g. success stories, lessons 
learned). A variety of methods will be used, including interviews, surveys, field visits and a  
review of project documents and reports ( annex 11  of the proposal ). The information collected 
during these visits and through the project ’s monitoring and evaluation  system will be 
structured to support Madagascar in its reporting obligations to the U nited Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change .  
21. The climate change mitigation potential of some of the activities included in this funding 
proposal (e.g. landscape restoration or agroforestry) is consider ed as a co -benefit and will be 
discussed in the section on sustainable development  (section 1.3) . 
22. The iTAP recogni zes the improvements made to this funding proposal regarding the 
adaptation response and the monitoring and evaluation system, compared with the first 
submission.  
23. However, t here are still two concerns . The first is on the detail ed planning of the 
landscape re habilitation  and climate -smart agriculture  interventions  in relation to the specific 
site conditions, which has not yet been done. The iTAP considers that this can be solved through 
the preparation of the Project Implementation Manual  (PIM)  prior the first disbursement .  
24. The second concern relate s to the long -term financial viability of the irrigation and road 
infrastructure. This will be discussed in the corresponding section on efficiency and 
effectiveness (section 1.6) .  
25. Considering the above, the iTAP assesses the adaptation impact potential of this funding 
proposal as high.   
2.2 Paradigm shift potential             Scale:  Medium to High   
26. The i TAP recognizes that some  aspects of this proposal  can contribute to a paradigm 
shift : in particular, the project’s use of a n innovativ e systemic approach that allows 
understanding of the links between climate change, road networks for acces sibility to 
agricultural markets , and climate -resilient agricultural productio n.  
27. The project has the potential to address the vulnerabilities of smallholder farmers in 
two regions of Madagascar by improving climate information, promoting resilient agricultural 
practices through climate -smart agriculture ( CSA ), promoting water and watershed 
management through the impr ovement of water tanks and subwatershed management, and 
facilitating access to markets (as well as the resilience of roads and groundwater recharge) by 
using the Green Roads for Water (GR4W) approach . 
28. In this way , the project has the potential to achieve progress towards a more sustainable 
and resilient agricultural sector in the central and south -east zones of Madagascar at the 
subnational and local levels , as well as improving food access and availability, as well as  
nutrition.  
29. The proposal is well positioned to upscale previous experiences from IFAD with regard 
to CSA and to use synergies with the GR4W approach. At the same time IFAD, as an international


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 121 
 
 
agency, has the opportunity to promote knowledge exchange at the national and regional levels 
and to disseminate lessons learned from this project. This is especially relevant for scaling up 
the systemic approach used in the project and for document ing and shar ing the lessons about 
the benefits of the GR4W approach as a n opportunity to place road building and maintenance in 
the service of water and landscape management and climate resilience while securing their 
transport functions. Such sharing of experien ces and knowledge transfer will  be useful for other 
ongoing activities in Madagascar , especially those led by the Ministry of Public Works and 
Transport, which is responsible for road construction and maintenance . However, the project 
activities under output 2.1 only cover roadworks and training of technicians , and do not cover  
structured engagement planned with the Ministry or with its financial and technical partners, 
such as the World Bank, who are together engaged in major road construction projects, an d 
have potential to apply more climate risk -informed approaches such as the GR4W approach.  
30. The paradigm shift potential is further limited  by the fact that CSA practices , and 
practices aimed at reducing climate vulnerability at the sub -watershed level , are highly context -
dependent, and therefore  lessons learned cannot be used in other regions without 
contextualizing the climate risks and the practices and techniques that can actually be 
considered as adaptive.  
31. The level of consistency of the proposal with the adaptation strategies and plans in 
Madagascar is high (see section 1.5 on c ountry ownership), but the potential for strengthening 
the regulatory frameworks and policies  at the subnational and local levels is unclear. This is 
particularly  relevant regarding  the extent  to which the project  can effectively secur e access to 
land tenure and land -use rights for women and youth, or how the project will align with or 
support  the (new) decentralization plan launched in 2019.  In addition to the limitation s of 
output 2.1 (see para. 29) , the iTAP notes that in failing to address the wider enabling 
environment, component 1 includes engagement with national and regional level government 
agencies only on climate information and misses opportunities for other engagement, for 
example , on agricultural extension.  
32. Considering the above the iTAP assesses the paradigm shift potential as medium to high. 
The iTAP considers it paramount that IFAD clarif ies the concrete measures  regarding land 
tenure and land -use rights to be implemented by this project and the measurable changes to be 
achieved, with especial consideration to rights for women and youth . The steps towards 
defining and implementing measures on specific land tenure and land -use right s in the two 
project regions sh ould  therefore be included in the  Project Implementation Manual, which, 
according to the answers provided by IFAD, will be prepared prior to the first disbursement of 
the GCF funding . 
33. Further more,  and due to the important learning potential of the systemic approach used 
in this proposal, the iTAP recommends  that the AE and the EEs  participate  in or, if not yet 
existent , facilitate a learning mechanism that enables the lessons regarding GR4W to be shared 
with the actors responsible for road building and maintenance in Madagascar , especially the 
Ministry of Public Works and Transport . 
2.3 Sustainable development potential                        Scale:  Medium to High  
34. This funding proposal can contribute to achieving several Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) in addition to SDG 13 ( climate action) , includ ing SDG 1 ( no poverty), SDG 2 ( no 
hunger) and, to some extent, SDG 7 ( affordable energy) and SDG 15 ( life on land).  
35. The project will have a mitigation co -benefit resulting from activities on CSA, 
agroforestry, landscape restoration and watershed management  (annex 17) , as quantifi ed in the 
proposal . More importantly , as the AE, IFAD is committed to provid ing information about 
progress in mitigating climate change to the reporting system in Madagascar , facilitating


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 122 
 
 
report ing of the  project’s  mitigation co -benefit s as part of the country’s reporting under the UN 
Framework Convention  on Climate Change . 
36. Further more , important environmental co -benefits can be the improvement of soil 
conditions through agroecology or the provision of ecosystem services through agroforestry 
and forest restoration in sub -watersheds.  
37. With regard to socioeconomic co -benefits, the project aims to improve nutrition through 
capacity -building on the management and use of new crops, as well as through the reduction of 
yield loss, and it will also contribute to increasing the income of local farmers through better 
access to markets and the possibility to participate in public -private -producer partnerships  
(known as 4P) . The se co-benefits can be further improved by securing the participation of 
small -scale  holders from DEFIS+ in the entrepreneu rship -related activities from the  wider 
ongoing DEFIS program me. 
38. Annex 8 of the funding proposal contains a gender assessment and action plan covering  
issues such as  heads of household s, agriculture, employment, use of time, decision -making, 
education and literacy, inequality in access to land and production factors, gender and natural 
resource management , and gender and climate change. It also includes an overview of the legal 
and administrative framework in Madagascar  as well as strategy and specific actions aimed at 
improving the situation of women and youth.  However,  the lack of clarity about the concrete 
steps regarding access to land and securing land tenure for women and youth discussed in 
section 1.2 are a development concern. In addition , some important activities of the Gender 
Action Plan are not reflected in the detailed budget.  
39. Considering the above, the iTAP assesses that the potential contribution to sustainable 
development in the central and south -east zones can be medium to high, depending upon the 
degree to which land tenure and land -use rights are properly addressed  and how gender -
related activities will be funded during implementation .  
2.4 Needs of the recipient                                 Scale: High  
40. Several indicators mentioned at the beginning of this assessment show the urgent 
situation of Madagascar. It is a country affected by climate risks and multidimensional poverty, 
with high levels of social inequality including gender inequality, and where individual and 
collective opportunities for sustainable development are strongly reduced.  
41. According to a 2023 report on Madagascar by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF), 
the COVID -19 pandemic, the high level of poverty and extreme weather events have aggravated 
the fragility of Madagascar. After a stronger -than -expected recovery in 2021, growth is 
estimated to have decelerated in 2022 mostly owing to climate shocks and a worsening global 
economic environment. Fiscal performance has deteriorated , with weak revenue performance 
and increasing cross liabilities with oil distributors. By 2023 the IMF considered that a lthough 
fiscal and external deficits have widened, fiscal and external sustainability are preserved in the 
medium term.5  
42. Multiple indicators show the high level of vulnerability to climate change . Furthermore,  
other factors , such as low income, food  insecurity, lack of infrastructure or  high  levels  of 
illiteracy , reduce the coping capacity of the farmers in Madagascar to respond to evolving  
climate risks.  
43. The current proposal is aimed at reducing vulnerability to climate change while securing 
food production and opening development opportunities via physical access to the market.  
 
5 IMF Country Report No. 23/239 (2023).


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 123 
 
 
44. Thus, the iTAP considers the response to the needs of the recipient as high.  
2.5 Country ownership              Scale: Medium to High  
45. Annex 1  to the funding proposal includes a letter of no objection from the Government 
of Madagascar dated 2019. The funding proposal  also demonstrates alignment with and 
contribution to several strategic areas included in the national adaptation plan  (NAP) for 
Madagascar (2021) ;6 specifically agriculture, water management, improvement of coastal areas 
and management of infrastructure.  
46. Further, t he funding proposal includes a stakeholders’ engagement plan (annex 7) that 
presents a list of stakeholders and mechanisms aiming at  enabl ing the participation of 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. It also includes a list of activities mentioning the 
stakeholders, topics and fre quency of the activities proposed and explains the need to have 
consultation processes. However, there is no budget included in the annex, and the detailed 
budget of the project (see annex 4) does not specifically consider consulta tions with 
stakeholders. The iTAP recognizes that the proposal includes activities aimed at “training, 
workshops and conferences” and that it is possible that consultation processes have been 
included in these activities. However, at the current stage is n ot clear if consultations on, for 
example, the implementation of different types of CSA practices , will be un dertaken by the 
project. Thus,  the iTA P considers it paramount that information on the participatory processes 
for designing the CSA  practices and the techniques and management activities  regarding the 
application of the GR4W approach is included in the  Project Implementation Manual prior to the 
first disbursement.  
47. Considering the above  and once the assessments of the technical capacity of the EEs are 
available , the iTAP considers the country ownership as medium to high.  
2.6 Efficiency and effectiveness              Scale: Medium to High  
48. The design of this project responds to several existing barriers  in Madagascar , including 
the limited financial access to invest in climate -resilient technologies  and, as mentioned before , 
it includes some  innovative approach es (see sections 1.1 and 1.2) . 
49. The total budget of the proposal is USD 150,847,444  with a GCF contribution of USD 
53,861,003  distributed in  the form of a grant of  USD 41,045,298  (74 per  cent) and a loan of USD 
12,815,705  (26 per  cent). According to the term sheet, k ey terms and conditions of the GCF loan 
to IFAD include a 40-year tenor, a 10-year grace period , zero ( 0.00 ) per cent interest rate per 
annum and a commitment fee of 0.5 per  cent per annum. The co -funding by IFAD is USD 
98 million, which means a co -financing ratio of 1:1.82  (GCF:IFAD) . 
50. The funding proposal includes a Letter of Intent from IFAD dated 12 December 2023 
(annex 13) and a corresponding temporary annex for co -financing policy requirements (annex 
14). According to these annexes, IFAD will contribute to the project with a total co -funding of 
USD 98 million distributed in the form of a grant of USD 37.4 million and senior loans 
amounting to USD 59.6 million. According to the annexes the amount has been approved by the 
IFAD Executive Board and the final approval is subject to the legal, budgetary and policy 
procedures  of IFAD . The iTAP noted that the term sheet sub mitted on 15  December 2023 
includes a cond ition on confirmation of the co -funding prior to the execution of the funded 
activity agreement .  
51. The funding proposal includes an Economic and Financial Analysis (annex 3). Following 
the recommendations by the iTAP made during the previous assessment, the current analysis 
 
6 Available at https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/PNA -Madagascar.pdf .


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 124 
 
 
includes investment in infrastructure as well as in agriculture and landscape management and 
was carried out for investment types (ITs): Improved drainage networks; Irrigation schemes; 
De-silting systems; Landscape restoration; Water tanks; Irrigation parameters; Ridge ditches; 
Runoff collection; Road improved drainage and reinforcement during rehabilitation; Road 
storage infrastructure.  
52. The economic financial analysis records an economic internal rate of return (E -IRR) of 
24 per  cent with a net present value (E -NPV ) of USD 255.5 million. Although the second 
submission includes a far more complete narrative for the analysis , the documentation of the 
input data is incomplete. For this reason, the iTAP conducted a plausibility analysis of the 
calculations and found two sources of potential overestimation : (i) unclear distribution of the 
economic benefits per investment type per year ; and (ii) implausible consideration of the 
economic benefits from year one regarding crops that are not currently being cultivated and 
would need some years before harvesting (e.g. vanilla). The second potential source of 
overestimation was confirmed during discussions  with the A E. That said, this is understandable 
because the final decision about which crops will be planted , when and where , will only be 
taken during the inception phase. A clearer picture will be available once the Project 
Implementation Manual has been presented to the GCF Secretariat prior to the first 
disbursement.  
53. A further  concern is the long -term financial viability of the irrigation and road 
infrastructure.  Considering the low payment capacity of the final beneficiaries of this funding 
proposal , a financial viability  based on the payment of fees (for roads and/or access to 
irrigation) is either unrealistic or, in the best case, insufficient. The iTAP is aware that the 
funding proposal has a strategy regarding payment s for irrigation costs by the Water User 
Associations which could re solve some of the irrigation costs , and is also aware that this is a 
structural problem that cannot be solved sol ely by this project . This is especial ly the case with  
regard to securing financ e for road maintenance. However, the iTAP encourages the A E to 
search for innovative and context -appropriate options, especially because IFAD is well 
positioned in Madagascar.  
54. Further, Madagascar  is one of the countries with the highest financial risk rating in the 
global south, which is also reflected in the high interest rate ( approx.  12 per cent  annually). 
Madagascar would  have to pay in order to hedge any foreign currency loans for local currency 
loans. Given the high volatility of macroeconomic conditions globally, and higher interest rates 
of the United States dollar leading to huge devaluations of emerging market currencies , 
Madagascar may have to do so in order to protect itself from a sove reign default.  
55. Although the  proposed project would be highly impactful to Madagascar in terms of the 
resilience to climate change of smallholder farmers, it could potentially harm Madagascar ’s 
ability  to repay the loan. After all, the loan will be paid back from the Government of 
Madagascar , which has access only to taxpayer s’ money in local currency. Its ability to earn 
foreign currency is limited to very few exports and , given it  is an island , it needs to import basic 
foods and fuels.  
56. Considering the above, the iTAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness of this funding 
proposal as medium to high. 
III. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
57. The iTAP notes that IFAD addressed most of the recommendations made for the first 
submission and highlights the many improvements in the funding proposal in this second 
submission.  
58. The iTAP makes the follo wing recommendation to be considered during the 
implementation of the project:


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 125 
 
 
(a) IFAD and the EEs are recommended to participate in  a dedicated learning and exchange 
platform that facilitates sharing the lessons regarding the GR4W  and long -term  financial 
viability of the road maintenance  actions  with the actors responsible for road building 
and maintenance in Madagascar, especially with the Ministry of Public Works and 
Transport , the Ministry  of Agriculture  and other key players . If such a platform is not yet 
in place in Madagascar the iTAP recommends that IFAD consider facilitating such 
exchange . 
59. Considering the above, t he iTAP endorses this funding proposal  for approval by the 
Board , subject to the following conditions . 
3.6.1.  Condition precedent to the effectiveness of the funded activity agreement : 
60. Delivery to the GCF by the A E of written confirmation of the completion of the financial 
management and technical competence assessment of the E Es, in line with the A E’s own policies 
and procedures, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat and consistent with 
the requirements of clause 10.02(a)(i) of the accreditation master agreement , as well as a copy 
of such capacity assessment  if requested by the GCF Secretariat ; 
3.6.2.  Condition precedent to first disbursement of GCF proceeds under the funded 
activity agreement : 
61. Delivery to GCF by the accredited entity , in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat, of a copy of the final version of the Project Implementation Manual , which shall 
include : 
(a) The definition of sub -activities, targets and means of verification aimed at contributing 
to improve land tenure and land -use right s for small -scale farmers in the two project 
regions with special attention paid to women and youth ; 
(b) The description of the participatory processes for designing the site -specific climate  
smart agriculture ( CSA ) practices and the techniques and management activities 
regarding the application of the Green Roads for Water ( GR4W ) approach ; 
(c) An outline of intended engagements with the relevant national and regional government 
agencies for applying the lessons learn ed on climate smart agriculture ( CSA ) and Green 
Roads  for Water ( GR4W ) approach , including on investment in maintenance of new 
infrastructure, through relevant policymaking and budgeting ; and  
(d) Clarification of the activities aimed at collaborating with micro -finance institutions  with 
special consideration of how such collaboration will assist beneficiaries .


---
*Page 126*
---

 
 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 126 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP227 ) 
Proposal name:  Increase Resilience to Climate Change of Smallholders Receiving 
the Services of the Inclusive Agricultural Value Chains 
Programme  (DEFIS+)  
Accredited  entity:  International  Fund  for Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  
Country:  Madagascar  
Project/ programme  size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
ITAP’s concerns regarding the detailed planning of the landscape rehabilitation , site-specific 
climate -smart agriculture (CSA) interventions , and the long -term financial viability of the 
infrastructure  are well noted. The Project Implementation Manual (PIM)  to be prepared after 
project approval and  expected to be finalized within Q2 2024 , will include processes and steps 
to be followed for detailed  landscape rehabilitation  planning . The PIM will also provide options 
for CSA  interventions based on site -specific conditions , from which  beneficiaries  will be able to 
select appropriate CSA measures following training and capacity building . Innovative ways of 
financing the infrastructure operation and maintenance will also be explored.  
Paradigm shift potential  
Regarding  the comments on addressing the rights of women and youth , steps towards defining 
and implementing measures on specific land tenure and land -use rights in the project areas  
will be included in the PIM. Using existing platforms,  IFAD and the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock will work closely with the Ministry of Public Works and Transport  to facilitate a 
learning mechanism to share  lessons on Green Roads for Water ( GR4W ) with the various actors 
responsible for road construction  and maintenance . Agricultural extension, F armer Field 
Schools  and other learning opp ortunities, are included in Component 3.    
Sustainable development potential  
To enhance the potential contribution to sustainable development in the south -central and 
south -east zones , concrete steps on access to land and land tenure security for women and 
youth  will be included in the PIM. Gender -related activities will be funded using the resources 
allocated for capacity building and technology dissemination through the application of the 
Gender Action Learning System  (GALS)  during  implementation . A Gender and Social Inclusion 
Specialist will be recruited to ensure that the targets in the Gender Action Plan are achieved. 
The participation of DEFIS+ smallholders in the entrepreneurship -related activities of the 
wider ongoing DEFIS programme will be ensured.  
Needs of the recipient  
As iTAP  has pointed out, Madagascar is projected to face increased climate shocks and 
decreased financial stability , exacerbated with  the factors mentioned by iTAP, such as low


---
*Page 127*
---

 
 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 127 
 
 
 income, food insecurity and lack of infrastructure . This project aims to help  mitigat e these 
extreme events through effective adaptation actions and sustainable financial measures.  
Country ownership  
A more recent no objection letter was provided by the NDA in Ju ly 2023. To improve country 
ownership, i nformation  on the participatory processes for designing the CSA practices and the 
techniques and management activities regarding the application of the GR4W approach will be  
included  in the PIM  and necessary budget provided. In addition, the assessments of the 
technical capacity of the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock  will be undertaken in  line with IFAD  policies and procedures, in a form and substance 
satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat  and consistent with the requirement s of the  Funded Activity 
Agreement (FAA) . 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
The sources of overestimation in the Economic and Financial Analysis  (EFA) are recognized. 
Smallholders are expected to make informed decision s about what  crops to plant , when and 
where , once their capacities have been enhanced. The EFA will be reviewed at mid -term and 
principles of adaptative management applied. Recognizing  the low capacities of the 
beneficiaries to pay for the infrastructure operations and maintenance, particularly roads, 
IFAD , in collaboration with service providers that will engage in project implementation , will 
seek  innovative and context -appropriate options  to ensure the long -term sustainability of the 
infrastructure. This also applies to  the irriga tion  system s and the pastures . 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
We appreciate the earlier feedback provided by iTAP , which  enabled us to improve  the Funding 
Proposal package. We also appreciate the positive feedback from the second review , which  will 
improve the implementation of the project and contribute to the achievement of  the DEFIS+ 
objective. We are  grateful for iTAP’s  endorsement of the DEFIS+ proposal to the GCF Board.  
As recommended by iTAP, IFAD and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock  will work closely 
with the Ministry of Works and Transport on a  dedicated learning and exchange platform to 
facilitate  the sharing of lessons on GR4W and  the long -term financial viability of the road 
maintenance interventions . 
The condition precedent to the effectiveness of the FAA is accepted. IFAD will  confirm the 
completion of the financial management and technical competence assessment of the EEs, in 
line with the IFAD’s  policies and procedures, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat and consistent with the requirements of the AMA.  
The condition precedent to first disbursement of GCF proceeds under the FAA is accepted. IFAD 
will provide a PIM that will include :  
o sub-activities, targets and means of verification to improve land tenure and land -
use rights for women and youth;  
o participatory processes for designing site -specific  CSA practices and applying  the 
GR4W approach;  
o intended engagements with the relevant government agencies to apply  the lessons 
learned on CS A and  the GR4W approach, including investment in maintenance of 
new infrastructure; and


---
*Page 128*
---

 
 
GCF/B.3 8/02/Add. 07 
Page 128 
 
 
 o activities aimed at collaborating with micro -finance institutions  focusing on 
assist ing beneficiaries.


---
*Page 129*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
Page 1 of 20 Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action 
Plan  
Part I: Gender Analysis/Assessment: Guide (Project/Programme Level)  
The principle of equal rights of women and men is enshrined in the Malagasy Constitution and 
the Government of Madagascar has adopted a National Policy on the Advancement of Women 
(PNPF), which reflects the country’s political commitment to eradicating disparities between men 
and women. Changes have been made to legal and regulatory texts to take gend er into 
consideration, such as the alterations to legislation on marriage to establish the same legal 
marriageable age for both sexes (in 2007) and the texts on land tenure (in 2009), among others. 
However, cultural habits and customary practices remain st rong and hinder the recognition of 
women’s rights. In certain parts of the country, they limit or even prevent women from having 
access to land ownership or real estate assets; they do not allow women to inherit land or 
buildings in the event of the death of a family member or when a couple separates.   
The possibility of getting involved and joining an association represents an opportunity for women 
to improve their status. At the national level, 43 per cent of women declare that they are members 
of a religious association and 5.5 per cent in a political  and civic association. As for their place in 
the organization, only 4.6 per cent of the women who are members of an association hold the 
position of president or vice -president; 4.7 per cent, the position of secretary, and 5.1 per cent, 
other positions. I t should be noted that nearly all (85 per cent) women between 15 and 49 years 
of age who are affiliated to an association are ordinary members (ENSOMD: 2012 -2013).  
According to the Madagascar Millennium Development Goals National Monitoring Survey 
(ENSOMD)  2012 -2013, it seems that the majority of women participate, together with their 
husband, in decisions on major household expenses: this was the response in 65 per cent of the 
cases. In relation to the decisions on the use of women’s income over a 12 -month period, only 
one third (30 per cent) of women had this prerogative. In 58 per cent of the cases, this decision 
had been made together with their husband or partner . 
Poverty and sex of the head of the household: At the national level, more than three quarters 
of households are headed by men (78 per cent). Female headed households (22 per cent) are 
more commonly found in urban areas (27 per cent) than in rural ones (21 per cent). The average 
age of women heads of h ousehold is higher than that of their male counterparts (46 years and 41 
years, respectively). Agriculture is the main economic activity of the majority of heads of 
household (64 per cent); another 13 per cent are small business entrepreneurs in non -agricultural 
sectors; approximately 8 per cent are labourers or unskilled workers; and only 2 per cent hold 
middle - or upper -level management positions. The average number of dependents per household 
is 2.7. Approxim ately 30 per cent of heads of household have no schooling (INSTAT/ENSOMD 
2013). The same survey shows that 57.2 per cent of female headed households are poor, in 
comparison to 62.8 per cent of the rest.  Generally, women headed households are smaller in siz e 
than those headed by men: 3.5 individuals. In terms of the overall population, the poverty gap is 
shrinking, but is still in women’s favour: 69.8 per cent, in comparison to 72.0 per cent.  
Gender, education and literacy: In regard to education, the differences between girls and boys 
in Madagascar are minor at the primary and secondary levels of education in comparison to other 
sub-Saharan African countries. While there is parity between girls and boys at the primary school  Gender Documentation for FP227


---
*Page 130*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 2 of 20 
 level (ratio of girls to boys’ enrolment is 1.05 in girls’ favour), at the secondary and superior 
education levels, girls are at a disadvantage in comparison to boys; this gap grows as the level of 
education increases. In Madagascar, illiteracy is still a matter of concern. The adult literacy rate 
is 64.5 per cent (2008 -2012). Among youth (15 -24 years of age), the literacy rate is 65.9 per cent 
for young men and 64 per cent for young women (2008 -2012) (UNICEF). Differences in this rate 
are also found when p lace of residence is compared: literacy rates are higher in urban areas. 
Regional disparities also exist.  
Gender and employment: On the labour market, there are fewer women wage earners in non -
agricultural sectors than men (38 per cent and 62 per cent, respectively).  The National Survey of 
Employment and the Informal Sector (ENEM PSI 2012)1 noted that the development of the 
informal sector contributed to more than 24 per cent of GDP (non -farm business market) and to 
the creation of more than 93 per cent of jobs (of which 76 per cent were in the agricultural sector). 
This raises the levels of  job dissatisfaction, precarity and instability among workers. Inadequate 
employment, which is a form of under -employment2, affects 81 per cent of workers, especially 
women in rural areas. Among youth from 15 to 29 years of age who are employed, close to 56 
per cent are not satisfied with their current status and wish to obtain a new job by changing 
companies.  
Gender and time -use. Many studies show that women spend more than half of their daily time 
to perform domestic tasks (World  Bank, 2014; AfDB, 2016; USAID, 2016) including water fetching, 
cooking, laundry washing and childcare.  Time -use surveys from a USAID gender analysis in the 
east, southeast, and southwest found that women  spend approximately four times as many hours 
on household activities compared men (USAID, 2016). Men  very rarely perform domestic tasks, 
which are viewed as women’s duties according to traditional  stereotypes and spend a major part 
of their time on a ctivities that provide income for the household’s  subsistence (AfDB, 2016). 
Women are also performing “productive activities” such as crop farming,  gardening, and livestock 
care and participate in addition in community activities. Coping with these  competing roles is a 
real challenge for women, mostly for those heads of households (FHHs), and led them  to a 
situation of time poverty (USAID, 2016).  
Gender and decision -making.  Women’s household decision making and access to resources 
is inequitable in Madagascar (USAID, 2013).  According to the 2008 -2009 DHS, only 33% of 
married and working women had primary control over their  earnings  (NSTAT and ICF Macro 
2010). Men mostly have highest control over expenditure for all expenses  beyond small routine 
household expenses. However, women tend to have more control over income that  they earn 
from petty trade, poultry sales, or gardening, although income from livestock and agriculture  (cash 
crops and food crops, particularly irrigated) falls more under the contro l of men (USAID, 2013). 
Men have also highest control over land and have the final says regarding their use and the choice 
of crops and  agricultural technologies to apply (JICA, 2015).  At the community level, women rarely 
participate in community -level decision -making meetings (CI &  CONFORME, 2014). However, in 
some cases where women do not attend or participate in community  meetings, they are still 
actively influencing men “behind the scenes” (PSI/Madagascar, 2015). Their rate of  membership 
in community st ructures such as producer groups and local forest management structures  
remains low. Also, while they can be members of such structures, they have less access to 
 
1 First type 1  and type 2 mixed survey c arried out in Madagascar by INSTAT, with the technical and financial support of UNDP, the 
International Labor Office and IRD/DIAL . 
2 Inadequate employment situation refers t o workers whose wage is lower than the legal minimum wage (the minimum wage at the 
time of the survey was MGA 100,000/month) and who are looking for other jobs and are ready to accept new offers .


---
*Page 131*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 3 of 20 
 executive  positions and have limited access to decision -making spheres (CI & CONFORME, 
2014).  
Gender and agriculture: According to the agricultural census (2004 -2005), the farm population 
is predominantly female, as women represent approximately 51.8 per cent of the total farm 
population and men, 48.2 per cent. The farm population is quite young: individuals under 15 
represent 48.6 per cent of the total; people from 15 to 59 years of age, 47.2 per cent, and people 
60 and over, only 4.2 per cent.  
Both men and women in the households  are involved in agricultural activities while tasks that 
need strong physical strengths are carried out by men.  Women and youth participate actively in 
farm work in the rice fields and/or other family fields managed by the head of household. It is rare 
for a woman to manage a rice field autonomously or on her own. However, women who are part 
of structured groups far m on fields or perimeters rented or allocated to them by private individuals 
(often their husbands, a relat ive of one of the women of the group or a village chief). The women, 
especially the ones from the poorest farms, work as labourers for other rice growers or farmers in 
the area. In the case of rice, a fundamental crop of family farms, women are present in the various 
stages of the productive process: they play an important role in seeding, nurseries, transplanting, 
weeding and harvest. Men are more involved in the ploughing and preparing of rice fields.  
Women tend to care for household gardens and subsistence agriculture, while men are more 
likely to engage  in for -profit cash crops. Women can be involved in agricultural produce selling 
but men tend to have the  highest control on the earned incomes. Men have also the final say 
about land -use and choice of agricultural  technologies and own major of farming tools.  Despite 
their work in agriculture, women’s participation in decisions on, for example, the distribution of 
land and the choice of plots to develop is limited, as men have greater access to farm supplies, 
means of production and technology. The income women earn is used to cover their family’ s 
needs and their children’s education.   
In regard to livestock, women mainly raise animal species with short life cycles (poultry and pigs), 
which represent both an income -generating activity and a way to increase their capital using 
income earned from other crops or economic activities. Several  experiences based on solidarity 
chains among women’s groups at the village level both reinforced the small animal breeding 
sector and contributed to the economic empowerment of women.  
The challenges facing th e agriculture sector policy relate to : mobilizing all stakeholders, with the 
adoption of a gender approach, around the sector's objectives, while giving importance to the 
decentralization  and through a program approach; p roviding  the support needed to boost the 
competitiveness and productivity of businesses, including local small and medium -sized 
enterprises headed by women.  
Women represent 53% of the rural agricultural population. However, they face a number of 
constraints in the family, community and professional spher es. They are poorly represented  and 
have very little access to decision -making in economic bodies.  Sub-programme 4.4 of the 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries Sector Program concerns Capacity building for women in 
terms of agribusiness, agricultural entrepreneurship and value chain development. This sub -
program aims to improve the economic empowerment  of rural  women, by strengthening their 
skills in agribusiness, agricultural entrepreneurship and value chain development.  
According to this policy, b y 2025:  
• The number of rural women leaders emerging and strengthened will be 750,


---
*Page 132*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 4 of 20 
 • The number of generating activities managed by women will be 120,000.  
• 500,000 women will be t rained and equip ped in new agricultural technologies  
• 180 exchange spaces for rural women will be c reate d and equip ped; 
• 50 training courses will be provided for women on improving product quality;  
 
The disruption of climatic conditions associated with changes in precipitation and temperatures 
should lead to changes in the types of crops and/or cropping methods and/or cropping patterns 
adopted in climate change adaptation strategies in agriculture. As  women practice less mixed 
farming than men - on average  per female -headed household versus four per male -headed 
household, and respectively  male -headed households, and respectively 24% and 15% of female - 
and male -headed households  engaged in monocultur e  - and with smaller areas under cultivation, 
women face greater risks of  face greater risks of losing their agricultural sources o income and 
livelihoods. Their capacity to adapt to change is also reduced with the illiteracy rate, the lack of 
agricultur al equipme nt and the weight of tradition more important among women. (Country gender 
profile Republic of Madagascar , 2021) .  
 
Inequality in access to land and production factors: In relation to access to factors of 
production, it is difficult for women to become landowners despite their strong presence in the 
agricultural sector. Civil laws grant equal rights to men and women, but customary laws remain 
the most applied in land  manageme nt, mostly in rural areas (OECD , 2019). Customs regarding 
to land vary across regions and  ethnic groups, but in most cases, women tend to have only 
secondary rights (Archambault & Zoomers,  2017). In case of decease of a landowner, often land 
is divided among the male siblings only, or land is  given back to families once a woman leaves 
her village (FAO, nd). In addition, in the event of a divorce  or death, women are only afforded 1/3 
of the common property, and in some cases a wife may not receive  anything at all (Archambault 
& Zoomers, 2017). Hence, the average area owned by FHHs (1 hectare) is  almost the half of that 
MHHs possess (1.9 hectares) (INSTA T, 2011), and FHHs own generally  marginalized lands . 
Women  gain access to land as members of women’s groups who work on plots that are lent, 
allocated or leased to them, as mentioned earlier, but they are unable to invest (e.g. plant trees). 
Women also have more limited access than men to factors of production, na mely agricultural 
supplies, new technologies, financing, training and information.  
Gender, forest and natural resources : Madagascar’s forests are a valuable resource for rural 
populations. They provide essential materials for  housing, fuelwood for cooking, medicines for 
adequate healthcare and a source of food for diverse food s (Randrianarivony et al. 2017; 
Borgerson et al. 2018). Collect ion of wood for cooking and timber for  construction is men’s 
responsibility, while the collection of traditional medicinal plants is predominantly a  female activity 
(Golden et al. 2016, Borgerson et al., 2018). Men may in addition practice opportunistic  hunting 
(using hunting pursuit  methods and passive snare trap (Reuter et al., 2016; Borgerson et al., 
2018).  However, although people benefit from forest resources, deforestation remains a serious 
problem and  constitutes the main cause of climate change effects exacerbation in the country 
(AfDB, 2016). Rural  populations are involved in forest and natural resources management through 
local forest management  structures (VOI/COBA, KASTI). However, women’s membership in 
these structures remains low and  executive positions are generally occupied by men (CI and 
Conforme, 2014).  
Gender and climate change.  Both men and women among smallholder farmer households in 
Madagascar  are seriously affected  by the effects of climate change. However, impacts on women,


---
*Page 133*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 5 of 20 
 especially female household heads, seems  to be worse than those on men. Women’s work 
burden has increased due  to water scarcity, food shortage and low availability of fuelwood 
(collecting water and often collecting  firewood are tasks assigned to women and girls). Also, cases 
of gender -based violence (of various forms)  perpetrated by men on women tend to increase in 
the face of harsh living conditions. Moreover, female -headed households are more exposed to 
risks of food insecurity because they produce less d ue to their poor  access to land, labo ur, 
agricultural technologies, and capital. Statistics related to impacts of climatic hazards  on the 
beneficiaries’ crops show in addition that damages observed on women's farms is significantly  
greater than that reported by men. Studies reveal that this is due in part to the poor diversification 
of crops  on women's farms (the average number of crops cultivated by FHHs  is lower than by 
MHHs) and an unequal  distribution of land (women often only have access to marginal la nd). 
Gender -based violence . A third of women (32%) interviewed during an USAID’s survey thought 
that a husband is justified in  beating his wife for at least one of the following reasons: she burns 
the food, she argues with him, she goes  out without telling him, she neglects the children, or she 
refuses to have sexual intercourse with him  (USAID, 2013). According to a survey conducted by 
INSTAT in 2014, 30% of women across  Madagascar, or 3 in 10 women, said they had experienced 
at least one of the four types of violence while  8% of them suffered from 2  types of violence . 
Table 1 
Social indicators for the country  
 
Total labour force (thousands), 2014  12,077  
Female labour force as % of total, 2014  49.38  
Crude birth rate (per thousand people), 2014  34.46  
Crude death rate (per thousand people), 2014  6.67 
Infant mortality rate (per thousand live births), 2015  35.9 
Life expectancy at birth (years), 2015  65.1 
Total labour force (thousands), 2014  12,077  
Female labour force as % of total, 2014  49.38  
Source : World Bank. 2016. World Development Indicators.  
 
Legal and administrative framework.  Madagascar has a legal and administrative framework 
conducive to the promotion of gender equality, which explains the country ’s good rankings 
according to international indexes, despite the persistence of significant gender gaps as 
mentioned in the above section. In addition to adhering to most of the international conventions, 
the country has adopted several laws promoting women' s rights and has a functional institutional 
mechanism for the promotion of gender.  
The country has ratified or signed many international and regional conventions or protocols 
regarding women’s rights and gender equity, namely:  
• The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1988),  
• The Beijing Declaration, and its action plan (1995),  
• The Southern African Development Community Protocol on Gender and Development,


---
*Page 134*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 6 of 20 
 • The United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and 
Security (2000).  
More recently, the country adhered to the global agendas on gender equality and women 
empowerment in all spheres of life, through:  
• The Political Declaration of the Commission on the Status of Women at its 59th session on 
Beijing + 20 and that of the International Organization of La Francophonie (March 2015),  
• The Sustainable Development Goals where these questions are essential aspects for the 
vision of the 2030 Agenda(September 2015),  
• The Agenda 2063 of the African Union which recognizes the role of women, girls, and 
young people in the achievement of the related objectives while inviting Africa to act in 
favour of women and girls and,  
• The Gender Policy and Strategy of the Indian Ocean Commission (January 2016).  
In 2016, the Declaration of Antananarivo at the end of the XVI Summit of the Heads of State of 
“La Francophonie”, materializes its previous commitments on women, girl s and young people 
(especially young women) particularly concerning development, trafficking, human beings, 
education, training, the environment, entrepreneurship, employment and the representation of 
women in decision -making bodies, for “shared growth and [un] sustainable and responsible 
development”.  
The country has a juridical arsenal that protect gender equality and promote women ’s rights. The 
2010 constitution reaffirms the equality of men and women before the law. Several national laws 
promote gender  equality and protect women ’s rights in access to land and assets (Law on Estate, 
wills, and donations, 1968; The new land policy, 2005; Law on marriage and matrimonial status, 
2007). Some laws were also revised to be less discriminatory against women such as the Labo ur 
code which henceforth prohibits di scrimination based on gender (Article 64, 2004), the Law on 
Marriage and Matrimonial Regimes which increase the legal age for marriage to 18 years old, 
allow both spouses to own individual property where they are entitled to administer without 
interference , and allow each spouse to administer joint property acquired during the marriage, 
which was before a right that was exclusively held by men. In addition, a new law related to the 
fight against Gender -Based Violence was adopted and provides severe penaltie s for perpetrators 
of GBV (Law n°2019 -008).  
Since the beginning of the 2000s, political efforts in favo ur of gender equality have been noted, 
in particular through revision of legislation and adoption of less discriminatory laws and the 
development of a National Policy for the Promotion of Women (“Politique Nationale pour la 
Promotion des Femmes”, PNPF). Thi s policy aims to reduce disparities between men and women 
and aimed to: (i) Improve the income and economic status of women (especially rural women and 
women heads of household) (ii) Increase the level of education and training of women and girls, 
(iii) promote rights to health and reproductive rights, (iv)  strengthen the participation of women in 
decision -making processes and (v) improve institutional mechanisms related to gender equality. 
Nevertheless, the recurrent socio -political crises in the country have limited the true integration of 
gender into insti tutional mechanisms and public policies and its implementation plan covers only 
the period 2004 -2008.


---
*Page 135*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 7 of 20 
 In 2016, the country launched a National Strategy for Fight against GBV (SNLVBG) for 2017 -
2021, with its action plan. The aim of this National Strategy is to contribute to reducing the 
prevalence of GBV and its general objective is to provide actors with a  reference document to 
lead actions to prevent and respond to GBV in a coordinated and effective manner. However, 
although the country has policy and national programs related to Climate Change, those are not 
sufficiently considering gender in their orient ation (AfDB, 2016). This neutrality is partially due to 
lack of studies and data that highlight differentiated impacts on men and women (World Bank, 
2011).  
The Ministry of Population, Social Protection and Promotion of Women (“Ministère de la 
Population, de la Protection Sociale et de la Promotion des Femmes”, MPPSPF) leads the 
implementation of policies,  strategies, and national programs for the promotion of gender. Since 
2015, the Ministry has dedicated gender mainstreaming to an attached structure, and the 
coordination of specific actions for women at the General Directorate for the Promotion of Women 
(DGPF). The Ministry has regional (directorates) and sub -regional (district level) branches which 
represent this structure at regional and districts level. In addition, with the support of its partners, 
the Ministry has set up “Trano Aro Zo” offices in some localities (mostly in urban and peripheral 
areas) whic h provide, among others, counselling and support to women victims of domestic and 
gender -based violence.  
Civil society organizations (C SOs), including international and national NGOs and associations, 
are also having an increased role in advancing gender equality in Madagascar (AfFD, 
2015).Through their interventions in various sector s (water and sanitation, governance, 
education, health, agriculture, food security, governance, etc.), they act to stimulate action and 
challenges related to gender equality / equity and collaborate with the Government as well as 
private sector. C SO’s networking with sub -regional, regional, and global movements made  
remarkable progress and have positive impacts  on gender equality in the country (AfDB, 2005).  
It is important to recognize that women are a heterogenous group (by age, wealth, socio -
economic status, marital status) , which results in significant implications for their  resource 
endowments such as  labour , access to land, access to finance and productive assets  and their 
freedom to make independent decisions. In turn, this influences their information -seeking 
behaviour, accessing project services such as ability to attend training, develop new skills, adopt 
new practices  and make decisions regarding inc ome earned. Among those often most 
disadvantaged are women heading their own households as a result of never marrying, divorce 
or widowhood .  
Summary of targeting approach and challenges in DEFIS areas:  The overall targeting 
process favo ured by DEFIS prioritizes vulnerable groups, including women, in particular women 
heads of households. T he identification of investment areas  is based, among other things, on the 
presence of a critical mass of beneficiaries, including the presence of a critical mass of women 
involved in the sectors. De facto, all the investments planned within the framework of all the 
components of DEFIS thus t ake into account the  concern to reach more women as a priority 
group. Nevertheless, for the benefit of the management of activities and to strengthen the 
implementation of specific pro -gender actions, some components provide for specific activities for 
the benefit of women. I n terms of indicators, the activities of DEFIS and DEFIS + are 
complementary and provide for capacity building of 2,400 women leaders in structuring


---
*Page 136*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 8 of 20 
 organizations, leadership and management. Overall, out of the total direct beneficiaries of the 
Programme, the aim is to support at least 30% women, 50% of whom are young women.  
On the whole, women face specific constraints related to access to land and physical capital and 
sometimes to access to leadership bodies and decision -making circles at the community level. 
They also sometimes do not have access to decision -making in the management of assets and 
capital (livestock) at the household level. Specifically, female heads of household are increasingly 
marginalized in decision -making at the group and community level. For lack of g uaranty, they are 
also not credible towards financial institutions. They sometimes remain dependent on others.  
With regards to infrastructure such as roads, which are largely deplorable in the DEFIS 
intervention areas, t he population is forced to go on foot to market centers, schools, health centers 
and town/district headquarters to settle admini strative matters. The transportation  of agricultural 
products remains difficult. Pregnant women and young children are the most vulnerable to this 
situation.  It should be noted that in terms of health, the geographical accessibility of health centers 
is a major issue influen cing the attendance of health facilities by women and therefore affecting 
their state of health and that of their children.  The densification of roads and rural tracks will be of 
definite benefit to women and men  through the improvement in their living conditions. Jobs for 
women can also been created, directly linked to the project, in the construction of rural roads 
using the high labour intensity approach (HIMO).  
In all cases, households headed by women derive less income from agricultural activities than 
those headed by men.  Mechanization is limited by the smallness of the cultivated areas, but it 
also remains more and more inaccessible to women. Indeed, the acquisition and use of 
equipment more important than the spade remains the prerogative of men. The constraints and 
facto rs limiting the development of agricultural activities in general affect women even more. 
Various observations relate them, on the one hand, to the difficulty of access to seeds and 
fertilizers, the insufficient cultivated area and the low selling price, and on the other hand, to the 
low levels of human capital, the dilapidation of production and transport facilities (particularly rural 
roads),  high exposure to climatic effects and poor irrigation infrastructure The transmission by 
inheritance of land from parents is most often to the detriment of women.  
DEFIS will give priority to women heads of household and young girls in targeting the AFEs 
benefiting from input support, the development of irrigated areas and the provision of production 
and processing equipment. Micro -subsidies are financed by mobilisin g the mechanism targeting 
the vulnerable in order to enable women to develop income -generating activities and strengthen 
their economic autonomy.  
Proposed solutions for gender empowerment in DEFIS implementation : To strengthen the 
inclusion of women, the Program implements specific actions for the benefit of women, including 
the mechanism targeting the vulnerable group, the promotion of pro -gender activities as well as 
the establishment of small village savings and credit groups. By promoting income -generating 
activities, these mechanisms allow them to quickly generate more income and excee d the poverty 
line. Their gradual integration into remunerative sectors remains the guarantor of their real exit 
from poverty and in the long term.


---
*Page 137*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 9 of 20 
 The taking into account of the gender dimension is rather institutionalized at the level of e ach 
institution including  the steering committee of the Program (CNP at the national level and CROS 
at the regional level). The national federation of rural women is specifically represented in the 
national umbrella structure of producers (TTM). The establishment of producer organ izations 
respects the quota system at the level of the governing body (over 30% women).  
Promoting gender eq uality in agriculture  require s support in various areas, including i) free r 
access for women to land ownership, requiring awareness -raising targeting the guardians of 
traditions on inheritance practices and on the rights of couples united by traditional/customary 
marriage; information and education for women and couples on land c ertification rights and 
procedures; (ii) greater access for women to improved production techniques (seeds, fertilizers, 
inputs, materials, processing, conservati on, marketing, management, etc.), requiring training and 
financing facilities; iii) a greater ability of women to regulate and sell their products, referring to 
the need for networking in the markets; iv) greater access for women to their income, which wou ld 
require actions to raise awareness among couples.  
The legislative texts and regulatory framework in Madagascar do not exclude the rights of women 
and young people in terms of access to land. DEFIS  support, such as technical assistance from  
FAO, respects the regulatory frameworks in force and provides for the promotion of the issuance 
of land certificates that include women. This guarantees the allocation of land to women and 
young people even after the completion of the Program.    
In the areas of the DEFIS programme, problems with hygiene and water -related diseases do 
exist. Limited access to potable water and poor sanitation and hygiene practices are of particular 
concern for some areas. Awareness -raising activities on water -relate d diseases will be carried 
out during the implementation of the project, especially in the areas where irrigated perimeters 
have been set up, because households some times use non -potable sources. T his is also part of 
the activities where beneficiaries will  be sensitized on water -borne diseases.  
Women intervene within local institutions and POs to defend their interests within the group, 
particularly in terms of access to inputs, financing, agricultural and processing equipment and 
above all access to capacity building and training modules. the au tonomy of women. The quota 
system  at the level of leading members can be strengthened and  the activities supported can 
provide for the specific interests of women  through the project . 
Support for the emergence of young leaders and specific funding for youth projects will be 
provided through capacity building such as the  gender action learning system.  
  
Part II: Gender equality action plan: Model (at the project/programme level)  
Gender strategy  
DEFIS adopted a gender strategy based on the need to address inequalities related to sex, age 
and status when implementing the programme’s activities. The programme’s gender strategy is 
founded on Madagascar’s national policy, IFAD’s Gender Policy  and the experiences and best 
practices developed in the framework of earlier projects in Madagascar. The objective is to: (i) 
eliminate the constraints that limit the inclusion, active participation and empowerment of women 
and youth (men and women) in th e differe nt links of agricultural chains; (ii) create opportunities to


---
*Page 138*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 10 of 20 
 improve their living conditions; (iii) strengthen their productive capacities to increase the 
productivity and profitability of their economic activities by facilitating the access of women and 
youth to resources and factors of production (land, water, inp uts, financing/credit, professional 
training, technology, support, etc.) and (iv) promote women’s leadership and participation in 
decision -making at home, in farmers’ organisations (grassroots peasant organisations, regional 
umbrella organisations and umbr ella organisations – whose acronyms are OPB, OPR and OPF, 
respectively – as well as farmers’ unions), the consultation forums of value chains and local 
communities in general.  
The strategy was informed by consultations that took place during the realization project design 
through a series of public consultation (South East Region, Sout h Region and Center Region) 
carried out that  significantly involved the participation of women's groups and young people even 
the participation of women's groups since the grassroots (women's cooperatives, grassroots 
groups at village level).  During the public consultations, specific requests were made for 
stakeholders to  propose concrete actions for women that could be financed by the DEFIS 
program .  
The strategy also takes into account that women are also active as agents of change, building 
climate resilience and finding innovative ways to adapt to climate change impacts on their 
communities and environments,3 for example b y switching to drought -tolerant  seeds, employing 
low impact or organic soil management techniques, or leading community -based reforestation 
and restoration efforts.4 These activities will be built on further during the implementation of 
DEFIS+.  
The strategy for the inclusion and empowerment of women  in the cultural and socioeconomic 
context of DEFIS’ eight intervention regions will take into account the primary constraints that 
women face when engaging in agricultural activities. The biggest constraints on the five 
dimensions of women’s empowerment a re: (i) production : limited participation in decisions on the 
management of the family farm and limited autonomy to farm on small plots of land and/or land 
farmed by groups, and/or in certain post -harvest activities (processing); (ii) resources : restricted 
access and decision -making power over resources and factors of production (land, farm supplies, 
new production and processing techniques, training/information; financing/credit; etc.; (iii) income : 
limited access to family farm income and the fact that decisions on the use of these resources are 
made by the men; (iv) leadership : limited capacity for public speaking and to express their needs 
in the home, in communities, farmers’ organizations (FOs) and  other associations of which they 
are members; and (v) time: farming and domestic workloads that occupy women’s entire day and 
the unequal division of labour between men and women.  
DEFIS will support: (i) viable, sustainable and climate -resilient production activities that contribute 
to the economic empowerment of women; and (ii) capacity -building activities that increase 
women’s voice, representation and  participation in decision -making such as in farmer groups and 
cooperatives . (iii) Reduce workloads for women related to production and post -harvest activities 
(processing, sales, etc.) (ii) facilitating their access to factors of production, including land, water, 
seeds and financing; (iii) facilitating their access to efficient techniques and energy and labour 
saving technologies and and (iv) ensuring joint control of benefits over the management of the 
 
3 WIFCAG, Oliver Wyman Forum, 2X Global. 2023. Applying a Gender Lens to Climate Investing  
https://www.oliverwymanforum.com/content/dam/oliver -wyman/ow -
forum/climate/2023/WIFCAG_Gender_and_Climate_Framework_vF.pdf  
4 Schalatek, L. 2022. Gender and Climate Finance, Climate Funds Update, ODI and HBF https://climatefundsupdate.org/wp -
content/uploads/2022/03/CFF10 -Gender -and-CF_ENG -2021.pdf


---
*Page 139*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 11 of 20 
 income generated by their activities. Access to more efficient technologies and techniques 
(combine harvesters, rice mills, machines to shell corn, etc.)  and investments on water 
infrastructure will help reduce women’s workload and the time spent on farm work.  
To increase voice, representation and decision -making of women ,, DEFIS’ strategy includes 
actions that aim to: (i) improve the structure and governance of women’s groups/associations and 
strengthen their leadership (training, awareness -building and information); (ii) increase 
knowledge on and respect for women’s right s by building the awareness of all actors from the 
local communities on this issue, including men, women, youth, administrative, traditional and 
religious authorities and all individuals who in fluence the social and economic life of the 
community and (iii) facilitate access to business management tools and tools to improve their 
understanding of information provided, namely literacy training.  
Women's influence on the choice of energy sources and equipment to be used remains limited 
by the level of the costs of this choice that the resource providers (boss; spouse) are willing to 
pay.  Small -scale experiments with solar or wind -powered electrifi cation of remote villages have 
shown that women have benefited both economically. Women's ability to adapt to change and 
their lack of access to climate -resilient farming systems and agroclimatic information are further 
reduced by illiteracy rates, a lack of farming equipment and the greater weight of tradition. 
Problems that may arise include husbands not accepting women's involvement in activities. 
Awareness -raising and information campaigns will be organized at village level for the entire 
population, in cluding men, traditional authorities and all those with influence over the socio -
economic dynamics of the villages, to encourage the involvement of young people and women.  
Leadership training is also planned to reinforce women's active participation in POs, in the 
communities to which they belong and in the management of their organizations. This will enable 
women to make a real commitment to their communities.  For all the activities planned by the 
DEFIS Program, eligibility criteria will promote the inclusion of the most vulnerable groups, FBOs, 
youth and women in project activities. The use of a quota system (achieving a minimum of 30% 
women and 30% youth) will  reinforce these criteria.  
Maintenance, rehabilitation and construction works are generally male dominated due to the 
manual nature of the work and labour efforts required. However, considerations for use of labour -
saving equipment for women or allocation of lighter tasks related to rehabilitation and construction  
will be made . Therefore,  the GAP includes an activity that guarantees women's participation in 
maintenance, rehabilitation and reconstruction work. This is also a result of DEFIS' targeting 
criteria that state women must be represented and participate in local decision -making bod ies. 
During construction work, companies will be sensitized to ensure women's involvement in 
construction – light activiti es. 
The difficulties encountered by women in participating in the Programme's activities are linked to:  
(i) their limited decision -making capacity. Women, especially married women, are very dependent 
on their husbands for decisions on the use of household production factors, (ii) their poor access 
to productive resources, (iiii) women's workload at farm and household level.  Women's 
participation in the various activities listed is likely to disrupt the relationship between men and 
women and give rise to conflic ts within the household.  Awareness -raising as well as the gender 
action learning that will be adopted and the mutual involvement of couples in the Programme's 
activities will help to eliminate this tension. The introduction of technologies to reduce the 
workload will also allow women to have more time to devote to Programme activities.  
Constant monitoring and follow -up on these actions are necessary to ensure their sustainability 
and their appropriation by the women, women’s groups, FOs and local communities. The


---
*Page 140*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 12 of 20 
 programme will mobilize actors in the inter -regional/regional coordination units and/or service 
providers who will receive training on DEFIS’ strategies and tools for implementing, monitoring 
and evaluating the gender approach and the achievement of its ob jectives. Furthermore, leaders 
(men and women) from the FOs and/or communities who are recognized as such by the 
population will be identified and trained on gender equality and women’s rights so that they can 
then facilitate awareness -building/information  sessions with local communities. This details of 
process will be refined once the sites/villages/poles of development for the programme’s 
interventions have been selected. In this selection process, specific sociocultural elements of the 
local context (e. g. customs of ethnic groups) will be taken into account to avoid any conflicts in 
the future.  
The implementation of the gender strategy  
Operational measures have been identified to guarantee the effective mainstreaming of the 
gender dimension. They are to make sure that while executing all programme activities, special 
care is systematically taken to ensure that women and youth from the mo st vulnerable FFs 
effectively engage. This exercise, which began during the programme’s design phase, will 
continue to be carried out at programme start and throughout its implementation, as it will be 
incorporated into the successive AWP/Bs. The entire pr ogramme team will be involved in the 
execution of AWP/Bs.  
As in the case of the targeting strategy, the responsibility for executing the gender strategy lies 
with the entire programme coordination team, as well as the different partners and institutions in 
charge of programme implementation, who will receive trai ning on gender issues. The PCU shall: 
(i) promote and monitor how gender issues are taken into account in the programme; (ii) 
guarantee that the programme’s gender strategy is appropriate given its approach and the context 
and sociocultural reality in the intervention zone, which continue to have considerable influence 
on the role of women in the home and the FFs; (iii) ensure that aspects related to the integration 
of gender and the inclusion of youth are systematically taken into account and that M&E indi cators 
are disaggregated by sex and age. Practical measures will be taken to: (i) introduce the gender 
dimension into the selection criteria of the recruitment of programme personnel; and (ii) build the 
awareness and capacity of the programme team and impl ementing partners on gender issues 
and respect for the gender principle during the operationalization of the programme.  
Youth empowerment. The project will (i ) increase youth and other vulnerable groups to  acquire 
jobs through wage employment and entrepreneurship or income -generating activities. These 
actions include: (i) Increase access to land allocation for youth by  reserving plots of land for them 
in the newly -developed perimeters; (ii) positioning youth including younger women as rural 
entrepreneurs in the services sector in areas linked to the poles of development; and (iii) ensuring  
male and female  participate in capacity -building activities and access to financing for farmers. 
The g oal is to ensure that at least 5 0 per cent of all beneficiaries are women and 30% of all 
beneficiaries are youth (men and women)5. 
DEFIS will engage with service providers (national and international NGOs and research 
institutes) who have expertise and proven experience in the field of women’s rights and youth 
empowerment. Priority will be given to collaborating with rural women’s federations and 
associations to strengthen the women farmers’ network and organize exchanges on issues that 
are common across the value chains in which the women are evolved. There are  plans for 
 
5 To arrive at these totals, the calculations are as follows: 15 per cent young men + 15 per cent young wo men  + 15  
per cent women in other age categories. See DEFIS DCP.


---
*Page 141*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 13 of 20 
 collaboration with the Ministry of Population, Social Protection and Women and its regional 
directorates in view of its mission to promote the advancement of women and gender equality  
DEFIS will monitored youth targets through the Program monitoring and evaluation team (at the 
national and regional levels). The close collaboration with the FORMAPROD Program (an IFAD 
project, which deals with the integration of young people and rural training intervening in almost 
the regions where D EFIS is implemented) is developed at the field level: involvement of young 
people trained in agricultural advisory services, promotion of the G ender Action Learning System  
(GALS) methodology to integrate gende r interventions and support and financing of income -
generating activities.  
The project will recruit a Gender and Social inclusion officer to enhance the capacity of the project 
and ensure the effective implementation of gender mainstreaming. The officer will support the 
monitoring of the gender results indicators assigned at the level of each activity will reinforce the 
involvement and the strong commitment of the implementing partners of the activities in the field. 
The Officer will coordinate the gender mainstreaming and also collaborate with the T echnicians 
at different levels that dedicate permanent time to the management of their daily activities while 
being concerned with the gender dimension.  At the level of the Steering C ommittee, rural women 
are represented in the TTM and participate in the validation of the AWPBs and the annual 
monitoring of implementation. Like the CNP, the CROS operate in the same way at regional level.  
 
Gender -based violence and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment  
Gender -based violence and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) undermines the 
security and well -being of individuals and entire communities, and threatens efforts to end poverty 
and stimulate shared prosperity. To address this, recommendations linked to the elimination of 
gender -based violence will include the following actions:  
• Strengthen awareness of GBV and SEAH issues among staff and beneficiaries through 
training s and continuous learning activities.  
• Develop or create awareness on prevention, handling and referral of GBV  protocol 
working with MOH  in order to anticipate and, if necessary, deal with related incidents.  
• Strengthen operational /screening processes for activities  deemed to be at high risk of 
GBV and SEAH, including signing of codes of conduct for public works contractors 
prohibiting all forms of GBV and SEAH - specifically against sexual activity with anyone 
under the age of 18 . Contractor contracts and collaboration agreements signed with the 
project will contain relevant clauses.  
• Develop and create awareness on a complaints and  grievance redress mechanism for 
the project  
• Information and awareness -raising on GBV and SEAH issues for those involved and 
beneficiaries.  
The various project stakeholders and communities will be informed of the existence of the 
project's complaint management mechanism, which is one of the entry points for identifying and 
recording cases of GBV and SEAH in activities linked to project impleme ntation.


---
*Page 142*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE 
INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGRAMME (DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 14 of 20 
 Reporting procedures for gender -based violence, SEAH and violence against children  
All staff, volunteers, consultants and contractors are encouraged and required to report suspected 
or actual cases of GBV as they are responsible for complying with the company's commitments 
and hold their direct reports accountable for compliance with the  individual Code of Conduct.  
The project will provide information to employees and the community on how to report cases of 
violations of the GBV Codes of Conduct through the grievance resolution mechanism (GRM).  
The project will follow up on cases of GBV and Code of Conduct violation s reported through the 
grievance mechanism.  
Service provider : In handling any cases of GBV and SEAH, DEFIS task team will work through a 
Service Provider. The service provider is a local organization that has the experience and capacity 
to support Victims of GBV. The client, contractor and consultant must establish a  working 
relationship with the service provider so that GBV cases can be safely referred to it. The service 
provider will also provide support and advice to the GBV focal points as required.  
GBV and SEAH focal point:  The project must confirm that all complaints related to GBV and SEAH 
have been forwarded to IFAD. The project must consider all GBV complaints and agree on a 
resolution plan. The Project will advise on resolution, including referral to the police if necess ary. 
They will be assisted by the service provider where appropriate. All reports must be kept 
confidential and returned immediately to the service provider. In cases of GBV and SEAH 
warranting police action, the project must refe r the complaint appropriately to: (i) the authorities; 
(ii) the service provider; and (iii) management for further action. The client and IFAD must be 
informed immediately.  
Transparent measures : All reports of GBV and SEAH must be treated confidentially in order to 
protect the rights of all those involved. The client, contractor and consultant must maintain the 
confidentiality of employees who report any act or threat of violence and of employees accused 
of committing acts or threats of violence (unless a violation of confidentiality is required to protect 
harmed persons or property or when required by law). To ensure that Victims feel confident in 
disclosing their experience of GBV, they can report cases of GBV and SEAH through various 
channels: (i) online, (ii) by t elephone, (iii) in person, (iv) the local service provider, (v) the 
manager(s), (vi) village councils; or, (vii) the police. To ensure confidentiality, only the service 
provider will have access to information about the Victim. The project will be the main point of 
contact for informatio n and follow -up concerning the perpetrator.  
Monitoring and evaluation : The project shall monitor the follow -up of reported cases and maintain 
all reported cases in a confidential and secure location. Monitoring should collect the number of 
cases that have been reported and the proportion of those managed by the police, NGOs, etc. 
These statistics should be reported for inclusion in the project's annual report. These statistics 
should be reported for inclusion in their reports.  For all cases of GBV and ECV warranting police 
action, the project must b e informed immediately.  
Response protocol:  The project will be responsible for developing a written response protocol to 
meet project requirements, in accordance with national laws and protocols. The response protocol 
must include mechanisms for reporting and responding to aggressors in the workplace with a 
competent and confidential response to disclosures of GBV and SEAH.


---
*Page 143*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGR AMME 
(DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 15 of 20 
 Gender Action Plan  
 
Results  Activities  Indicators and targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  (000 
USD)  
Objective: Strengthen  the resilience of agricultural production systems and vulnerable marginal communities to the impacts of climate change 
while contributing to enhance mitigation co -benefits  in six regions in Madagascar  through gender mainstreaming and technical and  financial 
assistance to gender -specific activities  
Outcome 1 Strengthened climate resilience of agricultural production systems  through enhancement and maintenance of ecosystem services  
Output 1.1: 
Improved water 
management for 
sustainable 
agriculture  Increase  women’s voice, 
representation and decision -
making  in WUAs, ensuring  a 
quota of at least 30% ; 
providing leadership training, 
etc.) and the development of 
water resource preservation 
and management plans  50 % of women in WUA  
Overall target 1400 (700 
females)  
 
30 % of women in leadership 
positions in WUA  
Target 210 females  Half yearly, 
annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 40    
 Construction of water tanks 
for drip -irrigation and for 
small livestock  to reduce 
women’s workloads  50 % of women amongst those 
benefiting from water tanks  
 
Overall target 150 (75 
females)  Qua rterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  3 461    
 
 Support access to energy and 
labour -saving equipment for 
women and youth e.g. cooking 
stoves, small farm equipment, 
post harvest technologies  30 % of women and youth with 
labour saving equipment  
 
Target 80, 496  
 
# of technologies supported and 
disseminated  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager 
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  100 
 Establishment of input shops 
and workshops for the 
manufacture and repair of # of youth managed inputs 
shops established  
 Annually  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 40


---
*Page 144*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGR AMME 
(DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 16 of 20 
 agricultural equipment for 
youth beneficiaries.  
 # of youth managed workshops 
for manufacture of agricultural 
equipment  social Inclusion 
officer  
 Increase access to land for 
women and youth through 
allocations e.g. through 
community sessions with 
traditional authorities and 
leaders etc  
 30 % of women and youth with 
new land allocations  
 
Target 80 496  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual   Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 50 
Output 1.2: 
Enhanced agro -
climatic information 
systems new 
technologies and 
initiatives  6 Training on climate 
information in capacity 
building of decentralized 
government (SRM & DRAEP) to 
ensure improved access to 
women by integrating their 
gendered needs  # of people (F,M) trained on 
gendered dimension of access 
and preferences regarding 
climate information  
 
Target 89 440  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual   Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 492 
Support roll  out and adoption 
of renewable energy and 
energy -efficient technologies 
at households  50 % of women amongst those 
benefiting from renewable 
energy and energy -efficient 
technologies  
Target 134  160 females  
 
30 % of Female Headed 
households benefitting from 
energy efficient technologies   Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer   
 871 
 
6 Women play important roles in the preparation of agricultural activities and in relation to the promotion of agricultural act ivities in the off -season to develop income -
generating activities and for nutrition (case of market gardening). Agro -meteorological  information is essential for women in relation to these roles (planning of input 
supply, adjustment of the agricultural calendar, management of agricultural labor, etc.)


---
*Page 145*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGR AMME 
(DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 17 of 20 
 Training in Gender Action 
Learning System (GALS) for the 
dissemination of Climate Smart 
Agriculture practices and 
addressing gender issues  # of farmers ( F,M, youth )  
trained on GALS  
 
# of farmers (trained in GALS 
including FHHs and vulnerable  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 291 
Outcome 2: Increased income generation through improved market accessibility  
Output 2.1: 
Reinforced rural 
access roads  Increased voice for women 
through, for example, focus 
group discussions to ensure 
their priorities are considered 
for site selection, management 
committees  # of women in WUAs leadership  
 
Target 210  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 47 
Increased involvement of 
women in less intensive 
maintenance and 
rehabilitation/reconstruction 
works  (e.g. requiring 
mandatory recruitment 
procedures in minor works 
contracts, preceded by 
conscience -raising activities 
targeting both men ( to 
encourage the m to allow 
female family members to 
participate) and women (to 
inform them of employment 
opportunities); ensuring equal 
pay for equal work and require 
contractors to submit weekly 
time sheets, broken out by % of women involved in light 
maintenance and 
rehabilitation/reconstruction 
works  
 
Target 89 440  
 
Number of time sheets 
submitted disaggregated by 
gender  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 47


---
*Page 146*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGR AMME 
(DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 18 of 20 
 gender; stimulating the 
development of women -
owned construction 
enterprises; adapting work 
programmes to allow for 
women’s considerable 
domestic workload and travel 
restrictions;...).  
Output 2.2: 
Improved capacity 
to build and 
maintain rural 
infrastructure  Training of women on 
construction standards related 
to climate change  20 % of women amongst those 
trained on construction 
standards related to climate 
change  
 
Target 35  776 women  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 47 
Training of youth on 
construction standards related 
to climate change  30 % of youth amongst those 
trained on construction 
standards related to climate 
change  
 
Target 53, 664 youth  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  45 
Outcome 3: Improved food and nutrition security  through managing knowledge on food production systems.  
Output 3.1: 
Knowledge on 
climate change 
adaptation and 
mitigation Training of women and rural 
development actors on climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation of food production 
systems for enhanced nutrition 
e.g. using participant quota of 
at least 50%; using female 
trainers, etc.)  50 % of women amongst those 
trained on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation of 
food production systems for 
enhanced nutrition  
 
Target 223  600 females  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 123


---
*Page 147*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGR AMME 
(DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
 
Page 19 of 20 
 generated and 
shared7 
 increased participation of 
women in exchange visits on 
the adaptation of food systems 
to climate change and on the 
carbon sequestration potential 
of improved farming practices  
(e.g. using participant quota of 
at least 50%; organising 
women -only exchange v isits 
and planning visits to 
successful female producers)  30 % of women and youth 
amongst those participating in 
exchange visits  
 
Target 120 women and youth  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 141 
 Capitalization of best practices 
and knowledge on climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation measures  including 
special attention to gender 
dimensions  % of knowledge on climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation measures  including 
special attention to gender 
dimensions  Quarterly, Half 
yearly, annual  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 198 
 Strengthen awareness of GBV 
and SEAH issues among staff 
and beneficiaries by 
developing orientation, 
training and continuous 
learning activities.  # of sessions held  
 
# of team members trained 
including at regional level  Annually  Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  
 30 
 
7 In terms of capitalizing on good practices, in practice, it is the women who keep the farm monitoring notebooks and the follow -up of the details in the management and 
conduct of the farm. It is rather relevant and effective to encourage their participation in the diss emination of resilient agricultural practices. Also, the assessment of the  
effects of climate change is rather quickly perceived at the level of daily management within the household (case of the mana gement of food stocks, management of 
income attributed to agricultural activities, etc.). Women are always the vectors of knowledge  sharing on climate change.


---
*Page 148*
---

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR  
INCREASE RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE OF SMALLHOLDERS RECEIVING THE SERVICES OF THE INCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS PROGR AMME 
(DEFIS +).  
Annex 8 - Gender Analysis/Assessment Guide and Gender Action Plan  
Page 20 of 20 Develop an 
information/awareness 
protocol with a specialized 
entity in order to anticipate 
and, if necessary, deal with 
related incidents.  # of incidents reported and 
addressed  Annually Monitoring and 
evaluation manager  
and Gender and 
social Inclusion 
officer  10 
The resources for the GAP are included in the overall project costs  particularly under the capacity building activities  and investment activities. 
_____________